b. This relation we define as the ratio of a' to a. This theory has the advantage

that it applies not only to finite integers, but to all other series of the same

type, i.e. all series of the type which I call progressions.

145. The only point which it is important, for our present purpose, to

  observe as regards the above definition of ratios is, that they are one-one

  relations between finite integers, which are with one exception

  asymmetrical, which are such that one and only one holds between any

  specified pair of finite integers, which are definable in terms of

  consecutiveness, and which themselves form a series having no first or

last term and having a term, and therefore an infinite number of terms,

  between any two specified terms. From the fact that ratios are relations it

  results that no ratios are to be identified with integers: the ratio of 2 to 1,

for example, is a wholly different entity from 2. When, therefore, we

  speak of the series of ratios as containing integers, the integers said to be

  contained are not cardinal numbers, but relations which have a certain

  one-one correspondence with cardinal numbers. The same remark applies

to positive and negative numbers. The nth power of the relation of

  consecutiveness is the positive number + n, which is plainly a wholly

  different concept from the cardinal number n. The confusion of entities

with others to which they have some important one-one relation is an

error to which mathematicians are very liable, and one which has

  produced the greatest havoc in the philosophy of mathematics. We shall

  find hereafter innumerable other instances of the same error, and it is

well to realize, as early as possible, that any failure in subtlety of

  distinctions is sure, in this subject at least, to cause the most disastrous

  consequences.

  There is no difficulty in connecting the above theory of ratio with the usual

theory derived from multiplication and division. But the usual theory does

not show, as the present theory does, why the infinite integers do not have

ratios strictly analogous to those of finite integers. The fact is, that ratio

depends upon consecutiveness, and consecutiveness as above defined does

not exist among infinite integers, since these are unchanged by the addition of

1.

It should be observed that what is called addition of ratios demands a new

set of relations among ratios, relations which may be called positive and

negative ratios, just as certain relations among integers are positive and

negative integers. This subject, however, need not be further developed.146. The above theory of ratio has, it must be confessed, a highly artificial

  appearance, and one which makes it seem extraordinary that ratios should

  occur in daily life. The fact is, it is not ratios, but fractions, that occur,

and fractions are not purely arithmetical, but are really concerned with

  relations of whole and part.

  Propositions asserting fractions show an important difference from those

asserting integers. We can say A is one, A and B are two, and so on; but we

cannot say A is one-third, or A and B are two-thirds. There is always need of

some second entity, to which our first has some fractional relation. We say A

is one-third of C, A and B together are two-thirds of C, and so on. Fractions,

in short, are either relations of a simple part to a whole, or of two wholes to

one another. But it is not necessary that the one whole, or the simple part,

should be part of the other whole. In the case of finite wholes, the matter

seems simple: the fraction expresses the ratio of the number of parts in the

one to the number in the other. But the consideration of infinite wholes will

show us that this simple theory is inadequate to the facts.

147. There is no doubt that the notion of half a league, or half a day, is a

  legitimate notion. It is therefore necessary to find some sense for

  fractions in which they do not essentially depend upon number. For, if a

  given period of twenty-four hours is to be divided into two continuous

  portions, each of which is to be half of the whole period, there is only one

way of doing this: but Cantor has shown that every possible way of

  dividing the period into two continuous portions divides it into two

  portions having the same number of terms. There must be, therefore,

  some other respect in which two periods of twelve hours are equal, while

a period of one hour and another of twenty-three hours are unequal. I

  shall have more to say upon this subject in Part III; for the present I will

  point out that what we want is of the nature of a magnitude, and that it

must be essentially a property of ordered wholes. I shall call this property

  magnitude of divisibility. To say now that A is one-half of B means: B is a

  whole, and if B be divided into two similar parts which have both the

  same magnitude of divisibility as each other, then A has the same

  magnitude of divisibility as each of these parts. We may interpret the

  fraction ½ somewhat more simply, by regarding it as a relation

  (analogous to ratio so long as finite wholes are concerned) between two

  magnitudes of divisibility. Thus finite integral fractions (such as n/1) will

  measure the relation of the divisibility of an aggregate of n terms to the  divisibility of a single term; the converse relation will be 1/n. Thus here

  again we have a new class of entities which is in danger of being

  confused with finite cardinal integers, though in reality quite distinct.

  Fractions, as now interpreted, have the advantage (upon which all

  metrical geometry depends) that they introduce a discrimination of

  greater and smaller among infinite aggregates having the same number of

  terms. We shall see more and more, as the logical inadequacy of the

  usual accounts of measurement is brought to light, how absolutely

  essential the notion of magnitude of divisibility really is. Fractions, then,

in the sense in which they may express relations of infinite aggregates—

and this is the sense which they usually have in daily life—are really of

the nature of relations between magnitudes of divisibility; and

  magnitudes of divisibility are only measured by number of parts where

the aggregates concerned are finite. It may also be observed (though this

  remark is anticipatory) that, whereas ratios, as above defined, are

  essentially rational, fractions, in the sense here given to them, are also

  capable of irrational values. But the development of this topic must be

left for Part V.

148. We may now sum up the results obtained in Part II. In the first four

  chapters, the modern mathematical theory of cardinal integers, as it

  results from the joint labours of arithmeticians and symbolic logicians,

was briefly set forth. Chapter 11 explained the notion of similar classes,

and showed that the usual formal properties of integers result from

  defining them as classes of similar classes. In Chapter 12, we showed

how arithmetical addition and multiplication both depend upon logical

  addition, and how both may be defined in a way which applies equally to

  finite and infinite numbers, and to finite and infinite sums and products,

and which moreover introduces nowhere any idea of order. In Chapter

13, we gave the strict definition of an infinite class, as one which is

  similar to a class resulting from taking away one of its terms; and we

  showed in outline how to connect this definition with the definition of

  finite numbers by mathematical induction. The special theory of finite

  integers was discussed in Chapter 14, and it was shown how the primitive

  propositions, which Peano proves to be sufficient in this subject, can all

be deduced from our definition of finite cardinal integers. This confirmed

us in the opinion that Arithmetic contains no indefinables or

  indemonstrables beyond those of general logic.We then advanced, in Chapter 15, to the consideration of philosophical

questions, with a view of testing critically the above mathematical

deductions. We decided to regard both term and a term as indefinable, and to

define the number 1, as well as all other numbers, by means of these

indefinables (together with certain others). We also found it necessary to

distinguish a class from its class-concept, since one class may have several

different class-concepts. We decided that a class consists of all the terms

denoted by the class-concept, denoted in a certain indefinable manner; but it

appeared that both common usage and the majority of mathematical purposes

would allow us to identify a class with the whole formed of the terms denoted

by the class-concept. The only reasons against this view were, the necessity

of distinguishing a class containing only one term from that one term, and the

fact that some classes are members of themselves. We found also a

distinction between finite and infinite classes, that the former can, while the

latter cannot, be defined extensionally, i.e. by actual enumeration of their

terms. We then proceeded to discuss what may be called the addition of

individuals, i.e. the notion involved in “A and B”; and we found that a more

or less independent theory of finite integers can be based upon this notion.

But it appeared finally, in virtue of our analysis of the notion of class, that

this theory was really indistinguishable from the theory previously

expounded, the only difference being that it adopted an extensional definition

of classes.

  Chapter 16 dealt with the relation of whole and part. We found that there

are two indefinable senses of this relation, and one definable sense, and that

there are two correspondingly different sorts of wholes, which we called

unities and aggregates respectively. We saw also that, by extending the

notion of aggregates to single terms and to the null-class, we could regard the

whole of the traditional calculus of Symbolic Logic as an algebra specially

applicable to the relations of wholes and parts in the definable sense. We

considered next, in Chapter 17, the notion of an infinite whole. It appeared

that infinite unities, even if they be logically possible, at any rate never

appear in anything accessible to human knowledge. But infinite aggregates,

we found, must be admitted; and it seemed that all infinite wholes which are

not unities must be aggregates of terms, though it is by no means necessary

that the terms should be simple. (They must, however, owing to the exclusion

of infinite unities, be assumed to be of finite complexity.)

In Chapter 18, finally, we considered ratios and fractions: the former werefound to be somewhat complicated relations of finite integers, while the latter

were relations between the divisibilities of aggregates. These divisibilities

being magnitudes, their further discussion belongs to Part III, in which the

general nature of quantity is to be considered.                                  Part III


                                Quantity19


THE MEANING OF


MAGNITUDE




149. Among the traditional problems of mathematical philosophy, few are

  more important than the relation of quantity to number. Opinion as to this

  relation has undergone many revolutions. Euclid, as is evident from his

  definitions of ratio and proportion, and indeed from his whole procedure,

was not persuaded of the applicability of numbers to spatial magnitudes.

  When Des Cartes and Vieta, by the introduction of co-ordinate

  Geometry, made this applicability a fundamental postulate of their

  systems, a new method was founded, which, however fruitful of results,

  involved, like most mathematical advances of the seventeenth century, a

  diminution of logical precision and a loss in subtlety of distinction. What

was meant by measurement, and whether all spatial magnitudes were

  susceptible of a numerical measure, were questions for whose decision,

until very lately, the necessary mathematical instrument was lacking; and

  even now much remains to be done before a complete answer can be

  given. The view prevailed that number and quantity were the objects of

  mathematical investigation, and that the two were so similar as not to

  require careful separation. Thus number was applied to quantities without

any hesitation, and conversely, where existing numbers were found

  inadequate to measurement, new ones were created on the sole ground

that every quantity must have a numerical measure.

All this is now happily changed. Two different lines of argument,

conducted in the main by different men, have laid the foundations both for

large generalizations, and for thorough accuracy in detail. On the one hand,

Weierstrass, Dedekind, Cantor, and their followers, have pointed out that, if

irrational numbers are to be significantly employed as measures of

quantitative fractions, they must be defined without reference to quantity; andthe same men who showed the necessity of such a definition have supplied

the want which they had created. In this way, during the last thirty or forty

years, a new subject, which has added quite immeasurably to theoretical

correctness, has been created, which may legitimately be called Arithmetic;

for, starting with integers, it succeeds in defining whatever else it requires—

rationals, limits, irrationals, continuity, and so on. It results that, for all

Algebra and Analysis, it is unnecessary to assume any material beyond the

integers, which, as we have seen, can themselves be defined in logical terms.

It is this science, far more than non-Euclidean Geometry, that is really fatal to

the Kantian theory of à priori intuitions as the basis of mathematics.

Continuity and irrationals were formerly the strongholds of the school who

may be called intuitionists, but these strongholds are theirs no longer.

Arithmetic has grown so as to include all that can strictly be called pure in the

traditional mathematics.

150. But, concurrently with this purist’s reform, an opposite advance has

  been effected. New branches of mathematics, which deal neither with

  number nor with quantity, have been invented; such are the Logical

  Calculus, Projective Geometry, and—in its essence—the Theory of

  Groups. Moreover it has appeared that measurement—if this means the

  correlation, with numbers, of entities which are not numbers or

  aggregates—is not a prerogative of quantities: some quantities cannot be

  measured, and some things which are not quantities (for example

  anharmonic ratios projectively defined) can be measured. Measurement,

in fact, as we shall see, is applicable to all series of a certain kind—a kind

  which excludes some quantities and includes some things which are not

  quantities. The separation between number and quantity is thus complete:

each is wholly independent of the other. Quantity, moreover, has lost the

  mathematical importance which it used to possess, owing to the fact that

most theorems concerning it can be generalized so as to become

  theorems concerning order. It would therefore be natural to discuss order

  before quantity. As all propositions concerning order can, however, be

  established independently for particular instances of order, and as

  quantity will afford an illustration, requiring slightly less effort of

  abstraction, of the principles to be applied to series in general; as, further,

the theory of distance, which forms a part of the theory of order,

  presupposes somewhat controversial opinions as to the nature of

  quantity, I shall follow the more traditional course, and consider quantityfirst. My aim will be to give, in the present chapter, a theory of quantity

  which does not depend upon number, and then to show the peculiar

  relation to number which is possessed by two special classes of

  quantities, upon which depends the measurement of quantities wherever

this is possible. The whole of this Part, however—and it is important to

  realize this—is a concession to tradition; for quantity, we shall find, is

not definable in terms of logical constants, and is not properly a notion

  belonging to pure mathematics at all. I shall discuss quantity because it is

  traditionally supposed to occur in mathematics, and because a thorough

  discussion is required for disproving this supposition; but if the

  supposition did not exist, I should avoid all mention of any such notion

as quantity.

151. In fixing the meaning of such a term as quantity or magnitude, one is

  faced with the difficulty that, however one may define the word, one

must appear to depart from usage. This difficulty arises wherever two

  characteristics have been commonly supposed inseparable which, upon

  closer examination, are discovered to be capable of existing apart. In the

case of magnitude, the usual meaning appears to imply (1) a capacity for

the relations of greater and less, (2) divisibility. Of these characteristics,

the first is supposed to imply the second. But as I propose to deny the

  implication, I must either admit that some things which are indivisible are

  magnitudes, or that some things which are greater or less than others are

not magnitudes. As one of these departures from usage is unavoidable, I

  shall choose the former, which I believe to be the less serious. A

  magnitude, then, is to be defined as anything which is greater or less than

  something else.

It might be thought that equality should be mentioned, along with greater

and less, in the definition of magnitude. We shall see reason to think,

however—paradoxical as such a view may appear—that what can be greater

or less than some term, can never be equal to any term whatever, and vice

versâ. This will require a distinction, whose necessity will become more and

more evident as we proceed, between the kind of terms that can be equal and

the kind that can be greater or less. The former I shall call quantities, the

latter magnitudes. An actual footrule is a quantity: its length is a magnitude.

Magnitudes are more abstract than quantities: when two quantities are equal,

they have the same magnitude. The necessity of this abstraction is the first

point to be established.152. Setting aside magnitudes for the moment, let us consider quantities. A

  quantity is anything which is capable of quantitative equality to

  something else. Quantitative equality is to be distinguished from other

kinds, such as arithmetical or logical equality. All kinds of equality have

in common the three properties of being reflexive, symmetrical and

  transitive, i.e. a term which has this relation at all has this relation to

  itself; if A has the relation to B, B has it to A; if A has it to B, and B to C,

A has it to C.* What it is that distinguishes quantitative equality from

  other kinds, and whether this kind of equality is analysable, is a further

and more difficult question, to which we must now proceed.

  There are, so far as I know, three main views of quantitative equality.

There is (1) the traditional view, which denies quantity as an independent

idea, and asserts that two terms are equal when, and only when, they have the

same number of parts. (2) There is what may be called the relative view of

quantity, according to which equal, greater and less are all direct relations

between quantities. In this view we have no need of magnitude, since

sameness of magnitude is replaced by the symmetrical and transitive relation

of equality. (3) There is the absolute theory of quantity, in which equality is

not a direct relation, but is to be analysed into possession of a common

magnitude, i.e. into sameness of relation to a third term. In this case there will

be a special kind of relation of a term to its magnitude; between two

magnitudes of the same kind there will be the relation of greater and less;

while equal, greater and less will apply to quantities only in virtue of their

relation to magnitudes. The difference between the second and third theories

is exactly typical of a difference which arises in the case of many other series,

and notably in regard to space and time. The decision is, therefore, a matter

of very considerable importance.

153. (1) The kind of equality which consists in having the same number of

parts has been already discussed in Part II. If this be indeed the meaning

of quantitative equality, then quantity introduces no new idea. But it may

be shown, I think, that greater and less have a wider field than whole and

  part, and an independent meaning. The arguments may be enumerated as

  follows: (α) we must admit indivisible quantities; (β) where the number

of simple parts is infinite, there is no generalization of number which will

give the recognized results as to inequality; (γ) some relations must be

  allowed to be quantitative, and relations are not even conceivably

  divisible; (δ) even where there is divisibility, the axiom that the whole is  greater than the part must be allowed to be significant, and not a result of

  definition.

(α) Some quantities are indivisible. For it is generally admitted that some

psychical existents, such as pleasure and pain, are quantitative. If now

equality means sameness in the number of indivisible parts, we shall have to

regard a pleasure or a pain as consisting of a collection of units, all perfectly

simple, and not, in any significant sense, equal inter se; for the equality of

compound pleasures results on this hypothesis, solely from the number of

simple ones entering into their composition, so that equality is formally

inapplicable to indivisible pleasures. If, on the other hand, we allow pleasures

to be infinitely divisible, so that no unit we can take is indivisible, then the

number of units in any given pleasure is wholly arbitrary, and if there is to be

any equality of pleasures, we shall have to admit that any two units may be

significantly called equal or unequal.* Hence we shall require for equality

some meaning other than sameness as to the number of parts. This latter

theory, however, seems unavoidable. For there is not only no reason to regard

pleasures as consisting of definite sums of indivisible units, but further—as a

candid consideration will, I think, convince anyone—two pleasures can

always be significantly judged equal or unequal. However small two

pleasures may be, it must always be significant to say that they are equal. But

on the theory I am combating, the judgment in question would suddenly

cease to be significant when both pleasures were indivisible units. Such a

view seems wholly unwarrantable, and I cannot believe that it has been

consciously held by those* who have advocated the premisses from which it

follows.

(β) Some quantities are infinitely divisible, and in these, whatever

definition we take of infinite number, equality is not coextensive with

sameness in the number of parts. In the first place, equality or inequality must

always be definite: concerning two quantities of the same kind, one answer

must be right and the other wrong, though it is often not in our power to

decide the alternative. From this it follows that, where quantities consist of an

infinite number of parts, if equality or inequality is to be reduced to number

of parts at all, it must be reduced to number of simple parts; for the number of

complex parts that may be taken to make up the whole is wholly arbitrary.

But equality, for example in Geometry, is far narrower than sameness in the

number of parts. The cardinal number of parts in any two continuous portions

of space is the same, as we know from Cantor; even the ordinal number ortype is the same for any two lengths whatever. Hence if there is to be any

spatial inequality of the kind to which Geometry and common-sense have

accustomed us, we must seek some other meaning for equality than that

obtained from the number of parts. At this point I shall be told that the

meaning is very obvious: it is obtained from superposition. Without trenching

too far on discussions which belong to a later part, I may observe (a) that

superposition applies to matter, not to space, (b) that as a criterion of

equality, it presupposes that the matter superposed is rigid, (c) that rigidity

means constancy as regards metrical properties. This shows that we cannot,

without a vicious circle, define spatial equality by superposition. Spatial

magnitude is, in fact, as indefinable as every other kind; and number of parts,

in this case as in all others where the number is infinite, is wholly inadequate

even as a criterion.

(γ) Some relations are quantities. This is suggested by the above discussion

of spatial magnitudes, where it is very natural to base equality upon

distances. Although this view, as we shall see hereafter, is not wholly

adequate, it is yet partly true. There appear to be in certain spaces, and there

certainly are in some series (for instance that of the rational numbers),

quantitative relations of distance among the various terms. Also similarity

and difference appear to be quantities. Consider for example two shades of

colour. It seems undeniable that two shades of red are more similar to each

other than either is to a shade of blue; yet there is no common property in the

one case which is not found in the other also. Red is a mere collective name

for a certain series of shades, and the only reason for giving a collective name

to this series lies in the close resemblance between its terms. Hence red must

not be regarded as a common property in virtue of which two shades of red

resemble each other. And since relations are not even conceivably divisible,

greater and less among relations cannot depend upon number of parts.

(δ) Finally, it is well to consider directly the meanings of greater and less

on the one hand, and of whole and part on the other. Euclid’s axiom, that the

whole is greater than the part, seems undeniably significant; but on the

traditional view of quantity, this axiom would be a mere tautology. This point

is again connected with the question whether superposition is to be taken as

the meaning of equality, or as a mere criterion. On the latter view, the axiom

must be significant, and we cannot identify magnitude with number of parts.*

154. (2) There is therefore in quantity something over and above the ideas

  which we have hitherto discussed. It remains to decide between the  relative and absolute theories of magnitude.

The relative theory regards equal quantities as not possessed of any

common property over and above that of unequal quantities, but as

distinguished merely by the mutual relation of equality. There is no such

thing as a magnitude, shared by equal quantities. We must not say: This and

that are both a yard long; we must say: This and that are equal, or are both

equal to the standard yard in the Exchequer. Inequality is also a direct relation

between quantities, not between magnitudes. There is nothing by which a set

of equal quantities are distinguished from one which is not equal to them,

except the relation of equality itself. The course of definition is, therefore, as

follows: We have first a quality or relation, say pleasure, of which there are

various instances, specialized, in the case of a quality, by temporal or spatio-

temporal position, and in the case of a relation, by the terms between which it

holds. Let us, to fix ideas, consider quantities of pleasure. Quantities of

pleasure consist merely of the complexes pleasure at such a time, and

pleasure at such another time (to which place may be added, if it be thought

that pleasures have position in space). In the analysis of a particular pleasure,

there is, according to the relational theory, no other element to be found. But

on comparing these particular pleasures, we find that any two have one and

only one of three relations, equal, greater and less. Why some have one

relation, some another, is a question to which it is theoretically and strictly

impossible to give an answer; for there is, ex hypothesi, no point of difference

except temporal or spatio-temporal position, which is obviously irrelevant.

Equal quantities of pleasure do not agree in any respect in which unequal

ones differ: it merely happens that some have one relation and some another.

This state of things, it must be admitted, is curious, and it becomes still

more so when we examine the indemonstrable axioms which the relational

theory obliges us to assume. They are the following (A, B, C being all

quantities of one kind):


a. A = B, or A is greater than B, or A is less than B.

b. A being given, there is always a B, which may be identical with A, such

    that A = B.

c. If A = B, then B = A.

d. If A = B and B = C, then A = C.

e. If A is greater than B, then B is less than A.

f. If A is greater than B, and B is greater than C, then A is greater than C.g. If A is greater than B, and B = C, then A is greater than C.

h. If A = B, and B is greater than C, then A is greater than C.


  From (b), (c), and (d) it follows that A = A.* From (e) and (f) it follows

that, if A is less than B, and B is less than C, then A is less than C; from (c),

(e), and (h) it follows that, if A is less than B, and B = C, then A is less than C;

from (c), (e), and (g) it follows that, if A = B, and B is less than C, then A is

less than C. (In the place of (b) we may put the axiom: If A be a quantity,

then A = A.) These axioms, it will be observed, lead to the conclusion that, in

any proposition asserting equality, excess, or defect, an equal quantity may

be substituted anywhere without affecting the truth or falsehood of the

proposition. Further, the proposition A = A is an essential part of the theory.

Now the first of these facts strongly suggests that what is relevant in

quantitative propositions is not the actual quantity, but some property which

it shares with other equal quantities. And this suggestion is almost

demonstrated by the second fact, A = A. For it may be laid down that the only

unanalysable symmetrical and transitive relation which a term can have to

itself is identity, if this be indeed a relation. Hence the relation of equality

should be analysable. Now to say that a relation is analysable is to say either

that it consists of two or more relations between its terms, which is plainly

not the case here, or that, when it is said to hold between two terms, there is

some third term to which both are related in ways which, when compounded,

give the original relation. Thus to assert that A is B’s grandparent is to assert

that there is some third person C, who is A’s son or daughter and B’s father or

mother. Hence if equality be analysable, two equal terms must both be related

to some third term; and since a term may be equal to itself, any two equal

terms must have the same relation to the third term in question. But to admit

this is to admit the absolute theory of magnitude.

A direct inspection of what we mean when we say that two terms are equal

or unequal will reinforce the objections to the relational theory. It seems

preposterous to maintain that equal quantities have absolutely nothing in

common beyond what is shared by unequal quantities. Moreover unequal

quantities are not merely different: they are different in the specific manner

expressed by saying that one is greater, the other less. Such a difference

seems quite unintelligible unless there is some point of difference, where

unequal quantities are concerned, which is absent where quantities are equal.

Thus the relational theory, though apparently not absolutely self-contradictory, is complicated and paradoxical. Both the complication and the

paradox, we shall find, are entirely absent in the absolute theory.

155. (3) In the absolute theory, there is, belonging to a set of equal

  quantities, one definite concept, namely a certain magnitude. Magnitudes

are distinguished among concepts by the fact that they have the relations

of greater and less (or at least one of them) to other terms, which are

  therefore also magnitudes. Two magnitudes cannot be equal, for equality

  belongs to quantities, and is defined as possession of the same

  magnitude. Every magnitude is a simple and indefinable concept. Not

any two magnitudes are one greater and the other less; on the contrary,

  given any magnitude, those which are greater or less than that magnitude

form a certain definite class, within which any two are one greater and

the other less. Such a class is called a kind of magnitude. A kind of

  magnitude may, however, be also defined in another way, which has to

be connected with the above by an axiom. Every magnitude is a

  magnitude of something—pleasure, distance, area, etc.—and has thus a

certain specific relation to the something of which it is a magnitude. This

  relation is very peculiar, and appears to be incapable of further definition.

All magnitudes which have this relation to one and the same something

(e.g. pleasure) are magnitudes of one kind; and with this definition, it

  becomes an axiom to say that, of two magnitudes of the same kind, one is

  greater and the other less.

156. An objection to the above theory may be based on the relation of a

  magnitude to that whose magnitude it is. To fix our ideas, let us consider

  pleasure. A magnitude of pleasure is so much pleasure, such and such an

  intensity of pleasure. It seems difficult to regard this, as the absolute

  theory demands, as a simple idea: there seem to be two constituents,

  pleasure and intensity. Intensity need not be intensity of pleasure, and

  intensity of pleasure is distinct from abstract pleasure. But what we

  require for the constitution of a certain magnitude of pleasure is, not

  intensity in general, but a certain specific intensity; and a specific

  intensity cannot be indifferent of pleasure or of something else. We

  cannot first settle how much we will have, and then decide whether it is

to be pleasure or mass. A specific intensity must be of a specific kind.

  Thus intensity and pleasure are not independent and coordinate elements

in the definition of a given amount of pleasure. There are different kinds

of intensity, and different magnitudes in each kind; but magnitudes in  different kinds must be different. Thus it seems that the common

  element, indicated by the term intensity or magnitude, is not any thing

  intrinsic, that can be discovered by analysis of a single term, but is

  merely the fact of being one term in a relation of inequality. Magnitudes

are defined by the fact that they have this relation, and they do not, so far

as the definition shows, agree in anything else. The class to which they

all belong, like the married portion of a community, is defined by mutual

  relations among its terms, not by a common relation to some outside term

  —unless, indeed, inequality itself were taken as such a term, which

  would be merely an unnecessary complication. It is necessary to consider

what may be called the extension or field of a relation, as well as that of a

  class-concept: and magnitude is the class which forms the extension of

  inequality. Thus magnitude of pleasure is complex, because it combines

  magnitude and pleasure; but a particular magnitude of pleasure is not

  complex, for magnitude does not enter into its concept at all. It is only a

  magnitude because it is greater or less than certain other terms; it is only

a magnitude of pleasure because of a certain relation which it has to

  pleasure. This is more easily understood where the particular magnitude

has a special name. A yard, for instance, is a magnitude because it is

  greater than a foot; it is a magnitude of length, because it is what is called

a length. Thus all magnitudes are simple concepts, and are classified into

  kinds by their relation to some quality or relation. The quantities which

are instances of a magnitude are particularized by spatio-temporal

  position or (in the case of relations which are quantities) by the terms

  between which the relation holds. Quantities are not properly greater or

less, for the relations of greater and less hold between their magnitudes,

  which are distinct from the quantities.

  When this theory is applied in the enumeration of the necessary axioms,

we find a very notable simplification. The axioms in which equality appears

have all become demonstrable, and we require only the following (L, M, N

being magnitudes of one kind):


a. No magnitude is greater or less than itself.

b. L is greater than M or L is less than M.

c. If L is greater than M, then M is less than L.

d. If L is greater than M and M is greater than N, then L is greater than N.The difficult axiom which we formerly called (b) is avoided, as are the

other axioms concerning equality; and those that remain are simpler than our

former set.

157. The decision between the absolute and relative theories can be made at

  once by appealing to a certain general principle, of very wide application,

  which I propose to call the principle of Abstraction. This principle asserts

that, whenever a relation, of which there are instances, has the two

  properties of being symmetrical and transitive, then the relation in

  question is not primitive, but is analysable into sameness of relation to

  some other term; and that this common relation is such that there is only

one term at most to which a given term can be so related, though many

  terms may be so related to a given term. (That is, the relation is like that

of son to father: a man may have many sons, but can have only one

  father.)

This principle, which we have already met with in connection with

cardinals, may seem somewhat elaborate. It is, however, capable of proof,

and is merely a careful statement of a very common assumption. It is

generally held that all relations are analysable into identity or diversity of

content. Though I entirely reject this view, I retain, so far as symmetrical

transitive relations are concerned, what is really a somewhat modified

statement of the traditional doctrine. Such relations, to adopt more usual

phraseology, are always constituted by possession of a common property. But

a common property is not a very precise conception, and will not, in most of

its ordinary significations, formally fulfil the function of analysing the

relations in question. A common quality of two terms is usually regarded as a

predicate of those terms. But the whole doctrine of subject and predicate, as

the only form of which propositions are capable, and the whole denial of the

ultimate reality of relations are rejected by the logic advocated in the present

work. Abandoning the word predicate, we may say that the most general

sense which can be given to a common property is this: A common property

of two terms is any third term to which both have one and the same relation.

In this general sense, the possession of a common property is symmetrical,

but not necessarily transitive. In order that it may be transitive, the relation to

the common property must be such that only one term at most can be the

property of any given term.* Such is the relation of a quantity to its

magnitude, or of an event to the time at which it occurs: given one term of the

relation, namely the referent, the other is determinate, but given the other, theone is by no means determinate. Thus it is capable of demonstration that the

possession of a common property of the type in question always leads to a

symmetrical transitive relation. What the principle of abstraction asserts is the

converse, that such relations only spring from common properties of the

above type.* It should be observed that the relation of the terms to what I

have called their common property can never be that which is usually

indicated by the relation of subject to predicate, or of the individual to its

class. For no subject (in the received view) can have only one predicate, and

no individual can belong to only one class. The relation of the terms to their

common property is, in general, different in different cases. In the present

case, the quantity is a complex of which the magnitude forms an element: the

relation of the quantity to the magnitude is further defined by the fact that the

magnitude has to belong to a certain class, namely that of magnitudes. It must

then be taken as an axiom (as in the case of colours) that two magnitudes of

the same kind cannot coexist in one spatio-temporal place, or subsist as

relations between the same pair of terms; and this supplies the required

uniqueness of the magnitude. It is such synthetic judgments of

incompatibility that lead to negative judgments; but this is a purely logical

topic, upon which it is not necessary to enlarge in this connection.

158. We may now sum up the above discussion in a brief statement of

  results. There are a certain pair of indefinable relations, called greater

and less; these relations are asymmetrical and transitive, and are

  inconsistent the one with the other. Each is the converse of the other, in

the sense that, whenever the one holds between A and B, the other holds

  between B and A. The terms which are capable of these relations are

  magnitudes. Every magnitude has a certain peculiar relation to some

  concept, expressed by saying that it is a magnitude of that concept. Two

  magnitudes which have this relation to the same concept are said to be of

the same kind; to be of the same kind is the necessary and sufficient

  condition for the relations of greater and less. When a magnitude can be

  particularized by temporal, spatial, or spatio-temporal position, or when,

  being a relation, it can be particularized by taking into a consideration a

pair of terms between which it holds, then the magnitude so

  particularized is called a quantity. Two magnitudes of the same kind can

  never be particularized by exactly the same specifications. Two quantities

  which result from particularizing the same magnitude are said to be

  equal.  Thus our indefinables are (1) greater and less, (2) every particular

magnitude. Our indemonstrable propositions are:


1. Every magnitude has to some term the relation which makes it of a

    certain kind.

2. Any two magnitudes of the same kind are one greater and the other less.

3. Two magnitudes of the same kind, if capable of occupying space or

    time, cannot both have the same spatio-temporal position; if relations,

    can never be both relations between the same pair of terms.

4. No magnitude is greater than itself.

5. If A is greater than B, B is less than A, and vice versâ.

6. If A is greater than B and B is greater than C, then A is greater than C.*


  Further axioms characterize various species of magnitudes, but the above

seem alone necessary to magnitude in general. None of them depend in any

way upon number or measurement; hence we may be undismayed in the

presence of magnitudes which cannot be divided or measured, of which, in

the next chapter, we shall find an abundance of instances.

  Note to Chapter 19.The work of Herr Meinong on Weber’s Law, already

alluded to, is one from which I have learnt so much, and with which I so

largely agree, that it seems desirable to justify myself on the points in which I

depart from it. This work begins (§ 1) by a characterization of magnitude as

that which is limited towards zero. Zero is understood as the negation of

magnitude, and after a discussion, the following statement is adopted (p. 8):


“That is or has magnitude, which allows the interpolation of terms between

itself and its contradictory opposite.”


  Whether this constitutes a definition, or a mere criterion, is left doubtful

(ib.), but in either case, it appears to me to be undesirable as a fundamental

characterization of magnitude. It derives support, as Herr Meinong points out

(p. 6 n.), from its similarity to Kant’s “Anticipations of Perception”.† But it

is, if I am not mistaken, liable to several grave objections. In the first place,

the whole theory of zero is most difficult, and seems subsequent, rather than

prior, to the theory of other magnitudes. And to regard zero as the

contradictory opposite of other magnitudes seems erroneous. The phraseshould denote the class obtained by negation of the class “magnitudes of such

and such a kind”; but this obviously would not yield the zero of that kind of

magnitude. Whatever interpretation we give to the phrase, it would seem to

imply that we must regard zero as not a magnitude of the kind whose zero it

is. But in that case it is not less than the magnitudes of the kind in question,

and there seems no particular meaning in saying that a lesser magnitude is

between zero and a greater magnitude. And in any case, the notion of

between, as we shall see in Part IV, demands asymmetrical relations among

the terms concerned. These relations, it would seem, are, in the case of

magnitude, none other than greater and less, which are therefore prior to the

betweenness of magnitudes, and more suitable to definition. I shall endeavour

at a later stage to give what I conceive to be the true theory of zero; and it

will then appear how difficult this subject is. It can hardly be wise, therefore,

to introduce zero in the first account of magnitude. Other objections might be

urged, as, for instance, that it is doubtful whether all kinds of magnitude have

a zero; that in discrete kinds of magnitude, zero is unimportant; and that

among distances, where the zero is simply identity, there is hardly the same

relation of zero to negation or non-existence as in the case of qualities such as

pleasure. But the main reason must be the logical inversion involved in the

introduction of between before any asymmetrical relations have been

specified from which it could arise. This subject will be resumed in Chapter

22.


* On the independence of these three properties, see Peano, Revue de

Mathématique, vii, p. 22. The reflexive property is not strictly necessary;

what is properly necessary and what is alone (at first sight at any rate) true of

quantitative equality, is, that there exists at least one pair of terms having the

relation in question. It follows then from the other two properties that each of

these terms has to itself the relation in question.

* I shall never use the word unequal to mean merely not equal, but always

to mean greater or less, i.e. not equal, though of the same kind of quantities.

* E.g. Mr Bradley, “What do we mean by the Intensity of Psychical

States?” Mind, N. S. Vol. iv; see esp. p. 5.

* Compare, with the above discussion, Meinong, Ueber die Bedeutung des

Weber’schen Gesetzes, Hamburg and Leipzig, 1896; especially Chap. i,§ 3.

* This does not follow from (c) and (d) alone, since they do not assert that

A is ever equal to B. See Peano, loc. cit.* The proof of these assertions is mathematical, and depends upon the

Logic of Relations; it will be found in my article “Sur la Logique des

Relations”, R. d. M. vii, No. 2, § 1, Props. 6. 1, and 6. 2.

* The principle is proved by showing that, if R be a symmetrical transitive

relation, and a a term of the field of R, a has, to the class of terms to which it

has the relation R taken as a whole, a many-one relation which, relationally

multiplied by its converse, is equal to R. Thus a magnitude may, so far as

formal arguments are concerned, be identified with a class of equal

quantities.

* It is not necessary in (5) and (6) to add “A, B, C being magnitudes”, for

the above relations of greater and less are what define magnitudes, and the

addition would therefore be tautological.

† Reine Vernunft, ed. Hartenstein (1867), p. 158.20


THE RANGE OF QUANTITY




159. The questions to be discussed in the present chapter are these: What

  kinds of terms are there which, by their common relation to a number of

  magnitudes, constitute a class of quantities of one kind? Have all such

  terms anything else in common? Is there any mark which will ensure that

a term is thus related to a set of magnitudes? What sorts of terms are

  capable of degree, or intensity, or greater and less?

The traditional view regards divisibility as a common mark of all terms

having magnitude. We have already seen that there is no à priori ground for

this view. We are now to examine the question inductively, to find as many

undoubted instances of quantities as possible, and to inquire whether they all

have divisibility or any other common mark.

Any term of which a greater or less degree is possible contains under it a

collection of magnitudes of one kind. Hence the comparative form in

grammar is primâ facie evidence of quantity. If this evidence were

conclusive, we should have to admit that all, or almost all, qualities are

susceptible of magnitude. The praises and reproaches addressed by poets to

their mistresses would afford comparatives and superlatives of most known

adjectives. But some circumspection is required in using evidence of this

grammatical nature. There is always, I think, some quantitative comparison

wherever a comparative or superlative occurs, but it is often not a comparison

as regards the quality indicated by grammar.


“O ruddier than the cherry,

O sweeter than the berry,

O nymph more bright

Than moonshine light,”are lines containing three comparatives. As regards sweetness and

brightness, we have, I think, a genuine quantitative comparison; but as

regards ruddiness, this may be doubted. The comparative here—and

generally where colours are concerned—indicates, I think, not more of a

given colour, but more likeness to a standard colour. Various shades of

colour are supposed to be arranged in a series, such that the difference of

quality is greater or less according as the distance in the series is greater or

less. One of these shades is the ideal “ruddiness”, and others are called more

or less ruddy according as they are nearer to or further from this shade in the

series. The same explanation applies, I think, to such terms as whiter,

blacker, redder. The true quantity involved seems to be, in all these cases, a

relation, namely the relation of similarity. The difference between two shades

of colour is certainly a difference of quality, not merely of magnitude; and

when we say that one thing is redder than another, we do not imply that the

two are of the same shade. If there were no difference of shade, we should

probably say one was brighter than the other, which is quite a different kind

of comparison. But though the difference of two shades is a difference of

quality, yet, as the possibility of serial arrangement shows, this difference of

quality is itself susceptible to degrees. Each shade of colour seems to be

simple and unanalysable; but neighbouring colours in the spectrum are

certainly more similar than remote colours. It is this that gives continuity to

colours. Between two shades of colour, A and B, we should say, there is

always a third colour C; and this means that C resembles A or B more than B

or A does. But for such relations of immediate resemblance, we should not be

able to arrange colours in series. The resemblance must be immediate, since

all shades of colour are unanalysable, as appears from any attempt at

description or definition.* Thus we have an indubitable case of relations

which have magnitude. The difference or resemblance of two colours is a

relation, and is a magnitude; for it is greater or less than other differences or

resemblances.

160. I have dwelt upon this case of colours, since it is one instance of a very

  important class. When any number of terms can be arranged in a series, it

  frequently happens that any two of them have a relation which may, in a

  generalized sense, be called a distance. This relation suffices to generate

a serial arrangement, and is always necessarily a magnitude. In all such

cases, if the terms of the series have names, and if these names have

  comparatives, the comparatives indicate, not more of the term in  question, but more likeness to that term. Thus, if we suppose the time-

  series to be one in which there is distance, when an event is said to be

  more recent than another, what is meant is that its distance from the

  present was less than that of the other. Thus recentness is not itself a

  quality of the time or of the event. What are quantitatively compared in

such cases are relations, not qualities. The case of colours is convenient

for illustration, because colours have names, and the difference of two

  colours is generally admitted to be qualitative. But the principle is of very

wide application. The importance of this class of magnitudes, and the

  absolute necessity of clear notions as to their nature, will appear more

and more as we proceed. The whole philosophy of space and time, and

the doctrine of so-called extensive magnitudes, depend throughout upon

a clear understanding of series and distance.

  Distance must be distinguished from mere difference or unlikeness. It

holds only between terms in a series. It is intimately connected with order,

and implies that the terms between which it holds have an ultimate and

simple difference, not one capable of analysis into constituents. It implies

also that there is a more or less continuous passage, through other terms

belonging to the same series, from one of the distant terms to the other. Mere

difference per se appears to be the bare minimum of a relation, being in fact a

precondition of almost all relations. It is always absolute, and is incapable of

degrees. Moreover it holds between any two terms whatever, and is hardly to

be distinguished from the assertion that they are two. But distance holds only

between the members of certain series, and its existence is then the source of

the series. It is a specific relation, and it has sense; we can distinguish the

distance of A from B from that of B from A. This last mark alone suffices to

distinguish distance from bare difference.

It might perhaps be supposed that, in a series in which there is distance,

although the distance AB must be greater than or less than AC, yet the

distance BD need not be either greater or less than AC. For example, there is

obviously more difference between the pleasure derivable from £5 and that

derivable from £100 than between that from £5 and that from £20. But need

there be either equality or inequality between the difference for £1 and £20

and that for £5 and £100? This question must be answered affirmatively. For

AC is greater or less than BC, and BC is greater or less than BD; hence AC,

BC and also BC, BD are magnitudes of the same kind. Hence AC, BD are

magnitudes of the same kind, and if not identical, one must be the greater andthe other the less. Hence, when there is distance in a series, any two distances

are quantitatively comparable.

It should be observed that all the magnitudes of one kind form a series, and

that their distances, therefore, if they have distances, are again magnitudes.

But it must not be supposed that these can, in general, be obtained by

subtraction, or are of the same kind as the magnitudes whose differences they

express. Subtraction depends, as a rule, upon divisibility, and is therefore in

general inapplicable to indivisible quantities. The point is important, and will

be treated in detail in the following chapter.

  Thus nearness and distance are relations which have magnitude. Are there

any other relations having magnitude? This may, I think, be doubted.* At

least I am unaware of any other such relation, though I know no way of

disproving their existence.

161. There is a difficult class of terms, usually regarded as magnitudes,

  apparently implying relations, though certainly not always relational.

  These are differential coefficients, such as velocity and acceleration.

  They must be borne in mind in all attempts to generalize about

  magnitude, but owing to their complexity they require a special

  discussion. This will be given in Part V; and we shall then find that

  differential coefficients are never magnitudes, but only real numbers, or

  segments in some series.

162. All the magnitudes dealt with hitherto have been, strictly speaking,

  indivisible. Thus the question arises: Are there any divisible magnitudes?

Here I think a distinction must be made. A magnitude is essentially one,

not many. Thus no magnitude is correctly expressed as a number of

  terms. But may not the quantity which has magnitude be a sum of parts,

and the magnitude a magnitude of divisibility? If so, every whole

  consisting of parts will be a single term possessed of the property of

  divisibility. The more parts it consists of, the greater is its divisibility. On

this supposition, divisibility is a magnitude, of which we may have a

  greater or less degree; and the degree of divisibility corresponds exactly,

in finite wholes, to the number of parts. But though the whole which has

  divisibility is of course divisible, yet its divisibility, which alone is

  strictly a magnitude, is not properly speaking divisible. The divisibility

does not itself consist of parts, but only of the property of having parts. It

is necessary, in order to obtain divisibility, to take the whole strictly as

one, and to regard divisibility as its adjective. Thus although, in this case,we have numerical measurement, and all the mathematical consequences

of division, yet, philosophically speaking, our magnitude is still

  indivisible.

  There are difficulties, however, in the way of admitting divisibility as a

kind of magnitude. It seems to be not a property of the whole, but merely a

relation to the parts. It is difficult to decide this point, but a good deal may be

said, I think, in support of divisibility as a simple quality. The whole has a

certain relation, which for convenience we may call that of inclusion, to all its

parts. This relation is the same whether there be many parts or few; what

distinguishes a whole of many parts is that it has many such relations of

inclusion. But it seems reasonable to suppose that a whole of many parts

differs from a whole of few parts in some intrinsic respect. In fact, wholes

may be arranged in a series according as they have more or fewer parts, and

the serial arrangement implies, as we have already seen, some series of

properties differing more or less from each other, and agreeing when two

wholes have the same finite number of parts, but distinct from number of

parts in finite wholes. These properties can be none other than greater or less

degrees of divisibility. Thus magnitude of divisibility would appear to be a

simple property of a whole, distinct from the number of parts included in the

whole, but correlated with it, provided this number be finite. If this view can

be maintained, divisibility may be allowed to remain as a numerically

measurable, but not divisible, class of magnitudes. In this class we should

have to place lengths, areas and volumes, but not distances. At a later stage,

however, we shall find that the divisibility of infinite wholes, in the sense in

which this is not measured by cardinal numbers, must be derived through

relations in a way analogous to that in which distance is derived, and must be

really a property of relations.*

  Thus it would appear, in any case, that all magnitudes are indivisible. This

is one common mark which they all possess, and so far as I know, it is the

only one to be added to those enumerated in Chapter 19. Concerning the

range of quantity, there seems to be no further general proposition. Very

many simple non-relational terms have magnitude, the principal exceptions

being colours, points, instants and numbers.

163. Finally, it is important to remember that, on the theory adopted in

  Chapter 19, a given magnitude of a given kind is a simple concept,

having to the kind a relation analogous to that of inclusion in a class.

  When the kind is a kind of existents, such as pleasure, what actually  exists is never the kind, but various particular magnitudes of the kind.

  Pleasure, abstractly taken, does not exist, but various amounts of it exist.

This degree of abstraction is essential to the theory of quantity: there

must be entities which differ from each other in nothing except

  magnitude. The grounds for the theory adopted may perhaps appear more

clearly from a further examination of this case.

Let us start with Bentham’s famous proposition: “Quantity of pleasure

being equal, pushpin is as good as poetry.” Here the qualitative difference of

the pleasures is the very point of the judgment; but in order to be able to say

that the quantities of pleasure are equal, we must be able to abstract the

qualitative differences, and leave a certain magnitude of pleasure. If this

abstraction is legitimate, the qualitative difference must be not truly a

difference of quality, but only a difference of relation to other terms, as, in

the present case, a difference in the causal relation. For it is not the whole

pleasurable states that are compared, but only—as the form of the judgment

aptly illustrates—their quality of pleasure. If we suppose the magnitude of

pleasure to be not a separate entity, a difficulty will arise. For the mere

element of pleasure must be identical in the two cases, whereas we require a

possible difference of magnitude. Hence we can neither hold that only the

whole concrete state exists, and any part of it is an abstraction, nor that what

exists is abstract pleasure, not magnitude of pleasure. Nor can we say: We

abstract, from the whole states, the two elements magnitude and pleasure. For

then we should not get a quantitative comparison of the pleasures. The two

states would agree in being pleasures, and in being magnitudes. But this

would not give us a magnitude of pleasure; and it would give a magnitude to

the states as a whole, which is not admissible. Hence we cannot abstract

magnitude in general from the states, since as wholes they have no

magnitude. And we have seen that we must not abstract bare pleasure, if we

are to have any possibility of different magnitudes. Thus what we have to

abstract is a magnitude of pleasure as a whole. This must not be analysed into

magnitude and pleasure, but must be abstracted as a whole. And the

magnitude of pleasure must exist as a part of the whole pleasurable states, for

it is only where there is no difference save at most one of magnitude that

quantitative comparison is possible. Thus the discussion of this particular

case fully confirms the theory that every magnitude is unanalysable, and has

only the relation analogous to inclusion in a class to that abstract quality or

relation of which it is a magnitude.  Having seen that all magnitudes are indivisible, we have next to consider

the extent to which numbers can be used to express magnitudes, and the

nature and limits of measurement.


* On the subject of the resemblances of colours, see Meinong,

“Abstrahiren und Vergleichen”, Zeitschrift f. Psych. u. Phys. d. Sinnesorgane,

Vol. xxiv, p. 72 ff. I am not sure that I agree with the whole of Meinong’s

argument, but his general conclusion, “dass die Umfangscollective des

Aehnlichen Allgemeinheiten darstellen, an denen die Abstraction wenigstens

unmittelbar keinen Antheil hat” (p. 78), appears to me to be a correct and

important logical principle.

* Cf. Meinong, Ueber die Bedeutung des Weber’schen Gesetzes, Hamburg

and Leipzig, 1896, p. 23.

* See Chap. 47.21


NUMBERS AS EXPRESSING


MAGNITUDES:


MEASUREMENT




164. It is one of the assumptions of educated common-sense that two

  magnitudes of the same kind must be numerically comparable. People are

apt to say that they are thirty per cent healthier or happier than they were,

  without any suspicion that such phrases are destitute of meaning. The

  purpose of the present chapter is to explain what is meant by

  measurement, what are the classes of magnitudes to which it applies and

how it is applied to those classes.

  Measurement of magnitudes is, in its most general sense, any method by

which a unique and reciprocal correspondence is established between all or

some of the magnitudes of a kind and all or some of the numbers, integral,

rational, or real, as the case may be. (It might be thought that complex

numbers ought to be included; but what can only be measured by complex

numbers is in fact always an aggregate of magnitudes of different kinds, not a

single magnitude.) In this general sense, measurement demands some one-

one relation between the numbers and magnitudes in question—a relation

which may be direct or indirect, important or trivial, according to

circumstances. Measurement in this sense can be applied to very many

classes of magnitudes; to two great classes, distances and divisibilities, it

applies, as we shall see, in a more important and intimate sense.

  Concerning measurement in the most general sense, there is very little to

be said. Since the numbers form a series, and since every kind of magnitude

also forms a series, it will be desirable that the order of the magnitudes

measured should correspond to that of the numbers, i.e. that all relations of

between should be the same for magnitudes and their measures. Whereverthere is a zero, it is well that this should be measured by the number zero.

These and other conditions, which a measure should fulfil if possible, may be

laid down; but they are of practical rather than theoretical importance.

165. There are two general metaphysical opinions, either of which, if

  accepted, shows that all magnitudes are theoretically capable of

  measurement in the above sense. The first of these is the theory that all

  events either are, or are correlated with, events in the dynamical causal

  series. In regard to the so-called secondary qualities, this view has been

so far acted upon by physical science that it has provided most of the so-

  called intensive quantities that appear in space with spatial, and thence

  numerical, measures. And with regard to mental quantities the theory in

  question is that of psychophysical parallelism. Here the motion which is

  correlated with any psychical quantity always theoretically affords a

  means of measuring that quantity. The other metaphysical opinion, which

  leads to universal measurability, is one suggested by Kant’s

  “Anticipations of Perception”,* namely that, among intensive

  magnitudes, an increase is always accompanied by an increase of reality.

  Reality, in this connection, seems synonymous with existence; hence the

  doctrine may be stated thus: Existence is a kind of intensive magnitude,

of which, where a greater magnitude exists, there is always more than

  where a less magnitude exists. (That this is exactly Kant’s doctrine seems

  improbable; but it is at least a tenable view.) In this case, since two

  instances of the same magnitude (i.e. two equal quantities) must have

  more existence than one, it follows that, if a single magnitude of the same

kind can be found having the same amount of existence as the two equal

  quantities together, then that magnitude may be called double that of each

of the equal quantities. In this way all intensive magnitudes become

  theoretically capable of measurement. That this method has any practical

  importance it would be absurd to maintain; but it may contribute to the

  appearance of meaning belonging to twice as happy. It gives a sense, for

  example, in which we may say that a child derives as much pleasure from

one chocolate as from two acid drops; and on the basis of such judgments

the hedonistic Calculus could theoretically be built.

  There is one other general observation of some importance. If it be

maintained that all series of magnitudes are either continuous in Cantor’s

sense, or are similar to series which can be chosen out of continuous series,

then it is theoretically possible to correlate any kind of magnitudes with all orsome of the real numbers, so that the zeros correspond, and the greater

magnitudes correspond to the greater numbers. But if any series of

magnitudes, without being continuous, contains continuous series, then such

a series of magnitudes will be strictly and theoretically incapable of

measurement by the real numbers.*

166. Leaving now these somewhat vague generalities, let us examine the

  more usual and concrete sense of measurement. What we require is some

  sense in which we may say that one magnitude is double of another. In

the above instances this sense was derived by correlation with spatio-

  temporal magnitudes, or with existence. This presupposed that in these

  cases a meaning had been found for the phrase. Hence measurement

  demands that, in some cases, there should be an intrinsic meaning to the

  proposition “this magnitude is double of that”. (In what sense the

  meaning is intrinsic will appear as we proceed.) Now so long as

  quantities are regarded as inherently divisible, there is a perfectly obvious

  meaning to such a proposition: a magnitude A is double of B when it is

the magnitude of two quantities together, each of these having the

  magnitude B. (It should be observed that to divide a magnitude into two

  equal parts must always be impossible, since there are no such things as

  equal magnitudes.) Such an interpretation will still apply to magnitudes

of divisibility; but since we have admitted other magnitudes, a different

  interpretation (if any) must be found for these. Let us first examine the

case of divisibilities, and then proceed to the other cases where

  measurement is intrinsically possible.

167. The divisibility of a finite whole is immediately and inherently

  correlated with the number of simple parts in the whole. In this case,

  although the magnitudes are even now incapable of addition of the sort

  required, the quantities can be added in the manner explained in Part II.

The addition of two magnitudes of divisibility yields merely two

  magnitudes, not a new magnitude. But the addition of two quantities of

  divisibility, i.e. two wholes, does yield a new single whole, provided the

  addition is of the kind which results from logical addition by regarding

  classes as the wholes formed by their terms. Thus there is a good

  meaning in saying that one magnitude of divisibility is double of another,

  when it applies to a whole containing twice as many parts. But in the case

of infinite wholes, the matter is by no means so simple. Here the number

of simple parts (in the only senses of infinite number hitherto discovered)may be equal without equality in the magnitude of divisibility. We

  require here a method which does not go back to simple parts. In actual

  space, we have immediate judgments of equality as regards two infinite

  wholes. When we have such judgments, we can regard the sum of n equal

  wholes as n times each of them; for addition of wholes does not demand

their finitude. In this way numerical comparison of some pairs of wholes

  becomes possible. By the usual well-known methods, by continual

  subdivision and the method of limits, this is extended to all pairs of

  wholes which are such that immediate comparisons are possible. Without

  these immediate comparisons, which are necessary both logically and

  psychologically,* nothing can be accomplished: we are always reduced

in the last resort to the immediate judgment that our foot-rule has not

  greatly changed its size during measurement, and this judgment is prior

to the results of physical science as to the extent to which bodies do

  actually change their sizes. But where immediate comparison is

  psychologically impossible, we may theoretically substitute a logical

  variety of measurement, which, however, gives a property not of the

  divisible whole, but of some relation or class of relations more or less

  analogous to those that hold between points in space.

That divisibility, in the sense required for areas and volumes, is not a

property of a whole, results from the fact (which will be established in Part

VI) that between the points of a space there are always relations which

generate a different space. Thus two sets of points which, with regard to one

set of relations, form equal areas, form unequal areas with respect to another

set, or even form one an area and the other a line or a volume. If divisibility

in the relevant sense were an intrinsic property of wholes, this would be

impossible. But this subject cannot be fully discussed until we come to

Metrical Geometry.

  Where our magnitudes are divisibilities, not only do numbers measure

them, but the difference of two measuring numbers, with certain limitations,

measures the magnitude of the difference (in the sense of dissimilarity)

between the divisibilities. If one of the magnitudes be fixed, its difference

from the other increases as the difference of the measuring numbers

increases; for this difference depends upon the difference in the number of

parts. But I do not think it can be shown generally that, if A, B, C, D be the

numbers measuring four magnitudes, and A − B = C − D, then the differences

of the magnitudes are equal. It would seem, for instance, that the differencebetween one inch and two inches is greater than that between 1001 inches

and 1002 inches. This remark has no importance in the present case, since

differences of divisibility are never required; but in the case of distances it

has a curious connection with non-Euclidean Geometry. But it is theoretically

important to observe that, if divisibility be indeed a magnitude—as the

equality of areas and volumes seems to require—then there is strictly no

ground for saying that the divisibility of a sum of two units is twice as great

as that of one unit. Indeed this proposition cannot be strictly taken, for no

magnitude is a sum of parts, and no magnitude therefore is double of another.

We can only mean that the sum of two units contains twice as many parts,

which is an arithmetical, not a quantitative, judgment, and is adequate only in

the case where the number of parts is finite, since in other cases the double of

a number is in general equal to it. Thus even the measurement of divisibility

by numbers contains an element of convention; and this element, we shall

find, is still more prominent in the case of distances.

168. In the above case we still had addition in one of its two fundamental

  senses, i.e. the combination of wholes to form a new whole. But in other

  cases of magnitude we do not have any such addition. The sum of two

  pleasures is not a new pleasure, but is merely two pleasures. The sum of

  two distances is also not properly one distance. But in this case we have

an extension of the idea of addition. Some such extension must always be

  possible where measurement is to be effected in the more natural and

  restricted sense which we are now discussing. I shall first explain this

  generalized addition in abstract terms, and then illustrate its application

to distances.

It sometimes happens that two quantities, which are not capable of addition

proper, have a relation, which has itself a one-one relation to a quantity of the

same kind as those between which it holds. Supposing a, b, c to be such

quantities, we have, in the case supposed, some proposition aBc, where B is a

relation which uniquely determines and is uniquely determined by some

quantity b of the same kind as that to which a and c belong. Thus for example

two ratios have a relation, which we may call their difference, which is itself

wholly determined by another ratio, namely the difference, in the arithmetical

sense, of the two given ratios. If α, β, γ be terms in a series in which there is

distance, the distances αβ, αγ have a relation which is measured by (though

not identical with) the distance βγ. In all such cases, by an extension of

addition, we may put a + b = c in place of aBc. Wherever a set of quantitieshave relations of this kind, if further aBc implies bAc, so that a + b = b + a,

we shall be able to proceed as if we had ordinary addition, and shall be able

in consequence to introduce numerical measurement.

The conception of distance will be discussed fully in Part IV, in connection

with order: for the present I am concerned only to show how distances come

to be measurable. The word will be used to cover a far more general

conception than that of distance in space. I shall mean by a kind of distance a

set of quantitative asymmetrical relations of which one and only one holds

between any pair of terms of a given class; which are such that, if there is a

relation of the kind between a and b, and also between b and c, then there is

one of the kind between a and c, the relation between a and c being the

relative product of those between a and b, b and c; this product is to be

commutative, i.e. independent of the order of its factors; and finally, if the

distance ab be greater than the distance ac, then, d being any other member

of the class, db is greater than dc. Although distances are thus relations, and

therefore indivisible and incapable of addition proper, there is a simple and

natural convention by which such distances become numerically measurable.

The convention is this. Let it be agreed that, when the distances aa, aa
                                                                                0112

… a−a are all equal and in the same sense, then aa is said to be n times
    n1n0n

each of the distances aa, etc., i.e. is to be measured by a number n times as
                        01

great. This has generally been regarded as not a convention, but an obvious

truth; owing, however, to the fact that distances are indivisible, no distance is

really a sum of other distances, and numerical measurement must be in part

conventional. With this convention, the numbers corresponding to distances,

where there are such numbers, become definite, except as to a common factor

dependent upon the choice of a unit. Numbers are also assigned by this

method to the members of the class between which the distances hold; these

numbers have, in addition to the arbitrary factor, an arbitrary additive

constant, depending upon the choice of origin. This method, which is capable

of still further generalization, will be more fully explained in Part IV. In order

to show that all the distances of our kind, and all the terms of our set, can

have numbers assigned to them, we require two further axioms, the axiom of

Archimedes and what may be called the axiom of linearity.*

169. The importance of the numerical measurement of distance, at least as

  applied to space and time, depends partly upon a further fact, by which it

is brought into relation with the numerical measurement of divisibility. Inall series there are terms intermediate between any two whose distance is

not the minimum. These terms are determinate when the two distant

  terms are specified. The intermediate terms may be called the stretch

from a to a.† The whole composed of these terms is a quantity, and has
        0n

a divisibility measured by the number of terms, provided their number is

finite. If the series is such that the distances of consecutive terms are all

  equal, then, if there are n − 1 terms between a and a, the measure of the
                                                        0n

  distance is proportional to n. Thus, if we include in the stretch one of the

end terms, but not the other, the measures of the stretch and the distance

are proportional, and equal stretches correspond to equal distances. Thus

the number of terms in the stretch measures both the distance of the end

  terms and the amount of divisibility of the whole stretch. When the

  stretch contains an infinite number of terms, we estimate equal stretches

as explained above. It then becomes an axiom, which may or may not

hold in a given case, that equal stretches correspond to equal distances. In

this case, coordinates measure two entirely distinct magnitudes, which,

  owing to their common measure, are perpetually confounded.

170. The above analysis explains a curious problem which must have

  troubled most people who have endeavoured to philosophize about

  Geometry. Starting from one-dimensional magnitudes connected with the

  straight line, most theories may be divided into two classes, those

  appropriate to areas and volumes, and those appropriate to angles

  between lines or planes. Areas and volumes are radically different from

  angles, and are generally neglected in philosophies which hold to

  relational views of space or start from projective Geometry. The reason

for this is plain enough. On the straight line, if, as is usually supposed,

there is such a relation as distance, we have two philosophically distinct

but practically conjoined magnitudes, namely the distance and the

  divisibility of the stretch. The former is similar to angles; the latter, to

  areas and volumes. Angles may also be regarded as distances between

  terms in a series, namely between lines through a point or planes through

a line. Areas and volumes, on the contrary, are sums, or magnitudes of

  divisibility. Owing to the confusion of the two kinds of magnitude

  connected with the line, either angles, or else areas and volumes, are

  usually incompatible with the philosophy invented to suit the line. By the

  above analysis, this incompatibility is at once explained and overcome.*

171. We thus see how two great classes of magnitudes—divisibilities and  distances—are rendered amenable to measure. These two classes

  practically cover what are usually called extensive magnitudes, and it

will be convenient to continue to allow the name to them. I shall extend

this name to cover all distances and divisibilities, whether they have any

  relation to space and time or not. But the word extensive must not be

  supposed to indicate, as it usually does, that the magnitudes so designated

are divisible. We have already seen that no magnitude is divisible.

  Quantities are only divisible into other quantities in the one case of

  wholes which are quantities of divisibility. Quantities which are

  distances, though I shall call them extensive, are not divisible into

  smaller distances; but they allow the important kind of addition explained

above, which I shall call in future relational addition.†

All other magnitudes and quantities may be properly called intensive.

Concerning these, unless by some causal relation, or by means of some more

or less roundabout relation such as those explained at the beginning of the

present chapter, numerical measurement is impossible. Those mathematicians

who are accustomed to an exclusive emphasis on numbers, will think that not

much can be said with definiteness concerning magnitudes incapable of

measurement. This, however, is by no means the case. The immediate

judgments of equality, upon which (as we saw) all measurements depend, are

still possible where measurement fails, as are also the immediate judgments

of greater and less. Doubt only arises where the difference is small; and all

that measurement does, in this respect, is to make the margin of doubt smaller

—an achievement which is purely psychological, and of no philosophical

importance. Quantities not susceptible to numerical measurement can thus be

arranged in a scale of greater and smaller magnitudes, and this is the only

strictly quantitative achievement of even numerical measurement. We can

know that one magnitude is greater than another, and that a third is

intermediate between them; also, since the differences of magnitudes are

always magnitudes, there is always (theoretically, at least) an answer to the

question whether the difference of one pair of magnitudes is greater than, less

than, or the same as the difference of another pair of the same kind. And such

propositions, though to the mathematician they may appear approximate, are

just as precise and definite as the propositions of Arithmetic. Without

numerical measurement, therefore, the quantitative relations of magnitudes

have all the definiteness of which they are capable—nothing is added, from

the theoretical standpoint, by the assignment of correlated numbers. Thewhole subject of the measurement of quantities is, in fact, one of more

practical than theoretical importance. What is theoretically important in it is

merged in the wider question of the correlation of series, which will occupy

us much hereafter. The chief reason why I have treated the subject thus at

length is derived from its traditional importance, but for which it might have

been far more summarily treated.


* Reine Vernunft, ed. Hart. (1867), p. 160. The wording of the first edition

illustrates better than that of the second the doctrine to which I allude. See

e.g. Erdmann’s edition, p. 161.

* See Part V, Chap. 33 ff.

* Cf. Meinong, op. cit., pp. 63–4.

* See Part IV, Chap. 31. This axiom asserts that a magnitude can be

divided into n equal parts, and forms part of Du Bois Reymond’s definition

of linear magnitude. See his Allgemeine Functionen-theorie (Tübingen,

1882), Chap. i, § 16; also Bettazzi, Teoria delle Grandezze (Pisa, 1890), p.

44. The axiom of Archimedes asserts that, given any two magnitudes of a

kind, some finite multiple of the lesser exceeds the greater.

† Called Strecke by Meinong, op. cit., e.g. p. 22.

* In Part VI, we shall find reason to deny distance in most spaces. But

there is still a distinction between stretches, consisting of the terms of some

series, and such quantities as areas and volumes, where the terms do not, in

any simple sense, form a one-dimensional series.

† Not to be confounded with the relative addition of the Algebra of

Relatives. It is connected rather with relative multiplication.22


ZERO




172. The present chapter is concerned, not with any form of the numerical

  zero, nor yet with the infinitesimal, but with the pure zero of magnitude.

This is the zero which Kant has in mind, in his refutation of

  Mendelssohn’s proof of the immortality of the soul.* Kant points out that

an intensive magnitude, while remaining of the same kind, can become

zero; and that, though zero is a definite magnitude, no quantity whose

  magnitude is zero can exist. This kind of zero, we shall find, is a

  fundamental quantitative notion, and is one of the points in which the

  theory of quantity presents features peculiar to itself. The quantitative

zero has a certain connection both with the number 0 and with the null-

class in Logic, but it is not (I think) definable in terms of either. What is

  less universally realized is its complete independence of the infinitesimal.

The latter notion will not be discussed until the following chapter.

The meaning of zero, in any kind of quantity, is a question of much

difficulty, upon which the greatest care must be bestowed, if contradictions

are to be avoided. Zero seems to be definable by some general characteristic,

without reference to any special peculiarity of the kind of quantity to which it

belongs. To find such a definition, however, is far from easy. Zero seems to

be a radically distinct conception according as the magnitudes concerned are

discrete or continuous. To prove that this is not the case, let us examine

various suggested definitions.

173. (1) Herr Meinong (op. cit., p. 8) regards zero as the contradictory

  opposite of each magnitude of its kind. The phrase “contradictory

  opposite” is one which is not free from ambiguity. The opposite of a

class, in symbolic logic, is the class containing all individuals not

  belonging to the first class; and hence the opposite of an individual

  should be all other individuals. But this meaning is evidently

  inappropriate: zero is not everything except one magnitude of its kind,nor yet everything except the class of magnitudes of its kind. It can

  hardly be regarded as true to say that a pain is a zero pleasure. On the

  other hand, a zero pleasure is said to be no pleasure, and this is evidently

what Herr Meinong means. But although we shall find this view to be

  correct, the meaning of the phrase is very difficult to seize. It does not

  mean something other than pleasure, as when our friends assure us that it

is no pleasure to tell us our faults. It seems to mean what is neither

  pleasure, nor yet anything else. But this would be merely a cumbrous

way of saying nothing, and the reference to pleasure might be wholly

  dropped. This gives a zero which is the same for all kinds of magnitude,

and if this be the true meaning of zero, then zero is not one among the

  magnitudes of a kind, nor yet a term in the series formed by magnitudes

of a kind. For though it is often true that there is nothing smaller than all

the magnitudes of a kind, yet it is always false that nothing itself is

  smaller than all of them. This zero, therefore, has no special reference to

any particular kind of magnitude, and is incapable of fulfilling the

  functions which Herr Meinong demands of it.* The phrase, however, as

we shall see, is capable of an interpretation which avoids this difficulty.

But let us first examine some other suggested meanings of the word.

174. (2) Zero may be defined as the least magnitude of its kind. Where a

kind of magnitude is discrete, and generally when it has what Professor

  Bettazzi calls a limiting magnitude of the kind,† such a definition is

  insufficient. For in such a case, the limiting magnitude seems to be really

the least of its kind. And in any case, the definition gives rather a

  characteristic than a true definition, which must be sought in some more

  purely logical notion, for zero cannot fail to be in some sense a denial of

all other magnitudes of the kind. The phrase that zero is the smallest of

  magnitudes is like the phrase which De Morgan commends for its

  rhetoric: “Achilles was the strongest of all his enemies.” Thus it would be

  obviously false to say that 0 is the least of the positive integers, or that

the interval between A and A is the least interval between any two letters

of the alphabet. On the other hand, where a kind of magnitude is

  continuous, and has no limiting magnitude, although we have apparently

a gradual and unlimited approach to zero, yet now a new objection arises.

  Magnitudes of this kind are essentially such as have no minimum. Hence

we cannot without express contradiction take zero as their minimum. We

  may, however, avoid this contradiction by saying that there is always a  magnitude less than any other, but not zero, unless that other be zero.

This emendation avoids any formal contradiction, and is only inadequate

  because it gives rather a mark of zero than its true meaning. Whatever

else is a magnitude of the kind in question might have been diminished;

and we wish to know what it is that makes zero obviously incapable of

any further diminution. This the suggested definition does not tell us, and

  therefore, though it gives a characteristic which often belongs to no other

  magnitude of the kind, it cannot be considered philosophically sufficient.

  Moreover, where there are negative magnitudes, it precludes us from

  regarding these as less than zero.

175. (3) Where our magnitudes are differences or distances, zero has, at

  first sight, an obvious meaning, namely identity. But here again, the zero

so defined seems to have no relation to one kind of distances rather than

  another: a zero distance in time would seem to be the same as a zero

  distance in space. This can, however, be avoided, by substituting, for

  identity simply, identity with some member of the class of terms between

  which the distances in question hold. By this device, the zero of any class

of relations which are magnitudes is made perfectly definite and free

from contradiction; moreover we have both zero quantities and zero

  magnitudes, for if A and B be terms of the class which has distances,

  identity with A and identity with B are distinct zero quantities.* This

  case, therefore, is thoroughly clear. And yet the definition must be

  rejected: for it is plain that zero has some general logical meaning, if only

this could be clearly stated, which is the same for all classes of quantities;

and that a zero distance is not actually the same concept as identity.

176. (4) In any class of magnitudes which is continuous, in the sense of

having a term between any two, and which also has no limiting

  magnitude, we can introduce zero in the manner in which real numbers

are obtained from rationals. Any collection of magnitudes defines a class

of magnitudes less than all of them. This class of magnitudes can be

  made as small as we please, and can actually be made to be the null-class,

i.e. to contain no members at all. (This is effected, for instance, if our

  collection consists of all magnitudes of the kind.) The classes so defined

form a series, closely related to the series of original magnitudes, and in

this new series the null-class is definitely the first term. Thus taking the

  classes as quantities, the null-class is a zero quantity. There is no class

  containing a finite number of members, so that there is not, as in  Arithmetic, a discrete approach to the null-class; on the contrary, the

  approach is (in several senses of the word) continuous. This method of

  defining zero, which is identical with that by which the real number zero

is introduced, is important, and will be discussed in Part V. But for the

  present we may observe that it again makes zero the same for all kinds of

  magnitude, and makes it not one among the magnitudes whose zero it is.

177. (5) We are compelled, in this question, to face the problem as to the

nature of negation. “No pleasure” is obviously a different concept from

“no pain”, even when these terms are taken strictly as mere denials of

  pleasure and pain respectively. It would seem that “no pleasure” has the

  same relation to pleasure as the various magnitudes of pleasure have,

  though it has also, of course, the special relation of negation. If this be

  allowed, we see that, if a kind of magnitudes be defined by that of which

they are magnitudes, then no pleasure is one among the various

  magnitudes of pleasure. If, then, we are to hold to our axiom, that all

pairs of magnitudes of one kind have relations of inequality, we shall be

  compelled to admit that zero is less than all other magnitudes of its kind.

It seems, indeed, to be rendered evident that this must be admitted, by the

fact that zero is obviously not greater than all other magnitudes of its

kind. This shows that zero has a connection with less which it does not

  have with greater. And if we adopt this theory, we shall no longer accept

the clear and simple account of zero distances given above, but we shall

hold that a zero distance is strictly and merely no distance, and is only

  correlated with identity.

  Thus it would seem that Herr Meinong’s theory, with which we began, is

substantially correct; it requires emendation, on the above view, only in this,

that a zero magnitude is the denial of the defining concept of a kind of

magnitudes, not the denial of any one particular magnitude, or of all of them.

We shall have to hold that any concept which defines a kind of magnitudes

defines also, by its negation, a particular magnitude of the kind, which is

called the zero of that kind, and is less than all other members of the kind.

And we now reap the benefit of the absolute distinction which we made

between the defining concept of a kind of magnitude, and the various

magnitudes of the kind. The relation which we allowed between a particular

magnitude and that of which it is a magnitude was not identified with the

class-relation, but was held to be sui generis; there is thus no contradiction, as

there would be in most theories, in supposing this relation to hold between nopleasure and pleasure, or between no distance and distance.

178. But finally, it must be observed that no pleasure, the zero magnitude,

is not obtained by the logical denial of pleasure, and is not the same as

the logical notion of not pleasure. On the contrary, no pleasure is

  essentially a quantitative concept, having a curious and intimate relation

to logical denial, just as 0 has a very intimate relation to the null-class.

The relation is this, that there is no quantity whose magnitude is zero, so

that the class of zero quantities is the null-class.* The zero of any kind of

  magnitude is incapable of that relation to existence or to particulars, of

  which the other magnitudes are capable.

But this is a synthetic proposition, to be accepted only on account of its

self-evidence. The zero magnitude of any kind, like the other magnitudes, is

properly speaking indefinable, but is capable of specification by means of its

peculiar relation to the logical zero.


* Kritik der Reinen Vernunft, ed. Hartenstein, p. 281 ff.

* See note to Chap. 19, supra.

† Teoria delle Grandezze, Pisa, 1890, p. 24.

* On this point, however, see § 55 above.

* This must be applied in correction of what was formerly said about zero

distances.23


INFINITY, THE


INFINITESIMAL AND


CONTINUITY




179. Almost all mathematical ideas present one great difficulty: the

  difficulty of infinity. This is usually regarded by philosophers as an

  antinomy, and as showing that the propositions of mathematics are not

  metaphysically true. From this received opinion I am compelled to

  dissent. Although all apparent antinomies, except such as are quite easily

  disposed of, and such as belong to the fundamentals of logic, are, in my

  opinion, reducible to the one difficulty of infinite number, yet this

  difficulty itself appears to be soluble by a correct philosophy of any, and

to have been generated very largely by confusions due to the ambiguity

in the meaning of finite integers. The problem in general will be

  discussed in Part V; the purpose of the present chapter is merely to show

that quantity, which has been regarded as the true home of infinity, the

  infinitesimal and continuity, must give place, in this respect, to order;

  while the statement of the difficulties which arise in regard to quantity

can be made in a form which is at once ordinal and arithmetical, but

  involves no reference to the special peculiarities of quantity.

180. The three problems of infinity, the infinitesimal and continuity, as they

  occur in connection with quantity, are closely related. None of them can

be fully discussed at this stage, since all depend essentially upon order,

  while the infinitesimal depends also upon number. The question of

  infinite quantity, though traditionally considered more formidable than

that of zero, is in reality far less so, and might be briefly disposed of, but

for the great devotion commonly shown by philosophers to a proposition

  which I shall call the axiom of finitude. Of some kinds of magnitude (for  example ratios, or distances in space and time), it appears to be true that

there is a magnitude greater than any given magnitude. That is, any

  magnitude being mentioned, another can be found which is greater than

it. The deduction of infinity from this fact is, when correctly performed, a

mere fiction to facilitate compression in the statement of results obtained

by the method of limits. Any class u of magnitudes of our kind being

  defined, three cases may arise: (1) There may be a class of terms greater

than any of our class u, and this new class of terms may have a smallest

  member; (2) there may be such a class, but it may have no smallest

  member; (3) there may be no magnitudes which are greater than any term

of our class u. Supposing our kind of magnitudes to be one in which there

is no greatest magnitude, case (2) will always arise where the class u

  contains a finite number of terms. On the other hand, if our series be

what is called condensed in itself, case (2) will never arise when u is an

  infinite class, and has no greatest term; and if our series is not condensed

in itself, but does have a term between any two, another which has this

  property can always be obtained from it.* Thus all infinite series which

  have no greatest term will have limits, except in case (3). To avoid

  circumlocution, case (3) is defined as that in which the limit is infinite.

But this is a mere device, and it is generally admitted by mathematicians

to be such. Apart from special circumstances, there is no reason, merely

  because a kind of magnitudes has no maximum, to admit that there is an

  infinite magnitude of the kind, or that there are many such. When

  magnitudes of a kind having no maximum are capable of numerical

  measurement, they very often obey the axiom of Archimedes, in virtue of

  which the ratio of any two magnitudes of the kind is finite. Thus, so far,

there might appear to be no problem connected with infinity.

But at this point the philosopher is apt to step in, and to declare that, by all

true philosophic principles, every well-defined series of terms must have a

last term. If he insists upon creating this last term, and calling it infinity, he

easily deduces intolerable contradictions, from which he infers the

inadequacy of mathematics to obtain absolute truth. For my part, however, I

see no reason for the philosopher’s axiom. To show, if possible, that it is not

a necessary philosophic principle, let us undertake its analysis, and see what

it really involves.

The problem of infinity, as it has now emerged, is not properly a

quantitative problem, but rather one concerning order. It is only because ourmagnitudes form a series having no last term that the problem arises: the fact

that the series is composed of magnitudes is wholly irrelevant. With this

remark I might leave the subject to a later stage. But it will be worth while

now to elicit, if not to examine, the philosopher’s axiom of finitude.

181. It will be well, in the first place, to show how the problem concerning

  infinity is the same as that concerning continuity and the infinitesimal.

For this purpose, we shall find it convenient to ignore the absolute zero,

and to mean, when we speak of any kind of magnitudes, all the magnitudes of

the kind except zero. This is a mere change of diction, without which

intolerable repetitions would be necessary. Now there certainly are some

kinds of magnitude where the three following axioms hold:

1. If A and B be any two magnitudes of the kind, and A is greater than B,

    there is always a third magnitude C such that A is greater than C and C

    greater than B. (This I shall call, for the present, the axiom of

    continuity.)

2. There is always a magnitude less than any given magnitude B.

3. There is always a magnitude greater than any given magnitude A.


  From these it follows:—

1. That no two magnitudes of the kind are consecutive.

2. That there is no least magnitude.

3. That there is no greatest magnitude.


The above propositions are certainly true of some kinds of magnitude;

whether they are true of all kinds remains to be examined. The following

three propositions, which directly contradict the previous three, must be

always true, if the philosopher’s axiom of finitude is to be accepted:

a. There are consecutive magnitudes, i.e. magnitudes such that no other

    magnitude of the same kind is greater than the less and less than the

    greater of the two given magnitudes.

b. There is a magnitude smaller than any other of the same kind.

c. There is a magnitude greater than any other of the same kind.*


As these three propositions directly contradict the previous three, it would

seem that both sets cannot be true. We have to examine the grounds for both,

and let one set of alternatives fall.

182. Let us begin with the propositions (a), (b), (c), and examine the natureof their grounds.

(a) A definite magnitude A being given, all the magnitudes greater than A

form a series, whose differences from A are magnitudes of a new kind. If

there be a magnitude B consecutive to A, its difference from A will be the

least magnitude of its kind, provided equal stretches correspond to equal

distances in the series. And conversely, if there be a smallest difference

between two magnitudes, A, B, then these two magnitudes must always be

consecutive; for if not, any intermediate magnitude would have a smaller

difference from A than B has. Thus if (b) is universally true, (a) must also be

true; and conversely, if (a) is true, and if the series of magnitudes be such that

equal stretches correspond to equal distances, then (b) is true of the distances

between the magnitudes considered. We might rest content with the reduction

of (a) to (b), and proceed to the proof of (b); but it seems worth while to offer

a direct proof, such as presumably the finitist philosopher has in his mind.

  Between A and B there is a certain number of magnitudes, unless A and B

are consecutive. The intermediate magnitudes all have order, so that in

passing from A to B all the intermediate magnitudes would be met with. In

such an enumeration, there must be some magnitude which comes next after

any magnitude C; or, to put the matter otherwise, since the enumeration has

to begin, it must begin somewhere, and the term with which it begins must be

the magnitude next to A. If this were not the case, there would be no definite

series; for if all the terms have an order, some of them must be consecutive.

In the above argument, what is important is its dependence upon number.

The whole argument turns upon the principle by which infinite number is

shown to be self-contradictory, namely: A given collection of many terms

must contain some finite number of terms. We say: All the magnitudes

between A and B form a given collection. If there are no such magnitudes, A

and B are consecutive, and the question is decided. If there are such

magnitudes, there must be a finite number of them, say n. Since they form a

series, there is a definite way of assigning to them the ordinal numbers from 1

to n. The mth and (m + 1)th are then consecutive.

If the axiom in italics be denied, the whole argument collapses; and this,

we shall find, is also the case as regards (b) and (c).

(b) The proof here is precisely similar to the proof of (a). If there are no

magnitudes less than A, then A is the least of its kind, and the question is

decided. If there are any, they form a definite collection, and therefore (by

our axiom) have a finite number, say n. Since they form a series, ordinalnumbers may be assigned to them growing higher as the magnitudes become

more distant from A. Thus the nth magnitude is the smallest of its kind.

(c) The proof here is obtained as in (b), by considering the collection of

magnitudes greater than A. Thus everything depends upon our axiom, without

which no case can be made out against continuity, or against the absence of a

greatest and least magnitude.

As regards the axiom itself, it will be seen that it has no particular

reference to quantity, and at first sight it might seem to have no reference to

order. But the word finite, which occurs in it, requires definition; and this

definition, in the form suited to the present discussion, has, we shall find, an

essential reference to order.

183. Of all the philosophers who have inveighed against infinite number, I

  doubt whether there is one who has known the difference between finite

and infinite numbers. The difference is simply this. Finite numbers obey

the law of mathematical induction; infinite numbers do not. That is to

say, given any number n, if n belongs to every class s to which 0 belongs,

and to which belongs also the number next after any number which is an

s, then n is finite; if not, not. It is in this alone, and in its consequences,

that finite and infinite numbers differ.*

The principle may be otherwise stated thus: If every proposition which

holds concerning 0, and also holds concerning the immediate successor of

every number of which it holds, holds concerning the number n, then n is

finite; if not, not. This is the precise sense of what may be popularly

expressed by saying that every finite number can be reached from 0 by

successive steps, or by successive additions of 1. This is the principle which

the philosopher must be held to lay down as obviously applicable to all

numbers, though he will have to admit that the more precisely his principle is

stated, the less obvious it becomes.

184. It may be worth while to show exactly how mathematical induction

  enters into the above proofs. Let us take the proof of (a), and suppose

there are n magnitudes between A and B. Then to begin with, we

  supposed these magnitudes capable of enumeration, i.e. of an order in

  which there are consecutive terms and a first term, and a term

  immediately preceding any term except the first. This property

  presupposes mathematical induction, and was in fact the very property in

  dispute. Hence we must not presuppose the possibility of enumeration,

  which would be a petitio principii. But to come to the kernel of the  argument: we supposed that, in any series, there must be a definite way

of assigning ordinal numbers to the terms. This property belongs to a

  series of one term, and belongs to every series having m + 1 terms, if it

  belongs to every series having m terms. Hence, by mathematical

  induction, it belongs to all series having a finite number of terms. But if it

be allowed that the number of terms may not be finite, the whole

  argument collapses.

As regards (b) and (c), the argument is similar. Every series having a finite

number of terms can be shown by mathematical induction to have a first and

last term; but no way exists of proving this concerning other series, or of

proving that all series are finite. Mathematical induction, in short, like the

axiom of parallels, is useful and convenient in its proper place; but to suppose

it always true is to yield to the tyranny of mere prejudice. The philosopher’s

finitist arguments, therefore, rest on a principle of which he is ignorant,

which there is no reason to affirm, and every reason to deny. With this

conclusion, the apparent antinomies may be considered solved.

185. It remains to consider what kinds of magnitude satisfy the propositions

(1), (2), (3). There is no general principle from which these can be

  proved or disproved, but there are certainly cases where they are true, and

  others where they are false. It is generally held by philosophers that

  numbers are essentially discrete, while magnitudes are essentially

  continuous. This we shall find to be not the case. Real numbers possess

the most complete continuity known, while many kinds of magnitude

  possess no continuity at all. The word continuity has many meanings, but

in mathematics it has only two—one old, the other new. For present

  purposes the old meaning will suffice. I therefore set up, for the present,

the following definition:

  Continuity applies to series (and only to series) whenever these are such

that there is a term between any two given terms.* Whatever is not a series,

or a compound of series, or whatever is a series not fulfilling the above

condition, is discontinuous.

  Thus the series of rational numbers is continuous, for the arithmetic mean

of two of them is always a third rational number between the two. The letters

of the alphabet are not continuous.

We have seen that any two terms in a series have a distance, or a stretch

which has magnitude. Since there are certainly discrete series (e.g. the

alphabet), there are certainly discrete magnitudes, namely, the distances orthe stretches of terms in discrete series. The distance between the letters A

and C is greater than that between the letters A and B, but there is no

magnitude which is greater than one of these and less than the other. In this

case, there is also a greatest possible and a least possible distance, so that all

three propositions (1), (2), (3) fail. It must not be supposed, however, that the

three propositions have any necessary connection. In the case of the integers,

for example, there are consecutive distances, and there is a least possible

distance, namely, that between consecutive integers, but there is no greatest

possible distance. Thus (3) is true, while (1) and (2) are false. In the case of

the series of notes, or of colours of the rainbow, the series has a beginning

and end, so that there is a greatest distance; but there is no least distance, and

there is a term between any two. Thus (1) and (2) are true, while (3) is false.

Or again, if we take the series composed of zero and the fractions having one

for numerator, there is a greatest distance, but no least distance, though the

series is discrete. Thus (2) is true, while (1) and (3) are false. And other

combinations might be obtained from other series.

  Thus the three propositions (1), (2), (3), have no necessary connection, and

all of them, or any selection, may be false as applied to any given kind of

magnitude. We cannot hope, therefore, to prove their truth from the nature of

magnitude. If they are ever to be true, this must be proved independently, or

discovered by mere inspection in each particular case. That they are

sometimes true, appears from a consideration of the distances between terms

of the number-continuum or of the rational numbers. Either of these series is

continuous in the above sense, and has no first or last term (when zero is

excluded). Hence its distances or stretches fulfil all three conditions. The

same might be inferred from space and time, but I do not wish to anticipate

what is to be said of these. Quantities of divisibility do not fulfil these

conditions when the wholes which are divisible consist of a finite number of

indivisible parts. But where the number of parts is infinite in a whole class of

differing magnitudes, all three conditions are satisfied, as appears from the

properties of the number-continuum.

We thus see that the problems of infinity and continuity have no essential

connection with quantity, but are due, where magnitudes present them at all,

to characteristics depending upon number and order. Hence the discussion of

these problems can only be undertaken after the pure theory of order has been

set forth.* To do this will be the aim of the following Part.

186. We may now sum up the results obtained in Part III. In Chapter 19 we  determined to define a magnitude as whatever is either greater or less

than something else. We found that magnitude has no necessary

  connection with divisibility, and that greater and less are indefinable.

  Every magnitude, we saw, has a certain relation—analogous to, but not

  identical with, that of inclusion in a class—to a certain quality or relation;

and this fact is expressed by saying that the magnitude in question is a

  magnitude of that quality or relation. We defined a quantity as a

  particular contained under a magnitude, i.e. as the complex consisting of

a magnitude with a certain spatio-temporal position, or with a pair of

  terms between which it is a relation. We decided, by means of a general

  principle concerning transitive symmetrical relations, that it is impossible

to content ourselves with quantities, and deny the further abstraction

  involved in magnitudes; that equality is not a direct relation between

  quantities, but consists in being particularizations of the same magnitude.

  Thus equal quantities are instances of the same magnitude. Similarly

  greater and less are not direct relations between quantities, but between

  magnitudes: quantities are only greater and less in virtue of being

  instances of greater and less magnitudes. Any two magnitudes which are

of the same quality or relation are one greater, the other less; and greater

and less are asymmetrical transitive relations.

  Among the terms which have magnitude are not only many qualities, but

also asymmetrical relations by which certain kinds of series are constituted.

These may be called distances. When there are distances in a series, any two

terms of the series have a distance, which is the same as, greater than, or less

than, the distance of any two other terms in the series. Another peculiar class

of magnitudes discussed in Chapter 20 is constituted by the degrees of

divisibility of different wholes. This, we found, is the only case in which

quantities are divisible, while there is no instance of divisible magnitudes.

  Numerical measurement, which was discussed in Chapter 21, required,

owing to the decision that most quantities and all magnitudes are indivisible,

a somewhat unusual treatment. The problem lies, we found, in establishing a

one-one relation between numbers and the magnitudes of the kind to be

measured. On certain metaphysical hypotheses (which were neither accepted

nor rejected), this was found to be always theoretically possible as regards

existents actual or possible, though often not practically feasible or important.

In regard to two classes of magnitudes, namely divisibilities and distances,

measurement was found to proceed from a very natural convention, whichdefines what is meant by saying (what can never have the simple sense which

it has in connection with finite wholes and parts) that one such magnitude is

double of, or n times, another. The relation of distance to stretch was

discussed, and it was found that, apart from a special axiom to that effect,

there was no à priori reason for regarding equal distances as corresponding to

equal stretches.

In Chapter 22 we discussed the definition of zero. The problem of zero was

found to have no connection with that of the infinitesimal, being in fact

closely related to the purely logical problem as to the nature of negation. We

decided that, just as there are the distinct logical and arithmetical negations,

so there is a third fundamental kind, the quantitative negation; but that this is

negation of that quality or relation of which the magnitudes are, not of

magnitude of that quality or relation. Hence we were able to regard zero as

one among the magnitudes contained in a kind of magnitude, and to

distinguish the zeroes of different kinds. We showed also that quantitative

negation is connected with logical negation by the fact that there cannot be

any quantities whose magnitude is zero.

In the present chapter the problems of continuity, the infinite, and the

infinitesimal, were shown to belong, not specially to the theory of quantity,

but to those of number and order. It was shown that, though there are kinds of

magnitude in which there is no greatest and no least magnitude, this fact does

not require us to admit infinite or infinitesimal magnitudes; and that there is

no contradiction in supposing a kind of magnitudes to form a series in which

there is a term between any two, and in which, consequently, there is no term

consecutive to a given term. The supposed contradiction was shown to result

from an undue use of mathematical induction—a principle, the full discussion

of which presupposes the philosophy of order.


* This will be further explained in Part V, Chap. 36.

* Those Hegelians who search for a chance of an antinomy may proceed to

the definition of zero and infinity by means of the above propositions. When

(2) and (b) both hold, they may say, the magnitude satisfying (b) is called

zero; when (3) and (c) both hold, the magnitude satisfying (c) is called

infinity. We have seen, however, that zero is to be otherwise defined, and has

to be excluded before (2) becomes true; while infinity is not a magnitude of

the kind in question at all, but merely a piece of mathematical shorthand.

(Not infinity in general, that is, but infinite magnitude in the cases we arediscussing.)

* It must, however, be mentioned that one of these consequences gives a

logical difference between finite and infinite numbers, which may be taken as

an independent definition. This has been already explained in Part II, Chap.

13, and will be further discussed in Part V.

* The objection to this definition (as we shall see in Part V) is, that it does

not give the usual properties of the existence of limits to convergent series

which are commonly associated with continuity. Series of the above kind will

be called compact, except in the present discussion.

* Cf. Couturat, “Sur la Définition du Continu”, Revue de Métaphysique et

de Morale, 1900.                                  Part IV


                                    Order24


THE GENESIS OF SERIES




187. The notion of order or series is one with which, in connection with

  distance, and with the order of magnitude, we have already had to deal.

The discussion of continuity in the last chapter of Part III showed us that

this is properly an ordinal notion, and prepared us for the fundamental

  importance of order. It is now high time to examine this concept on its

own account. The importance of order, from a purely mathematical

  standpoint, has been immeasurably increased by many modern

  developments. Dedekind, Cantor and Peano have shown how to base all

  Arithmetic and Analysis upon series of a certain kind—i.e. upon those

  properties of finite numbers in virtue of which they form what I shall call

a progression. Irrationals are defined (as we shall see) entirely by the

help of order; and a new class of transfinite ordinals is introduced, by

  which the most important and interesting results are obtained. In

  Geometry, von Staudt’s quadrilateral construction and Pieri’s work on

  Projective Geometry have shown how to give points, lines and planes an

  order independent of metrical considerations and of quantity; while

  descriptive Geometry proves that a very large part of Geometry demands

only the possibility of serial arrangement. Moreover the whole

  philosophy of space and time depends upon the view we take of order.

  Thus a discussion of order, which is lacking in the current philosophies,

has become essential to any understanding of the foundations of

  mathematics.

188. The notion of order is more complex than any hitherto analysed. Two

  terms cannot have an order, and even three cannot have a cyclic order.

Owing to this complexity, the logical analysis of order presents

  considerable difficulties. I shall therefore approach the problem

  gradually, considering, in this chapter, the circumstances under which

  order arises, and reserving for the second chapter the discussion as towhat order really is. This analysis will raise several fundamental points in

  general logic, which will demand considerable discussion of an almost

  purely philosophical nature. From this I shall pass to more mathematical

topics, such as the types of series and the ordinal definition of numbers,

  thus gradually preparing the way for the discussion of infinity and

  continuity in the following Part.

  There are two different ways in which order may arise, though we shall

find in the end that the second way is reducible to the first. In the first, what

may be called the ordinal element consists of three terms a, b, c, one of which

(b say) is between the other two. This happens whenever there is a relation of

a to b and of b to c, which is not a relation of b to a, of c to b, or of c to a.

This is the definition, or better perhaps, the necessary and sufficient

condition, of the proposition “b is between a and c”. But there are other cases

of order where, at first sight, the above conditions are not satisfied, and where

between is not obviously applicable. These are cases where we have four

terms a, b, c, d, as the ordinal element, of which we can say that a and c are

separated by b and d. This relation is more complicated, but the following

seems to characterize it: a and c are separated from b and d, when there is an

asymmetrical relation which holds between a and b, b and c, c and d, or

between a and d, d and c, c and b, or between c and d, d and a, a and b; while

if we have the first case, the same relation must hold either between d and a,

or else between both a and c, and a and d; with similar assumptions for the

other two cases.* (No further special assumption is required as to the relation

between a and c or between b and d; it is the absence of such an assumption

which prevents our reducing this case to the former in a simple manner.)

There are cases—notably where our series is closed—in which it seems

formally impossible to reduce this second case to the first, though this

appearance, as we shall see, is in part deceptive. We have to show, in the

present chapter, the principal ways in which series arise from collections of

such ordinal elements.

  Although two terms alone cannot have an order, we must not assume that

order is possible except where there are relations between two terms. In all

series, we shall find, there are asymmetrical relations between two terms. But

an asymmetrical relation of which there is only one instance does not

constitute order. We require at least two instances for between, and at least

three for separation of pairs. Thus although order is a relation between three

or four terms, it is only possible where there are other relations which holdbetween pairs of terms. These relations may be of various kinds, giving

different ways of generating series. I shall now enumerate the principal ways

with which I am acquainted.

189. (1) The simplest method of generating a series is as follows. Let there

be a collection of terms, finite or infinite, such that every term (with the

  possible exception of a single one) has to one and only one other term of

the collection a certain asymmetrical relation (which must of course be

  intransitive), and that every term (with again one possible exception,

  which must not be the same as the term formerly excepted) has also to

one and only one other term of the collection the relation which is the

  converse of the former one.* Further, let it be assumed that, if a has the

  first relation to b, and b to c, then c does not have the first relation to a.

  Then every term of the collection except the two peculiar terms has one

  relation to a second term, and the converse relation to a third, while these

  terms themselves do not have to each other either of the relations in

  question. Consequently, by the definition of between, our first term is

  between our second and third terms. The term to which a given term has

one of the two relations in question is called next after the given term; the

term to which the given term has the converse relation is called next

  before the given term. Two terms between which the relations in question

hold are called consecutive. The exceptional terms (when they exist) are

not between any pair of terms; they are called the two ends of the series,

or one is called the beginning and the other the end. The existence of the

one does not imply that of the other—for example the natural numbers

  have a beginning but no end—and neither need exist—for example, the

  positive and negative integers together have neither.†

The above method may perhaps become clear by a formal exhibition. Let R

be one of our relations, and let its converse be denoted by RŘ.‡ Then if e be

any term of our set, there are two terms d, f, such that e RŘ d, c R f, i.e. such

that d R e, e R f. Since each term only has the relation R to one other, we

cannot have d R f; and it was one of the initial assumptions that we were not

to have f R d. Hence e is between d and f.§ If a be a term which has only the

relation R, then obviously a is not between any pair of terms. We may extend

the notion of between by defining that, if c be between b and d, and d

between c and e, then c or d will be said to be also between b and e. In this

way, unless we either reach an end or come back to the term with which we

started, we can find any number of terms between which and b the term c willlie. But if the total number of terms be not less than seven, we cannot show in

this way that of any three terms one must be between the other two, since the

collection may consist of two distinct series, of which, if the collection is

finite, one at least must be closed, in order to avoid more than two ends.

This remark shows that, if the above method is to give a single series, to

which any term of our collection is to belong, we need a further condition,

which may be expressed by saying that the collection must be connected. We

shall find means hereafter of expressing this condition without reference to

number, but for the present we may content ourselves by saying that our

collection is connected when, given any two of its terms, there is a certain

finite number (not necessarily unique) of steps from one term to the next, by

which we can pass from one of our two terms to the other. When this

condition is fulfilled, we are assured that, of any three terms of our collection,

one must be between the other two.

  Assuming now that our collection is connected, and therefore forms a

single series, four cases may arise: (a) our series may have two ends, (b) it

may have one end, (c) it may have no end and be open, (d) it may have no

end and be closed. Concerning (a), it is to be observed that our series must be

finite. For, taking the two ends, since the collection is connected, there is

some finite number n of steps which will take us from one end to the other,

and hence n + 1 is the number of terms of the series. Every term except the

two ends is between them, and neither of them is between any other pair of

terms. In case (b), on the other hand, our collection must be infinite, and this

would hold even if it were not connected. For suppose the end which exists to

have the relation R, but not RŘ. Then every other term of the collection has

both relations, and can never have both to the same term, since R is

asymmetrical. Hence the term to which (say) e has the relation R is not that to

which it had the relation RŘ, but is either some new term, or one of e’s

predecessors. Now it cannot be the end-term a, since a does not have the

relation RŘ to any term. Nor can it be any term which can be reached by

successive steps from a without passing through e, for if it were, this term

would have two predecessors, contrary to the hypothesis that R is a one-one

relation. Hence, if k be any term which can be reached by successive steps

from a, k has a successor which is not a or any of the terms between a and k;

and hence the collection is infinite, whether it be connected or not. In case

(c), the collection must again be infinite. For here, by hypothesis, the series is

open—i.e., starting from any term e, no number of steps in either directionbrings us back to e. And there cannot be a finite limit to the number of

possible steps, since, if there were, the series would have an end. Here again,

it is not necessary to suppose the series connected. In case (d), on the

contrary, we must assume connection. By saying that the series is closed, we

mean that there exists some number n of steps by which, starting from a

certain term a, we shall be brought back to a. In this case, n is the number of

terms, and it makes no difference with which term we start. In this case,

between is not definite except where three terms are consecutive, and the

series contains more than three terms. Otherwise, we need the more

complicated relation of separation.

190. (2) The above method, as we have seen, will give either open or closed

  series, but only such as have consecutive terms. The second method,

  which is now to be discussed, will give series in which there are no

  consecutive terms, but will not give closed series.* In this method we

  have a transitive asymmetrical relation P, and a collection of terms any

  two of which are such that either xPy or yPx. When these conditions are

  satisfied our terms necessarily form a single series. Since the relation is

  asymmetrical, we can distinguish xPy from yPx, and the two cannot both

  subsist.† Since P is transitive, xPy and yPz involve xPz. It follows that  is

  also asymmetrical and transitive.‡ Thus with respect to any term x of our

  collection, all other terms of the collection fall into two classes, those for

  which xPy, and those for which zPx. Calling these two classes x and πx

  respectively, we see that, owing to the transitiveness of P, if y belongs to

the class x, y is contained in x; and if z belongs to the class πx, πz is

  contained in πx. Taking now two terms x, y, for which xPy, all other

  terms fall into three classes: (1) Those belonging to πx, and therefore to πy;

(2) those belonging to y, and therefore to x; (3) those belonging to x but

not to y. If z be of the first class, we have zPx, zPy; if v be of the second,

xPv and yPv; if w be of the third, xPw and wPy. The case yPu and uPx is

  excluded: for xPy, yPu imply xPu, which is inconsistent with uPx. Thus we

have, in the three cases, (1) x is between z and y; (2) y is between x and v;

(3) w is between x and y. Hence any three terms of our collection are such

that one is between the other two, and the whole collection forms a single

  series. If the class (3) contains no terms, x and y are said to be consecutive;

but many relations P can be assigned, for which there are always terms in

the class (3). If for example P be before, and our collection be the

  moments in a certain interval, or in all time, there is a moment between any  two of our collection. Similarly in the case of the magnitudes which, in the

last chapter of Part III, we called continuous. There is nothing in the

  present method, as there was in the first, to show that there must be

  consecutive terms, unless the total number of terms in our collection be

finite. On the other hand, the present method will not allow closed series;

for owing to the transitiveness of the relation P, if the series were closed,

and x were any one of its terms, we should have xPx, which is impossible

  because P is asymmetrical. Thus in a closed series, the generating relation

can never be transitive.* As in the former method, the series may have two

ends, or one, or none. In the first case only, it may be finite; but even in

this case it may be infinite, and in the other two cases it must be so.

191. (3) A series may be generated by means of distances, as was already

  partially explained in Part III, and as we shall see more fully hereafter. In

this case, starting with a certain term x, we are to have relations, which

are magnitudes, between x and a number of other terms y, z… .

  According as these relations are greater or less, we can order the

  corresponding terms. If there are no similar relations between the

  remaining terms y, z, …, we require nothing further. But if these have

  relations which are magnitudes of the same kind, certain axioms are

  necessary to insure that the order may be independent of the particular

term from which we start. Denoting by xz the distance of x and z, if xz is

  less than xw, we must have yz less than yw. A consequence, which did

not follow when x was the only term that had a distance, is that the

  distances must be asymmetrical relations, and those which have one

  sense must be considered less than zero. For “xz is less than xw” must

  involve “wz is less than ww”, i.e. wz is less than 0. In this way the present

case is practically reduced to the second; for every pair of terms x, y will

be such that xy is less than 0 or else xy is greater than 0; and we may put

in the first case yPx, in the second xPy. But we require one further axiom

in order that the arrangement may be thus effected unambiguously. If xz

= yw, and zw' = xy, w and w' must be the same point. With this further

  axiom, the reduction to case (2) becomes complete.

192. (4) Cases of triangular relations are capable of giving rise to order. Let

there be a relation R which holds between y and (x, z), between z and (y,

u), between u and (z, w), and so on. Between is itself such a relation, and

this might therefore seem the most direct and natural way of generating

order. We should say, in such a case, that y is between x and z, when the  relation R holds between y and the couple x, z. We should need

  assumptions concerning R which should show that, if y is between x and

z, and z between y and w, then y and z are each between x and w. That is,

if we have yR (x, w), zR (y, w), we must have yR (x, w) and zR (x, w).

This is a kind of three-term transitiveness. Also if y be between x and w,

and z between y and w, then z must be between x and w, and y between x

and z: that is, if yR (x, w) and zR (y, w), then zR (x, w) and yR (x, z). Also

yR (x, z) must be equivalent to yR (z, x).† With these assumptions, an

  unambiguous order will be generated among any number of terms such

that any triad has the relation R. Whether such a state of things can ever

be incapable of further analysis, is a question which I leave for the next

  chapter.

193. (5) We have found hitherto no way of generating closed continuous

  series. There are, however, instances of such series, e.g. angles, the

  elliptic straight line, the complex numbers with a given modulus. It is

  therefore necessary to have some theory which allows of their possibility.

In the case where our terms are asymmetrical relations, as straight lines

are, or are correlated uniquely and reciprocally with such relations, the

  following theory will effect this object. In other cases, the sixth method

  (below) seems adequate to the end in view.

Let x, y, z … be a set of asymmetrical relations, and let R be an

asymmetrical relation which holds between any two x, y or y, x except when y

is the converse relation to x. Also let R be such that, if it holds between x and

y, it holds between y and the converse of x; and if x be any term of the

collection, let all the terms to which x has either of the relations R, RŘ be

terms of the collection. All these conditions are satisfied by angles, and

whenever they are satisfied, the resulting series is closed. For xRy implies yR

, and hence R, and thence Rx; so that by means of relations R it is

possible to travel from x back to x. Also there is nothing in the definition to

show that our series cannot be continuous. Since it is closed, we cannot apply

universally the notion of between; but the notion of separation can be always

applied. The reason why it is necessary to suppose that our terms either are,

or are correlated with, asymmetrical relations, is, that such series often have

antipodes, opposite terms as they may be called; and that the notion of

opposite seems to be essentially bound up with that of the converse of an

asymmetrical relation.

194. (6) In the same way in which, in (4), we showed how to construct a  series by relations of between, we can construct a series directly by four-

term relations of separation. For this purpose, as before, certain axioms

are necessary. The following five axioms have been shown by Vailati* to

be sufficient, and by Padoa to possess ordered independence, i.e. to be

such that none can be deduced from its predecessors.† Denoting “a and b

  separate c from d” by ab cd, we must have:

    (α) ab cd is equivalent to cd ab;

    (β) ab cd is equivalent to ab dc;

    (γ) ab cd excludes ac bd;

    (δ) For any four terms of our collection, we must have ab cd, or ac bd,

    or ad bc;

    (ε) If ab cd, and ac be, then ac de.


By means of these five assumptions, our terms a, b, c, d, e … acquire an

unambiguous order, in which we start from a relation between two pairs of

terms, which is undefined except to the extent to which the above

assumptions define it. The further consideration of this case, as generally of

the relation of separation, I postpone to a later stage.

The above six methods of generating series are the principal ones with

which I am acquainted, and all other methods, so far as I know, are reducible

to one of these six. The last alone gives a method of generating closed

continuous series whose terms neither are, nor are correlated with,

asymmetrical relations.* This last method should therefore be applied in

projective and elliptic Geometry, where the correlation of the points on a line

with the lines through a point appears to be logically subsequent to the order

of the points on a line. But before we can decide whether these six methods

(especially the fourth and sixth) are irreducible and independent, we must

discuss (what has not hitherto been analysed) the meaning of order, and the

logical constituents (if any) of which this meaning is compounded. This will

be done in the following chapter.


* This gives a sufficient but not a necessary condition for the separation of

couples.

* The converse of a relation is the relation which must hold between y and

x when the given relation holds between x and y.

† The above is the only method of generating series given by Bolzano,

“Paradoxien des Unendlichen”, § 7.‡ This is the notation adopted by Professor Schröder.

§ The denial of d R f is only necessary to this special method, but the

denial of f R d is essential to the definition of between.

* The following method is the only one given by Vivanti in the Formulaire

de Mathématiques (1895), VI, § 2, No. 7; also by Gilman, “On the properties

of a one-dimensional manifold”, Mind, N. S. Vol. I. We shall find that it is

general in a sense in which none of our other methods are so.

† I use the term asymmetrical as the contrary, rather than the contradictory,

of symmetrical. If xPy, and the relation is symmetrical, we have always yPx;

if asymmetrical, we never have yPx. Some relations—e.g. logical implication

—are neither symmetrical nor asymmetrical. Instead of assuming P to be

asymmetrical, we may make the equivalent assumption that it is what

Professor Peirce calls an aliorelative, i.e. a relation which no term has to

itself. (This assumption is not equivalent to asymmetry in general, but only

when combined with transitiveness.)

‡ P may be read precedes, and  may be read follows, provided no

temporal or spatial ideas are allowed to intrude themselves.

* For more precise statements, see Chap. 28.

† See Peano, I Principii di Geometria, Turin, 1889, Axioms viii, ix, x, xi.

* Rivista di Matematica, v, pp. 76, 183.

† Ibid. p. 185.

* See Chap. 28.25


THE MEANING OF ORDER




195. We have now seen under what circumstances there is an order among

a set of terms, and by this means we have acquired a certain inductive

  familiarity with the nature of order. But we have not yet faced the

  question: What is order? This is a difficult question, and one upon which,

so far as I know, nothing at all has been written. All the authors with

  whom I am acquainted are content to exhibit the genesis of order; and

  since most of them give only one of the six methods enumerated in

  Chapter 24, it is easy for them to confound the genesis of order with its

  nature. This confusion is rendered evident to us by the multiplicity of the

  above methods; for it is evident that we mean by order something

  perfectly definite, which, being generated equally in all our six cases, is

clearly distinct from each and all of the ways in which it may be

  generated, unless one of these ways should turn out to be fundamental,

and the others to be reducible to it. To elicit this common element in all

  series, and to broach the logical discussions connected with it, is the

  purpose of the present chapter. This discussion is of purely philosophical

  interest, and might be wholly omitted in a mathematical treatment of the

  subject.

In order to approach the subject gradually, let us separate the discussion of

between from that of separation of couples. When we have decided upon the

nature of each of these separately, it will be time to combine them, and

examine what it is that both have in common. I shall begin with between, as

being the simpler of the two.

196. Between may be characterized (as in Chapter 24) as a relation of one

term y to two others x and z, which holds whenever x has to y, and y has

to z, some relation which y does not have to x, nor z to y, nor z to x.*

  These conditions are undoubtedly sufficient for betweenness, but it may

be questioned whether they are necessary. Several possible opinionsmust be distinguished in this respect. (1) We may hold that the above

  conditions give the very meaning of between, that they constitute an

  actual analysis of it, and not merely a set of conditions insuring its

  presence. (2) We may hold that between is not a relation of the terms x, y,

z at all, but a relation of the relation of y to x to that of y to z, namely the

  relation of difference of sense. (3) We may hold that between is an

  indefinable notion, like greater and less; that the above conditions allow

us to infer that y is between x and z, but that there may be other

  circumstances under which this occurs, and even that it may occur

  without involving any relation except diversity among the pairs (x, y), (y,

z), (x, z). In order to decide between these theories, it will be well to

  develop each in turn.

197. (1) In this theory, we define “y is between x and z” to mean: “There is

a relation R such that xRy, yRz but not yRx, zRy”; and it remains a

  question whether we are to add “not zRx”. We will suppose to begin with

that this addition is not made. The following propositions will be

  generally admitted to be self-evident: (α) If y be between x and z, and z

  between y and w, then y is between x and w; (β) if y be between x and z,

and w between x and y, then y is between w and z. For brevity, let us

  express “y is between x and z” by the symbol xyz. Then our two

  propositions are: (α) xyz and yzw imply xyw; (β) xyz and xwy imply wyz.

We must add that the relation of between is symmetrical so far as the

  extremes are concerned: i.e. xyz implies zyx. This condition follows

  directly from our definition. With regard to the axioms (α) and (β), it is to

be observed that between, on our present view, is always relative to some

  relation R, and that the axioms are only assumed to hold when it is the

  same relation R that is in question in both the premisses. Let us see

  whether these axioms are consequences of our definition. For this purpose,

let us write R for not-R.

xyz means xRy, yRz, yx, zy.

yzw means yRz, zRw, zRy, wRz.


  Thus yzw only adds to xyz the two conditions zRw, wz. If R is transitive,

these conditions insure xyw; if not, not. Now we have seen that some series

are generated by one-one relations R, which are not transitive. In these cases,
                          2
however, denoting by R the relation between x and z implied by xRy, yRz,

and so on for higher powers, we can substitute a transitive relation R' for R,where R' means “some positive power of R”. In this way, if xyz holds for a

relation which is some definite power of R, then xyz holds for R' , provided

only that no positive power of R is equivalent to RŘ. For, in this latter event,

we should have yR' x whenever xR' y, and R' could not be substituted for R in

the explanation of xyz. Now this condition, that the converse of R is not to be

a positive power of R, is equivalent to the condition that our series is not to be
                        nn1
closed. For if RŘ = R, then RRŘ = R + ; but since R is a one-one relation,

RRŘ implies the relation of identity. Thus n + 1 steps bring us back from x to

x, and our series is a closed series of n + 1 terms. Now we have agreed

already that between is not properly applicable to closed series. Hence this

condition, that RŘ is not to be a power of R, imposes only such restrictions

upon our axiom (α) as we should expect it to be subject to.

  With regard to (β), we have


xyz = xRy ·yRz ·yx ·zy.

xwy = xRw ·wRy ·wx ·yw.


The case contemplated by this axiom is only possible if R be not a one-one

relation, since we have xRy and xRw. The deduction wyz is here an immediate

consequence of the definition, without the need of any further conditions.

It remains to examine whether we can dispense with the condition zx in

the definition of between. If we suppose R to be a one-one relation, and zRx

to be satisfied, we shall have


xyz = xRy . yRz . zy. yx,


and we have further by hypothesis zRx, and since R is one-one, and xRy,

we have xz. Hence, in virtue of the definition, we have yzx; and similarly we

shall obtain zxy. If we now adhere to our axiom (α), we shall have xzx, which

is impossible; for it is certainly part of the meaning of between that the three

terms in the relation should be different, and it is impossible that a term

should be between x and x. Thus we must either insert our condition zx, or

we must set up the new condition in the definition, that x and z are to be

different. (It should be observed that our definition implies that x is different

from y and y from z; for if not, xRy would involve yRx, and yRz would

involve zRy.) It would seem preferable to insert the condition that x and z areto be different: for this is in any case necessary, and is not implied by zx.

This condition must then be added to our axiom (α); xyz and yzw are to imply

xyw, unless x and w are identical. In axiom (β), this addition is not necessary,

since it is implied in the premisses. Thus the condition zx is not necessary, if

we are willing to admit that xyz is compatible with yzx—an admission which

such cases as the angles of a triangle render possible. Or we may insert, in

place of zx, the condition which we found necessary before to the universal

validity of our axiom (α), namely that no power of R is to be equivalent to the

converse of R: for if we have both xyz and yzx, we shall have (so far at least
                            2
as x, y, z are concerned) R = RŘ, i.e. if xRy and yRz, then zRx. This last

course seems to be the best. Hence in all cases where our first instance of

between is defined by a one-one relation R, we shall substitute the relation R'

, which means “some positive power of R”. The relation R' is then transitive,

and the condition that no positive power of R is to be equivalent to RŘ is

equivalent to the condition that R' is to be asymmetrical. Hence, finally, the

whole matter is simplified into the following:

To say that y is between x and z is equivalent to saying that there is some

transitive asymmetrical relation which relates both x and y, and y and z.

This short and simple statement, as the above lengthy argument shows,

contains neither more nor less than our original definition, together with the

emendations which we gradually found to be necessary. The question

remains, however: Is this the meaning of between?

198. A negative instance can be at once established if we allow the phrase:

R is a relation between x and y. The phrase, as the reader will have

  observed, has been with difficulty excluded from the definitions of

  between, which its introduction would have rendered at least verbally

  circular. The phrase may have none but a linguistic importance, or again

it may point to a real insufficiency in the above definition. Let us

  examine the relation of a relation R to its terms x and y. In the first place,

there certainly is such a relation. To be a term which has the relation R to

  some other term is certainly to have a relation to R, a relation which we

may express as “belonging to the domain of R”. Thus if xRy, x will

belong to the domain of R, and y to that of RŘ. If we express this relation

  between x and R, or between y and RŘ, by E, we shall have xER, yERŘ. If

further we express the relation of R to RŘ by I, we shall have RŘIR and

  RIRŘ. Thus we have xER, yEIR. Now EI is by no means the converse of

E, and thus the above definition of between, if for this reason only, doesnot apply; also neither E nor EI is transitive. Thus our definition of

  between is wholly inapplicable to such a case. Now it may well be

  doubted whether between, in this case, has at all the same meaning as in

  other cases. Certainly we do not in this way obtain series: x and y are not,

in the same sense as R, between R and other terms. Moreover, if we

  admit relations of a term to itself, we shall have to admit that such

  relations are between a term and itself, which we agreed to be impossible.

  Hence we may be tempted to regard the use of between in this case as

due to the linguistic accident that the relation is usually mentioned

  between the subject and the object, as in “A is the father of B”. On the

  other hand, it may be urged that a relation does have a very peculiar

  relation to the pair of terms which it relates, and that between should

  denote a relation of one term to two others. To the objection concerning

  relations of a term to itself, it may be answered that such relations, in any

  system, constitute a grave logical difficulty; that they would, if possible,

be denied philosophic validity; and that even where the relation asserted

is identity, there must be two identical terms, which are therefore not

  quite identical. As this raises a fundamental difficulty, which we cannot

  discuss here, it will be prudent to allow the answer to pass.* And it may

be further urged that use of the same word in two connections points

  always to some analogy, the extent of which should be carefully

  indicated by those who deny that the meaning is the same in both cases;

and that the analogy here is certainly profounder than the mere order of

  words in a sentence, which is, in any case, far more variable in this

  respect than the phrase that a relation is between its terms. To these

  remarks, however, it may be retorted that the objector has himself

  indicated the precise extent of the analogy: the relation of a relation to its

  terms is a relation of one term to two others, just as between is, and this is

what makes the two cases similar. This last retort is, I think, valid, and

we may allow that the relation of a relation to its terms, though involving

a most important logical problem, is not the same as the relation of

  between by which order is to be constituted.

  Nevertheless, the above definition of between, though we shall be

ultimately forced to accept it, seems, at first sight, scarcely adequate from a

philosophical point of view. The reference to some asymmetrical relation is

vague, and seems to require to be replaced by some phrase in which no such

undefined relation appears, but only the terms and the betweenness. Thisbrings us to the second of the above opinions concerning between.

199. (2) Between, it may be said, is not a relation of three terms at all, but a

  relation of two relations, namely difference of sense. Now if we take this

view, the first point to be observed is, that we require the two opposite

  relations, not merely in general, but as particularized by belonging to one

and the same term. This distinction is already familiar from the case of

  magnitudes and quantities. Before and after in the abstract do not

  constitute between: it is only when one and the same term is both before

and after that between arises: this term is then between what it is before

and what it is after. Hence there is a difficulty in the reduction of between

to difference of sense. The particularized relation is a logically puzzling

  entity, which in Part I (§ 55) we found it necessary to deny; and it is not

  quite easy to distinguish a relation of two relations, particularized as

  belonging to the same term, from a relation of the term in question to two

  others. At the same time, great advantages are secured by this reduction.

We get rid of the necessity for a triangular relation, to which many

  philosophers may object, and we assign a common element to all cases of

  between, namely difference of sense, i.e. the difference between an

  asymmetrical relation and its converse.

200. The question whether there can be an ultimate triangular relation is one

  whose actual solution is both difficult and unimportant, but whose

  precise statement is of very great importance. Philosophers seem usually

to assume—though not, so far as I know, explicitly—that relations never

  have more than two terms; and even such relations they reduce, by force

or guile, to predications. Mathematicians, on the other hand, almost

  invariably speak of relations of many terms. We cannot, however, settle

the question by a simple appeal to mathematical instances, for it remains

a question whether these are, or are not, susceptible of analysis. Suppose,

for example, that the projective plane has been defined as a relation of

three points: the philosopher may always say that it should have been

  defined as a relation of a point and a line, or of two intersecting lines—a

  change which makes little or no mathematical difference. Let us see what

is the precise meaning of the question. There are among terms two

  radically different kinds, whose difference constitutes the truth

  underlying the doctrine of substance and attribute. There are terms which

can never occur except as terms; such are points, instants, colours,

  sounds, bits of matter, and generally terms of the kind of which existents  consist. There are, on the other hand, terms which can occur otherwise

than as terms; such are being, adjectives generally and relations. Such

  terms we agreed to call concepts.* It is the presence of concepts not

  occurring as terms which distinguishes propositions from mere concepts;

in every proposition there is at least one more concept than there are

  terms. The traditional view—which may be called the subject-predicate

  theory—holds that in every proposition there is one term, the subject, and

one concept which is not a term, the predicate. This view, for many

  reasons, must be abandoned.† The smallest departure from the traditional

  opinion lies in holding that, where propositions are not reducible to the

  subject-predicate form, there are always two terms only, and one concept

  which is not a term. (The two terms may, of course, be complex, and may

each contain concepts which are not terms.) This gives the opinion that

  relations are always between only two terms; for a relation may be

  defined as any concept which occurs in a proposition containing more

than one term. But there seems no à priori reason for limiting relations to

  two terms, and there are instances which lead to an opposite view. In the

  first place, when the concept of a number is asserted of a collection, if the

  collection has n terms, there are n terms, and only one concept (namely

n) which is not a term. In the second place, such relations as those of an

  existent to the place and time of its existence are only reducible by a very

  cumbrous method to relations of two terms.‡ If, however, the reduction

be held essential, it seems to be always formally possible, by

  compounding part of the proposition into one complex term, and then

  asserting a relation between this part and the remainder, which can be

  similarly reduced to one term. There may be cases where this is not

  possible, but I do not know of them. The question whether such a formal

  reduction is to be always undertaken is not, however, so far as I have

  been able to discover, one of any great practical or theoretical

  importance.

201. There is thus no valid à priori reason in favour of analysing between

into a relation of two relations, if a triangular relation seems otherwise

  preferable. The other reason in favour of the analysis of between is more

  considerable. So long as between is a triangular relation of the terms, it

must be taken either as indefinable, or as involving a reference to some

  transitive asymmetrical relation. But if we make between consist

  essentially in the opposition of two relations belonging to one term, there  seems to be no longer any undue indeterminate-ness. Against this view

we may urge, however, that no reason now appears why the relations in

  question should have to be transitive, and that—what is more important

  —the very meaning of between involves the terms, for it is they, and not

their relations, that have order. And if it were only the relations that were

  relevant, it would not be necessary, as in fact it is, to particularize them

by the mention of the terms between which they hold. Thus on the whole,

the opinion that between is not a triangular relation must be abandoned.

202. (3) We come now to the view that between is an ultimate and

  indefinable relation. In favour of this view it might be urged that, in all

our ways of generating open series, we could see that cases of between

did arise, and that we could apply a test to suggested definitions. This

  seems to show that the suggested definitions were merely conditions

  which imply relations of between, and were not true definitions of this

  relation. The question: Do such and such conditions insure that y shall be

  between x and z?, is always one which we can answer, without having to

  appeal (at least consciously) to any previous definition. And the

  unanalysable nature of between may be supported by the fact that the

  relation is symmetrical with respect to the two extremes, which was not

the case with the relations of pairs from which between was inferred.

  There is, however, a very grave difficulty in the way of such a view, and

that is, that sets of terms have many different orders, so that in one we

may have y between x and z, while in another we have x between y and

z.* This seems to show that between essentially involves reference to the

  relations from which it is inferred. If not, we shall at least have to admit

that these relations are relevant to the genesis of series; for series require

  imperatively that there should be at most one relevant relation of between

among three terms. Hence we must, apparently, allow that between is not

the sole source of series, but must always be supplemented by the

  mention of some transitive asymmetrical relation with respect to which

the betweenness arises. The most that can be said is, that this transitive

  asymmetrical relation of two terms may itself be logically subsequent to,

and derived from, some relation of three terms, such as those considered

in Chapter 24, in the fourth way of generating series. When such

  relations fulfil the axioms which were then mentioned, they lead of

  themselves to relations between pairs of terms. For we may say that b

  precedes c when acd implies bcd, and that b follows c when abd impliescbd, where a and d are fixed terms. Though such relations are merely

  derivative, it is in virtue of them that between occurs in such cases.

  Hence we seem finally compelled to leave the reference to an

  asymmetrical relation in our definition. We shall therefore say:

    A term y is between two terms x and z with reference to a transitive

    asymmetrical relation R when xRy and yRz. In no other case can y be

    said properly to be between x and z; and this definition gives not merely

    a criterion, but the very meaning of betweenness.

203. We have next to consider the meaning of separation of couples. This is

a more complicated relation than between, and was but little considered

until elliptic Geometry brought it into prominence. It has been shown by

  Vailati* that this relation, like between, always involves a transitive

  asymmetrical relation of two terms; but this relation of a pair of terms is

  itself relative to three other fixed terms of the set, as, in the case of

  between, it was relative to two fixed terms. It is further sufficiently

  evident that wherever there is a transitive asymmetrical relation, which

  relates every pair of terms in a collection of not less than four terms,

there are pairs of couples having the relation of separation. Thus we shall

  find it possible to express separation, as well as between, by means of

  transitive asymmetrical relations and their terms. But let us first examine

  directly the meaning of separation.

We may denote the fact that a and c are separated by b and d by the

symbol abcd. If, then, a, b, c, d, e be any five terms of the set we require the

following properties to hold of the relation of separation (of which, it will be

observed, only the last involves five terms):

1. abcd = badc.

2. abcd = adcb.

3. abcd excludes acbd.

4. We must have abcd or acdb or adbc.

5. abcd and acde together imply abde.†  These properties may be illustrated by the consideration of five points on a

circle, as in the accompanying figure. Whatever relation of two pairs of terms

possesses these properties we shall call a relation of separation between the

pairs. It will be seen that the relation is symmetrical, but not in general

transitive.

204. Wherever we have a transitive asymmetrical relation R between any

  two terms of a set of not less than four terms, the relation of separation

  necessarily arises. For in any series, if four terms have the order abcd,

then a and c are separated by b and d; and every transitive asymmetrical

  relation, as we have seen, provided there are at least two consecutive

  instances of it, gives rise to a series. Thus in this case, separation is a

mere extension of between: if R be asymmetrical and transitive, and aRb,

  bRc, cRd, then a and c are separated by b and d. The existence of such a

  relation is therefore a sufficient condition of separation.

It is also a necessary condition. For, suppose a relation of separation to

exist, and let a, b, c, d, e be five terms of the set to which the relation applies.

Then, considering a, b, c as fixed, and d and e as variable, twelve cases may

arise. In virtue of the five fundamental properties, we may introduce the

symbol abcde to denote that, striking out any one of these five letters, the

remaining four have the relation of separation which is indicated by the

resulting symbol. Thus by the fifth property, abcd and acde imply abcde.*

Thus the twelve cases arise from permuting d and e, while keeping a, b, c

fixed. (It should be observed that it makes no difference whether a letter

appears at the end or the beginning: i.e. abcde is the same case as eabcd. We

may therefore decide not to put either d or e before a.) Of these twelve cases,

six will have d before e, and six will have e before d. In the first six cases, we

say that, with respect to the sense abc, d precedes e; in the other six cases, we

say that e precedes d. In order to deal with limiting cases, we shall say further

that a precedes every other term, and that b precedes c.† We shall then find

that the relation of preceding is asymmetrical and transitive, and that every

pair of terms of our set is such that one precedes and the other follows. In this

way our relation of separation is reduced, formally at least, to the

combination of “a precedes b”, “b precedes c” and “c precedes d”.

The above reduction is for many reasons highly interesting. In the first

place, it shows the distinction between open and closed series to be somewhat

superficial. For although our series may initially be of the sort which is called

closed, it becomes, by the introduction of the above transitive relation, anopen series, having a for its beginning, but having possibly no last term, and

not in any sense returning to a. Again it is of the highest importance in

Geometry, since it shows how order may arise on the elliptic straight line, by

purely projective considerations, in a manner which is far more satisfactory

than that obtained from von Staudt’s construction.* And finally, it is of great

importance as unifying the two sources of order, between and separation;

since it shows that transitive asymmetrical relations are always present where

either occurs, and that either implies the other. For, by the relation of

preceding, we can say that one term is between two others, although we

started solely from separation of pairs.

205. At the same time, the above reduction (and also, it would seem, the

  corresponding reduction in the case of between) cannot be allowed to be

  more than formal. That is, the three terms a, b, c by relation to which our

  transitive asymmetrical relation was defined, are essential to the

  definition, and cannot be omitted. The reduction shows no reason for

  supposing that there is any transitive asymmetrical relation independent

of all other terms than those related, though it is arbitrary what other

  terms we choose. And the fact that the term a, which is not essentially

  peculiar, appears as the beginning of the series, illustrates this fact.

  Where there are transitive asymmetrical relations independent of all

  outside reference, our series cannot have an arbitrary beginning, though it

may have none at all. Thus the four-term relation of separation remains

  logically prior to the resulting two-term relation, and cannot be analysed

into the latter.

206. But when we have said that the reduction is formal, we have not said

that it is irrelevant to the genesis of order. On the contrary, it is just

  because such a reduction is possible that the four-term relation leads to

order. The resulting asymmetrical transitive relation is in reality a

  relation of five terms; but when three of these are kept fixed, it becomes

  asymmetrical and transitive as regards the other two. Thus although

  between applies to such series, and although the essence of order

  consists, here as elsewhere, in the fact that one term has, to two others,

  converse relations which are asymmetrical and transitive, yet such an

  order can only arise in a collection containing at least five terms, because

five terms are needed for the characteristic relation. And it should be

  observed that all series, when thus explained, are open series, in the sense

that there is some relation between pairs of terms, no power of which is  equal to its converse, or to identity.

207. Thus finally, to sum up this long and complicated discussion: The six

  methods of generating series enumerated in Chapter 24 are all genuinely

  distinct; but the second is the only one which is fundamental, and the

  other five agree in this, that they are all reducible to the second.

  Moreover, it is solely in virtue of their reducibility to the second that they

give rise to order. The minimum ordinal proposition, which can always

be made wherever there is an order at all, is of the form: “y is between x

and z”; and this proposition means; “There is some asymmetrical

  transitive relation which holds between x and y and between y and z.”

This very simple conclusion might have been guessed from the

  beginning; but it was only by discussing all the apparently exceptional

  cases that the conclusion could be solidly established.

* The condition that z does not have to x the relation in question is

comparatively inessential, being only required in order that, if y be between x

and z, we may not have x between y and z, or z between x and y. If we are

willing to allow that in such cases, for example, as the angles of a triangle,

each is between the other two, we may drop the condition in question

altogether. The other four conditions, on the contrary, seem more essential.

* Cf. § 95.

* See Part I, Chap. 4.

† See The Philosophy of Leibniz, by the present author, Cambridge, 1900;

Chapter II, § 10.

‡ See Part VII, Chap. 54.

* This case is illustrated by the rational numbers, which may be taken in

order of magnitude, or in one of the orders (e.g. the logical order) in which

they are denumerable. The logical order is the order 1, 2, 1/2, 3, 1/3, 2/3, 4,

……

* Rivista di Matematica,v, pp. 75–78. See also Pieri, I Principii della

Geometria di Posizione, Turin, 1898, § 7.

† These five properties are taken from Vailati, loc. cit. and ib. p. 183.

* The argument is somewhat tedious, and I therefore omit it. It will be

found in Vailati, loc. cit.

† Pieri, op. cit. p. 32.

* The advantages of this method are evident from Pieri’s work quoted

above, where many things which seemed incapable of projective proof arerigidly deduced from projective premisses. See Part VI, Chap. 45.26


ASYMMETRICAL RELATIONS




208. We have now seen that all order depends upon transitive asymmetrical

  relations. As such relations are of a kind which traditional logic is

  unwilling to admit, and as the refusal to admit them is one of the main

  sources of the contradictions which the Critical Philosophy has found in

  mathematics, it will be desirable, before proceeding further, to make an

  excursion into pure logic, and to set forth the grounds which make the

  admission of such relations necessary. At a later stage (in Part VI, Chap.

51), I shall endeavour to answer the general objections of philosophers to

  relations; for the present, I am concerned only with asymmetrical

  relations.

  Relations may be divided into four classes, according as they do or do not

possess either of two attributes, transitiveness* and symmetry. Relations such

that xRy always implies yRx are called symmetrical; relations such that xRy,

yRz together always imply xRz are called transitive. Relations which do not

possess the first property I shall call not symmetrical; relations which do

possess the opposite property, i.e. for which xRy always excludes yRx, I shall

call asymmetrical. Relations which do not possess the second property I shall

call not transitive; those which possess the property that xRy, yRz always

exclude xRz I shall call intransitive. All these cases may be illustrated from

human relationships. The relation brother or sister is symmetrical, and is

transitive if we allow that a man may be his own brother, and a woman her

own sister. The relation brother is not symmetrical, but is transitive. Half-

brother or half-sister is symmetrical but not transitive. Spouse is symmetrical

but intransitive; descendant is asymmetrical but transitive. Half-brother is not

symmetrical and not transitive; if third marriages were forbidden, it would be

intransitive. Son-in-law is asymmetrical and not transitive; if second

marriages were forbidden, it would be intransitive. Brother-in-law is not

symmetrical and not transitive. Finally, father is both asymmetrical andintransitive. Of not-transitive but not intransitive relations there is, so far as I

know, only one important instance, namely diversity; of not-symmetrical but

not asymmetrical relations there seems to be similarly only one important

instance, namely implication. In other cases, of the kind that usually occur,

relations are either transitive or intransitive, and either symmetrical or

asymmetrical.

209. Relations which are both symmetrical and transitive are formally of the

nature of equality. Any term of the field of such a relation has the relation

in question to itself, though it may not have the relation to any other

term. For denoting the relation by the sign of equality, if a be of the field

of the relation, there is some term b such that a = b. If a and b be

  identical, then a = a. But if not, then, since the relation is symmetrical, b

= a; since it is transitive, and we have a = b, b = a, it follows that a = a.

The property of a relation which insures that it holds between a term and

  itself is called by Peano reflexiveness, and he has shown, contrary to

what was previously believed, that this property cannot be inferred from

  symmetry and transitiveness. For neither of these properties asserts that

there is a b such that a = b, but only what follows in case there is such a

b; and if there is no such b, then the proof of a = a fails.* This property

of reflexiveness, however, introduces some difficulty. There is only one

  relation of which it is true without limitation, and that is identity. In all

  other cases, it holds only of the terms of a certain class. Quantitative

  equality, for example, is only reflexive as applied to quantities; of other

  terms, it is absurd to assert that they have quantitative equality with

  themselves. Logical equality, again, is only reflexive for classes, or

  propositions, or relations. Simultaneity is only reflexive for events, and

so on. Thus, with any given symmetrical transitive relation, other than

  identity, we can only assert reflexiveness within a certain class; and of

this class, apart from the principle of abstraction (already mentioned in

  Part III, Chap. 19, and shortly to be discussed at length), there need be no

  definition except as the extension of the transitive symmetrical relation in

  question. And when the class is so defined, reflexiveness within that

class, as we have seen, follows from transitiveness and symmetry.

210. By introducing what I have called the principle of abstraction,† a

  somewhat better account of reflexiveness becomes possible. Peano has

  defined* a process which he calls definition by abstraction, of which, as

he shows, frequent use is made in Mathematics. This process is as  follows: when there is any relation which is transitive, symmetrical and

  (within its field) reflexive, then, if this relation holds between u and v, we

define a new entity  (u), which is to be identical with  (v). Thus our

  relation is analysed into sameness of relation to the new term  (u) or  (v).

Now the legitimacy of this process, as set forth by Peano, requires an

  axiom, namely the axiom that, if there is any instance of the relation in

  question, then there is such an entity as  (u) or  (v). This axiom is my

  principle of abstraction, which, precisely stated, is as follows: “Every

  transitive symmetrical relation, of which there is at least one instance, is

  analysable into joint possession of a new relation to a new term, the new

  relation being such that no term can have this relation to more than one

term, but that its converse does not have this property.” This principle

  amounts, in common language, to the assertion that transitive

  symmetrical relations arise from a common property, with the addition

that this property stands, to the terms which have it, in a relation in which

  nothing else stands to those terms. It gives the precise statement of the

  principle, often applied by philosophers, that symmetrical transitive

  relations always spring from identity of content. Identity of content is,

  however, an extremely vague phrase, to which the above proposition

gives, in the present case, a precise signification, but one which in no

way answers the purpose of the phrase, which is, apparently, the

  reduction of relations to adjectives of the related terms.

It is now possible to give a clearer account of the reflexive property. Let R

be our symmetrical relation, and let S be the asymmetrical relation which two

terms having the relation R must have to some third term. Then the

proposition xRy is equivalent to this: “There is some term a such that xSa and

ySa.” Hence it follows that, if x belongs to what we have called the domain of

S, i.e. if there is any term a such that xSa, then xRx; for xRx is merely xSa and

xSa. It does not of course follow that there is any other term y such that xRy,

and thus Peano’s objections to the usual proof of reflexiveness are valid. But

by means of the analysis of symmetrical transitive relations, we obtain the

proof of the reflexive property, together with the exact limitation to which it

is subject.

211. We can now see the reason for excluding from our accounts of the

  methods of generating series a seventh method, which some readers may

  have expected to find. This is the method in which position is merely

  relative—a method which, in Chap. 19, § 154, we rejected as regards  quantity. As the whole philosophy of space and time is bound up with the

  question as to the legitimacy of this method, which is in fact the question

as to absolute and relative position, it may be well to give an account of it

  here, and to show how the principle of abstraction leads to the absolute

  theory of position.

If we consider such a series as that of events, and if we refuse to allow

absolute time, we shall have to admit three fundamental relations among

events, namely, simultaneity, priority and posteriority. Such a theory may be

formally stated as follows: Let there be a class of terms, such that any two, x

and y, have either an asymmetrical transitive relation P, or the converse

relation P, or a symmetrical transitive relation R. Also let xRy, yPz imply

xPz, and let xPy, yRz imply xPz. Then all the terms can be arranged in a

series, in which, however, there may be many terms which have the same

place in the series. This place, according to the relational theory of position,

is nothing but the transitive symmetrical relation R to a number of other

terms. But it follows from the principle of abstraction that there is some

relation S, such that, if xRy, there is some one entity t for which xSt, ySt. We

shall then find that the different entities t, corresponding to different groups

of our original terms, also form a series, but one in which any two different

terms have an asymmetrical relation (formally, the product ŠRS). These terms

t will then be the absolute positions of our x’s and y’s, and our supposed

seventh method of generating series is reduced to the fundamental second

method. Thus there will be no series having only relative position, but in all

series it is the positions themselves that constitute the series.*

212. We are now in a position to meet the philosophic dislike of relations.

The whole account of order given above, and the present argument

  concerning abstraction, will be necessarily objected to by those

  philosophers—and they are, I fear, the major part—who hold that no

  relations can possess absolute and metaphysical validity. It is not my

  intention here to enter upon the general question, but merely to exhibit

the objections to any analysis of asymmetrical relations.

It is a common opinion—often held unconsciously, and employed in

argument, even by those who do not explicitly advocate it—that all

propositions, ultimately, consist of a subject and a predicate. When this

opinion is confronted by a relational proposition, it has two ways of dealing

with it, of which the one may be called monadistic, the other monistic. Given,

say, the proposition aRb, where R is some relation, the monadistic view willanalyse this into two propositions, which we may call ar and br, which give
                                                                  12

to a and b respectively adjectives supposed to be together equivalent to R.

The monistic view, on the contrary, regards the relation as a property of the

whole composed of a and b, and as thus equivalent to a proposition which we

may denote by (ab)r. Of these views, the first is represented by Leibniz and

(on the whole) by Lotze, the second by Spinoza and Mr Bradley. Let us

examine these views successively, as applied to asymmetrical relations; and

for the sake of definiteness, let us take the relations of greater and less.

213. The monadistic view is stated with admirable lucidity by Leibniz in the

  following passage:*

“The ratio or proportion between two lines L and M may be conceived

three several ways; as a ratio of the greater L to the lesser M; as a ratio of the

lesser M to the greater L; and lastly, as something abstracted from both, that

is, as the ratio between L and M, without considering which is the antecedent,

or which the consequent; which the subject, and which the object… . In the

first way of considering them, L the greater, in the second M the lesser, is the

subject of that accident which philosophers call relation. But which of them

will be the subject, in the third way of considering them? It cannot be said

that both of them, L and M together, are the subject of such an accident; for if

so, we should have an accident in two subjects, with one leg in one, and the

other in the other; which is contrary to the notion of accidents. Therefore we

must say that this relation, in this third way of considering it, is indeed out of

the subjects; but being neither a substance nor an accident, it must be a mere

ideal thing, the consideration of which is nevertheless useful.”

214. The third of the above ways of considering the relation of greater and

  less is, roughly speaking, that which the monists advocate, holding, as

they do, that the whole composed of L and M is one subject, so that their

way of considering ratio does not compel us, as Leibniz supposed, to

  place it among bipeds. For the present our concern is only with the first

  two ways. In the first way of considering the matter, we have “L is

  (greater than M)”, the words in brackets being considered as an adjective

of L. But when we examine this adjective it is at once evident that it is

  complex: it consists, at least, of the parts greater and M, and both these

parts are essential. To say that L is greater does not at all convey our

  meaning, and it is highly probable that M is also greater. The supposed

  adjective of L involves some reference to M; but what can be meant by a

  reference the theory leaves unintelligible. An adjective involving a  reference to M is plainly an adjective which is relative to M, and this is

  merely a cumbrous way of describing a relation. Or, to put the matter

  otherwise, if L has an adjective corresponding to the fact that it is greater

than M, this adjective is logically subsequent to, and is merely derived

from, the direct relation of L to M. Apart from M, nothing appears in the

  analysis of L to differentiate it from M; and yet, on the theory of relations

in question, L should differ intrinsically from M. Thus we should be

  forced, in all cases of asymmetrical relations, to admit a specific

  difference between the related terms, although no analysis of either

  singly will reveal any relevant property which it possesses and the other

lacks. For the monadistic theory of relations, this constitutes a

  contradiction; and it is a contradiction which condemns the theory from

  which it springs.*

Let us examine further the application of the monadistic theory to

quantitative relations. The proposition “A is greater than B” is to be

analysable into two propositions, one giving an adjective to A, the other

giving one to B. The advocate of the opinion in question will probably hold

that A and B are quantities, not magnitudes, and will say that the adjectives

required are the magnitudes of A and B. But then he will have to admit a

relation between the magnitudes, which will be as asymmetrical as the

relation which the magnitudes were to explain. Hence the magnitudes will

need new adjectives, and so on ad infinitum; and the infinite process will

have to be completed before any meaning can be assigned to our original

proposition. This kind of infinite process is undoubtedly objectionable, since

its sole object is to explain the meaning of a certain proposition, and yet none

of its steps bring it any nearer to that meaning.† Thus we cannot take the

magnitudes of A and B as the required adjectives. But further, if we take any

adjectives whatever except such as have each a reference to the other term,

we shall not be able, even formally, to give any account of the relation,

without assuming just such a relation between the adjectives. For the mere

fact that the adjectives are different will yield only a symmetrical relation.

Thus if our two terms have different colours we find that A has to B the

relation of differing in colour, a relation which no amount of careful handling

will render asymmetrical. Or if we were to recur to magnitudes, we could

merely say that A and B differ in magnitude, which gives us no indication as

to which is the greater. Thus the adjectives of A and B must be, as in

Leibniz’s analysis, adjectives having a reference each to the other term. Theadjective of A must be “greater than B”, and that of B must be “less than A”.

Thus A and B differ, since they have different adjectives—B is not greater

than B, and A is not less than A—but the adjectives are extrinsic, in the sense

that A’s adjective has reference to B, and B’s to A. Hence the attempted

analysis of the relation fails, and we are forced to admit what the theory was

designed to avoid, a so-called “external” relation, i.e. one implying no

complexity in either of the related terms.

The same result may be proved of asymmetrical relations generally, since

it depends solely upon the fact that both identity and diversity are

symmetrical. Let a and b have an asymmetrical relation R, so that aRb and

bRŘa. Let the supposed adjectives (which, as we have seen, must each have a

reference to the other term) be denoted by β and α respectively. Thus our

terms become αβ and βα. α involves a reference to a, and β to b; and α and β

differ, since the relation is asymmetrical. But a and b have no intrinsic

difference corresponding to the relation R, and prior to it; or, if they have, the

points of difference must themselves have a relation analogous to R, so that

nothing is gained. Either α or β expresses a difference between a and b, but

one which, since either α or β involves reference to a term other than that

whose adjective it is, so far from being prior to R, is in fact the relation R

itself. And since α and β both presuppose R, the difference between α and β

cannot be used to supply an intrinsic difference between a and b. Thus we

have again a difference without a prior point of difference. This shows that

some asymmetrical relations must be ultimate, and that at least one such

ultimate asymmetrical relation must be a component in any asymmetrical

relation that may be suggested.

It is easy to criticize the monadistic theory from a general standpoint, by

developing the contradictions which spring from the relations of the terms to

the adjectives into which our first relation has been analysed. These

considerations, which have no special connection with asymmetry, belong to

general philosophy, and have been urged by advocates of the monistic theory.

Thus Mr Bradley says of the monadistic theory:* “We, in brief, are led by a

principle of fission which conducts us to no end. Every quality in relation

has, in consequence, a diversity within its own nature, and this diversity

cannot immediately be asserted of the quality. Hence the quality must

exchange its unity for an internal relation. But, thus set free, the diverse

aspects, because each something in relation, must each be something also

beyond. This diversity is fatal to the internal unity of each; and it demands anew relation, and so on without limit.” It remains to be seen whether the

monistic theory, in avoiding this difficulty, does not become subject to others

quite as serious.

215. The monistic theory holds that every relational proposition aRb is to be

  resolved into a proposition concerning the whole which a and b compose

—a proposition which we may denote by (ab)r. This view, like the other,

may be examined with special reference to asymmetrical relations, or

from the standpoint of general philosophy. We are told, by those who

  advocate this opinion, that the whole contains diversity within itself, that

it synthesizes differences, and that it performs other similar feats. For my

  part, I am unable to attach any precise significance to these phrases. But

let us do our best.

The proposition “a is greater than b”, we are told, does not really say

anything about either a or b, but about the two together. Denoting the whole

which they compose by (ab), it says, we will suppose, “(ab) contains

diversity of magnitude”. Now to this statement—neglecting for the present all

general arguments—there is a special objection in the case of asymmetry.

(ab) is symmetrical with regard to a and b, and thus the property of the whole

will be exactly the same in the case where a is greater than b as in the case

where b is greater than a. Leibniz, who did not accept the monistic theory,

and had therefore no reason to render it plausible, clearly perceived this fact,

as appears from the above quotation. For, in his third way of regarding ratio,

we do not consider which is the antecedent, which the consequent; and it is

indeed sufficiently evident that, in the whole (ab) as such, there is neither

antecedent nor consequent. In order to distinguish a whole (ab) from a whole

(ba), as we must do if we are to explain asymmetry, we shall be forced back

from the whole to the parts and their relation. For (ab) and (ba) consist of

precisely the same parts, and differ in no respect whatever save the sense of

the relation between a and b.“a is greater than b” and “b is greater than a” are

propositions containing precisely the same constituents, and giving rise

therefore to precisely the same whole; their difference lies solely in the fact

that greater is, in the first case, a relation of a to b, in the second, a relation of

b to a. Thus the distinction of sense, i.e. the distinction between an

asymmetrical relation and its converse, is one which the monistic theory of

relations is wholly unable to explain.

  Arguments of a more general nature might be multiplied almost

indefinitely, but the following argument seems peculiarly relevant. Therelation of whole and part is itself an asymmetrical relation, and the whole—

as monists are peculiarly fond of telling us—is distinct from all its parts, both

severally and collectively. Hence when we say “a is part of b”, we really

mean, if the monistic theory be correct, to assert something of the whole

composed of a and b, which is not to be confounded with b. If the proposition

concerning this new whole be not one of whole and part there will be no true

judgments of whole and part, and it will therefore be false to say that a

relation between the parts is really an adjective of the whole. If the new

proposition is one of whole and part, it will require a new one for its

meaning, and so on. If, as a desperate measure, the monist asserts that the

whole composed of a and b is not distinct from b, he is compelled to admit

that a whole is the sum (in the sense of Symbolic Logic) of its parts, which,

besides being an abandonment of his whole position, renders it inevitable that

the whole should be symmetrical as regards its parts—a view which we have

already seen to be fatal. And hence we find monists driven to the view that

the only true whole, the Absolute, has no parts at all, and that no propositions

in regard to it or anything else are quite true—a view which, in the mere

statement, unavoidably contradicts itself. And surely an opinion which holds

all propositions to be in the end self-contradictory is sufficiently condemned

by the fact that, if it be accepted, it also must be self-contradictory.

216. We have now seen that asymmetrical relations are unintelligible on

both the usual theories of relation.* Hence, since such relations are

  involved in Number, Quantity, Order, Space, Time and Motion, we can

  hardly hope for a satisfactory philosophy of Mathematics so long as we

  adhere to the view that no relation can be “purely external”. As soon,

  however, as we adopt a different theory, the logical puzzles, which have

  hitherto obstructed philosophers, are seen to be artificial. Among the

  terms commonly regarded as relational, those that are symmetrical and

  transitive—such as equality and simultaneity—are capable of reduction

to what has been vaguely called identity of content, but this in turn must

be analysed into sameness of relation to some other term. For the so-

  called properties of a term are, in fact, only other terms to which it stands

in some relation; and a common property of two terms is a term to which

both stand in the same relation.

The present long digression into the realm of logic is necessitated by the

fundamental importance of order, and by the total impossibility of explaining

order without abandoning the most cherished and widespread of philosophicdogmas. Everything depends, where order is concerned, upon asymmetry and

difference of sense, but these two concepts are unintelligible to the traditional

logic. In the next chapter we shall have to examine the connection of

difference of sense with what appears in Mathematics as difference of sign.

In this examination, though some pure logic will still be requisite, we shall

approach again to mathematical topics; and these will occupy us wholly

throughout the succeeding chapters of this Part.


* This term appears to have been first used in the present sense by De

Morgan; see Camb. Phil. Trans., ix, p. 104; x, p. 346. The term is now in

general use.

* See e.g. Revue de Mathématiques, T. vii, p. 22; Notations de Logique

Mathématique, Turin, 1894, p. 45, F. 1901, p. 193.

† An axiom virtually identical with this principle, but not stated with the

necessary precision, and not demonstrated, will be found in De Morgan,

Camb. Phil. Trans., Vol. x, p. 345.

* Notations de Logique Mathématique, p. 45.

* A formal treatment of relative position is given by Schröder, Sur une

extension de l’idée d’ordre, Congrès, Vol. iii, p. 235.

* Phil. Werke, Gerhardt’s ed., Vol. vii, p. 401.

* See a paper on “The Relations of Number and Quantity”, Mind, N.S. No.

23. This paper was written while I still adhered to the monadistic theory of

relations: the contradiction in question, therefore, was regarded as inevitable.

The following passage from Kant raises the same point: “Die rechte Hand ist

der linken ähnlich und gleich, und wenn man blos auf eine derselben allein

sieht, auf die Proportion der Lage der Theile unter einander und auf die

Grösse des Ganzen, so muss eine vollständige Beschreibung der einen in

allen Stücken auch von der andern gelten.” (Von dem ersten Grunde des

Unterschiedes der Gegenden im Raume, ed. Hart. Vol. ii, p. 389.)

† Where an infinite process of this kind is required we are necessarily

dealing with a proposition which is an infinite unity, in the sense of Part II,

Chap. 17.

* Appearance and Reality, 1st edition, p. 31.

* The grounds of these theories will be examined from a more general

point of view in Part VI, Chap. 51.27


DIFFERENCE OF SENSE AND


DIFFERENCE OF SIGN




217. We have now seen that order depends upon asymmetrical relations,

and that these always have two senses, as before and after, greater and

less, east and west, etc. The difference of sense is closely connected

  (though not identical) with the mathematical difference of sign. It is a

  notion of fundamental importance in Mathematics, and is, so far as I can

see, not explicable in terms of any other notions. The first philosopher

who realized its importance would seem to be Kant. In the Versuch den

  Begriff der negativen Grösse in die Weltweisheit einzuführen (1763), we

  find him aware of the difference between logical opposition and the

  opposition of positive and negative. In the discussion Von dem ersten

  Grunde des Unterschiedes der Gegenden im Raume (1768), we find a

full realization of the importance of asymmetry in spatial relations, and a

  proof, based on this fact, that space cannot be wholly relational.* But it

  seems doubtful whether he realized the connection of this asymmetry

with difference of sign. In 1763 he certainly was not aware of the

  connection, since he regarded pain as a negative amount of pleasure, and

  supposed that a great pleasure and a small pain can be added to give a

  lesser pleasure†—a view which seems both logically and psychologically

false. In the Prolegomena (§ 13), as is well known, he made the

  asymmetry of spatial relations a ground for regarding space as a mere

form of intuition, perceiving, as appears from the discussion of 1768, that

  space could not consist, as Leibniz supposed, of mere relations among

  objects, and being unable, owing to his adherence to the logical objection

to relations discussed in the preceding chapter, to free from contradiction

the notion of absolute space with asymmetrical relations between its

  points. Although I cannot regard this later and more distinctively Kantian  theory as an advance upon that of 1768, yet credit is undoubtedly due to

Kant for having first called attention to the logical importance of

  asymmetrical relations.

218. By difference of sense I mean, in the present discussion at least, the

  difference between an asymmetrical relation and its converse. It is a

  fundamental logical fact that, given any relation R, and any two terms a,

b, there are two propositions to be formed of these elements, the one

  relating a to b (which I call aRb), the other (bRa) relating b to a. These

  two propositions are always different, though sometimes (as in the case

of diversity) either implies the other. In other cases, such as logical

  implication, the one does not imply either the other or its negation; while

in a third set of cases, the one implies the negation of the other. It is only

in cases of the third kind that I shall speak of difference of sense. In these

cases, aRb excludes bRa. But here another fundamental logical fact

  becomes relevant. In all cases where aRb does not imply bRa there is

  another relation, related to R, which must hold between b and a. That is,

there is a relation RŘ such that aRb implies bRa; and further, bRŘa

  implies aRb. The relation of R to RŘ is difference of sense. This relation

is one-one, symmetrical and intransitive. Its existence is the source of

  series, of the distinction of signs, and indeed of the greater part of

  mathematics.

219. A question of considerable importance to logic, and especially to the

  theory of inference, may be raised with regard to difference of sense. Are

  aRb and bRŘa really different propositions, or do they only differ

  linguistically? It may be held that there is only one relation R, and that all

  necessary distinctions can be obtained from that between aRb and bRa. It

may be said that, owing to the exigencies of speech and writing, we are

  compelled to mention either a or b first, and that this gives a seeming

  difference between “a is greater than b” and “b is less than a”; but that, in

  reality, these two propositions are identical. But if we take this view we

  shall find it hard to explain the indubitable distinction between greater

and less. These two words have certainly each a meaning, even when no

  terms are mentioned as related by them. And they certainly have different

  meanings, and are certainly relations. Hence if we are to hold that “a is

  greater than b” and “b is less than a” are the same proposition, we shall

  have to maintain that both greater and less enter into each of these

  propositions, which seems obviously false; or else we shall have to holdthat what really occurs is neither of the two, but that third abstract

  relation mentioned by Leibniz in the passage quoted above. In this case

the difference between greater and less would be one essentially

  involving a reference to the terms a and b. But this view cannot be

  maintained without circularity; for neither the greater nor the less is

  inherently the antecedent, and we can only say that, when the greater is

the antecedent, the relation is greater; when the less, the relation is less.

  Hence, it would seem, we must admit that R and Ř are distinct relations.

We cannot escape this conclusion by the analysis into adjectives

  attempted in the last chapter. We there analysed aRb into aβ and bα. But,

  corresponding to every b, there will be two adjectives, β and , and

  corresponding to every a there will also be two, α and . Thus if R be

  greater, α will be “greater than A” and  “less than A”, or vice versâ. But

the difference between α and  presupposes that between greater and less,

  between R and Ř, and therefore cannot explain it. Hence R and Ř must be

  distinct, and “aRb implies bŘa” must be a genuine inference.

I come now to the connection between difference of sense and difference

of sign. We shall find that the latter is derivative from the former, being a

difference which only exists between terms which either are, or are correlated

with, asymmetrical relations. But in certain cases we shall find some

complications of detail which will demand discussion.

The difference of signs belongs, traditionally, only to numbers and

magnitudes, and is intimately associated with addition. It may be allowed that

the notation cannot be usefully employed where there is no addition, and

even that, where distinction of sign is possible, addition in some sense is in

general also possible. But we shall find that the difference of sign has no very

intimate connection with addition and subtraction. To make this clear, we

must, in the first place, clearly realize that numbers and magnitudes which

have no sign are radically different from such as are positive. Confusion on

this point is quite fatal to any just theory of signs.

220. Taking first finite numbers, the positive and negative numbers arise as

  follows.* Denoting by R the relation between two integers in virtue of

  which the second is next after the first, the proposition mRn is equivalent

to what is usually expressed by m + 1 = n. But the present theory will

  apply to progressions generally and does not depend upon the logical

  theory of cardinals developed in Part II. In the proposition mRn, the

  integers m and n are considered, as when they result from the logical  definition, to be wholly destitute of sign. If now mRn and nRp, we put
    2
  mRp; and so on for higher powers. Every power of R is an asymmetrical

  relation, and its converse is easily shown to be the same power of Ř as it
                            aa
is itself of R. Thus mRq is equivalent to qŘm. These are the two

  propositions which are commonly written m + a = q and q − a = m. Thus
                  aa
the relations R, Ř are the true positive and negative integers; and these,

  though associated with a, are both wholly distinct from it. Thus in this

case the connection with difference of sense is obvious and

  straightforward.

221. As regards magnitudes, several cases must be distinguished. We have

(1) magnitudes which are not either relations or stretches, (2) stretches,

(3) magnitudes which are relations.

    Magnitudes of this class are themselves neither positive nor negative.1. 

    But two such magnitudes, as explained in Part III, determine either a

    distance or a stretch, and these are always positive or negative. These are

    moreover always capable of addition. But since our original magnitudes

    are neither relations nor stretches, the new magnitudes thus obtained are

    of a different kind from the original set. Thus the difference of two

    pleasures, or the collection of pleasures intermediate between two

    pleasures, is not a pleasure, but in the one case a relation, in the other a

    class.

2. Magnitudes of divisibility in general have no sign, but when they are

      magnitudes of stretches they acquire sign by correlation. A stretch is

      distinguished from other collections by the fact that it consists of all the

    terms of a series intermediate between two given terms. By combining

    the stretch with one sense of the asymmetrical relation which must exist

    between its end-terms, the stretch itself acquires sense, and becomes

      asymmetrical. That is, we can distinguish (1) the collection of terms

    between a and b without regard to order, (2) the terms from a to b, (3)

    the terms from b to a. Here (2) and (3) are complex, being compounded

    of (1) and one sense of the constitutive relation. Of these two, one must

    be called positive, the other negative. Where our series consists of

    magnitudes, usage and the connection with addition have decided that, if

    a is less than b, (2) is positive and (3) is negative. But where, as in

      Geometry, our series is not composed of magnitudes, it becomes wholly

    arbitrary which is to be positive and which negative. In either case, we

    have the same relation to addition, which is as follows. Any pair of    collections can be added to form a new collection, but not any pair of

    stretches can be added to form a new stretch. For this to be possible the

    end of one stretch must be consecutive to the beginning of the other. In

    this way, the stretches ab, bc can be added to form the stretch ac. If ab,

    bc have the same sense, ac is greater than either; if they have different

    senses, ac is less than one of them. In this second case the addition of ab

    and bc is regarded as the subtraction of ab and cb, bc and cb being

    negative and positive respectively. If our stretches are numerically

      measurable, addition or subtraction of their measures will give the

    measure of the result of adding or subtracting the stretches, where these

    are such as to allow addition or subtraction. But the whole opposition of

    positive and negative, as is evident, depends upon the fundamental fact

    that our series is generated by an asymmetrical relation.

3. Magnitudes which are relations may be either symmetrical or

    asymmetrical relations. In the former case, if a be a term of the field of

    one of them, the other terms of the various fields, if certain conditions

    are fulfilled,* may be arranged in series according as their relations to a

    are greater or smaller. This arrangement may be different when we

    choose some term other than a; for the present, therefore, we shall

    suppose a to be chosen once for all. When the terms have been arranged

    in a series, it may happen that some or all places in the series are

    occupied by more than one term; but in any case the assemblage of

    terms between a and some other term m is definite, and leads to a stretch

    with two senses. We may then combine the magnitude of the relation of

    a to m with one or other of these two senses, and so obtain an

    asymmetrical relation of a to m, which, like the original relation, will

    have magnitude. Thus the case of symmetrical relations may be reduced

    to that of asymmetrical relations. These latter lead to signs, and to

    addition and subtraction, in exactly the same way as stretches with

    sense; the only difference being that the addition and subtraction are

    now of the kind which, in Part III, we called relational. Thus in all cases

    of magnitudes having sign, the difference between the two senses of an

    asymmetrical relation is the source of the difference of sign.


The case which we discussed in connection with stretches is of

fundamental importance in Geometry. We have here a magnitude without

sign, an asymmetrical relation without magnitude, and some intimateconnection between the two. The combination of both then gives a magnitude

which has sign. All geometrical magnitudes having sign arise in this way. But

there is a curious complication in the case of volumes. Volumes are, in the

first instance, signless quantities; but in analytical Geometry they always

appear as positive or negative. Here the asymmetrical relations (for there are

two) appear as terms, between which there is a symmetrical relation, but one

which yet has an opposite of a kind very similar to the converse of an

asymmetrical relation. This relation, as an exceptional case, must be here

briefly discussed.

222. The descriptive straight line is a serial relation in virtue of which the

  points of the line form a series.* Either sense of the descriptive straight

line may be called a ray, the sense being indicated by an arrow. Any two

  non-coplanar rays have one or other of two relations, which may be

  called right and left-handedness respectively.† This relation is

  symmetrical but not transitive, and is the essence of the usual distinction

of right and left. Thus the relation of the upward vertical to a line from

  north to east is right-handed, and to a line from south to east is left-

  handed. But though the relation is symmetrical, it is changed into its

  opposite by changing either of the terms of the relation into its converse.

That is, denoting right-handedness by R, left-handedness by L (which is

not Ř), if A and B be two rays which are mutually right-handed, we shall

  have







 


That is, every pair of non-coplanar straight lines gives rise to eight such

relations, of which four are right-handed, and four left-handed. The

difference between L and R, though not, as it stands, a difference of sense, is,

nevertheless, the difference of positive and negative, and is the reason why

the volumes of tetrahedra, as given by determinants, always have signs. But

there is no difficulty in following the plain man’s reduction of right and left

to asymmetrical relations. The plain man takes one of the rays (say A) as

fixed—when he is sober, he takes A to be the upward vertical—and thenregards right and left as properties of the single ray B, or, what comes to the

same thing, as relations of any two points which determine B. In this way,

right and left become asymmetrical relations, and even have a limited degree

of transitiveness, of the kind explained in the fifth way of generating series

(in Chapter 24). It is to be observed that what is fixed must be a ray, not a

mere straight line. For example, two planes which are not mutually

perpendicular are not one right and the other left with regard to their line of

intersection, but only with regard to either of the rays belonging to this line.*

But when this is borne in mind, and when we consider, not semi-planes, but

complete planes, through the ray in question, right and left become

asymmetrical and each other’s converses. Thus the signs associated with right

and left, like all other signs, depend upon the asymmetry of relations. This

conclusion, therefore, may now be allowed to be general.

223. Difference of sense is, of course, more general than difference of sign,

  since it exists in cases with which mathematics (at least at present) is

  unable to deal. And difference of sign seems scarcely applicable to

  relations which are not transitive, or are not intimately connected with

  some transitive relation. It would be absurd, for example, to regard the

  relation of an event to the time of its occurrence, or of a quantity to its

  magnitude, as conferring a difference of sign. These relations are what

  Professor Schröder calls erschöpft,* i.e. if they hold between a and b,

they can never hold between b and some third term. Mathematically,

their square is null. These relations, then, do not give rise to difference of

  sign.

All magnitudes with sign, so the above account has led us to believe, are

either relations or compound concepts into which relations enter. But what

are we to say of the usual instances of opposites: good and evil, pleasure and

pain, beauty and ugliness, desire and aversion? The last pair are very

complex, and if I were to attempt an analysis of them, I should emit some

universally condemned opinions. With regard to the others, they seem to me

to have an opposition of a very different kind from that of two mutually

converse asymmetrical relations, and analogous rather to the opposition of

red and blue, or of two different magnitudes of the same kind. From these

oppositions, which are constituted by what may be called synthetic

incompatibility,† the oppositions above mentioned differ only in the fact that

there are only two incompatible terms, instead of a whole series. The

incompatibility consists in the fact that two terms which are thusincompatible cannot coexist in the same spatio-temporal place, or cannot be

predicates of the same existent, or, more generally, cannot both enter into true

propositions of a certain form, which differ only in the fact that one contains

one of the incompatibles while the other contains the other. This kind of

incompatibility (which usually belongs, with respect to some class of

propositions, to the terms of a given series) is a most important notion in

general logic, but is by no means to be identified with the difference between

mutually converse relations. This latter is, in fact, a special case of such

incompatibility; but it is the special case only that gives rise to the difference

of sign. All difference of sign—so we may conclude our argument—is

primarily derived from transitive asymmetrical relations, from which it may

be extended by correlation to terms variously related to such relations;‡ but

such extensions are always subsequent to the original opposition derived

from difference of sense.


* See especially ed. Hart, Vol. II, pp. 386, 391.

† Ed. Hart, Vol. II, p. 83.

* I give the theory briefly here, as it will be dealt with more fully and

generally in the chapter on Progressions, § 233.

* Cf. § 245.

* See Part VI.

† The two cases are illustrated in the figure. The difference is the same as

that between the two sorts of coordinate axes.

* This requires that the passage from the one plane to the other should be

made via one of the acute angles made by their intersection.

* Algebra der Logik, Vol. III, p. 328. Professor Peirce calls such relations

non-repeating (reference in Schröder, ib.).

† See The Philosophy of Leibniz, by the present author (Cambridge 1900),

pp. 19, 20.

‡ Thus in mathematical Economics, pleasure and pain may be taken as

positive and negative without logical error, by the theory (whose

psychological correctness we need not examine) that a man must be paid to

endure pain, and must pay to obtain pleasure. The opposition of pleasure and

pain is thus correlated with that of money paid and money received, which is

an opposition of positive and negative in the sense of elementary Arithmetic.28


ON THE DIFFERENCE


BETWEEN OPEN AND CLOSED


SERIES




224. We have now come to the end of the purely logical discussions

  concerned with order, and can turn our attention with a free mind to the

  more mathematical aspects of the subject. As the solution of the most

  ancient and respectable contradictions in the notion of infinity depends

  mainly upon a correct philosophy of order, it has been necessary to go

into philosophical questions at some length—not so much because they

are relevant, as because most philosophers think them so. But we shall

reap our reward throughout the remainder of this work.

The question to be discussed in this chapter is this: Can we ultimately

distinguish open from closed series, and if so, in what does the distinction

consist? We have seen that, mathematically, all series are open, in the sense

that all are generated by an asymmetrical transitive relation. But

philosophically, we must distinguish the different ways in which this relation

may arise, and especially we must not confound the case where this relation

involves no reference to other terms with that where such terms are essential.

And practically, it is plain that there is some difference between open and

closed series—between, for instance, a straight line and a circle, or a pedigree

and a mutual admiration society. But it is not quite easy to express the

difference precisely.

225. Where the number of terms in the series is finite, and the series is

  generated in the first of the ways explained in Chapter 24, the method of

  obtaining a transitive relation out of the intransitive relation with which

we start is radically different according as the series is open or closed. If

R be the generating relation, and n be the number of terms in our series,  two cases may arise. Denoting the relation of any term to the next but one
      2n
by R, and so on for higher powers, the relation R can have only one of

  two values, zero and identity. (It is assumed that R is a one-one relation.)
                                                            n1
For starting with the first term, if there be one, R− brings us to the last
                    n
  term; and thus R gives no new term, and there is no instance of the
            n
  relation R. On the other hand, it may happen that, starting with any term,
  n
R brings us back to that term again. These two are the only possible

  alternatives. In the first case, we call the series open; in the second, we

call it closed. In the first case, the series has a definite beginning and end;

in the second case, like the angles of a polygon, it has no peculiar terms.

In the first case, our transitive asymmetrical relation is the disjunctive

  relation “a power of R not greater than the (n − 1)th”. By substituting this

  relation, which we may call R' , for R, our series becomes of the second

of the six types. But in the second case no such simple reduction to the

  second type is possible. For now, the relation of any two terms a and m

of our series may be just as well taken to be a power of RŘ as a power of

R, and the question which of any three terms is between the other two

  becomes wholly arbitrary. We might now introduce, first the relation of

  separation of four terms, and then the resulting five-term relation

  explained in Chapter 25. We should then regard three of the terms in the

  five-term relation as fixed, and find that the resulting relation of the other

  two is transitive and asymmetrical. But here the first term of our series is

  wholly arbitrary, which was not the case before; and the generating

  relation is, in reality, one of five terms, not one of two. There is,

  however, in the case contemplated, a simpler method. This may be

  illustrated as follows: In an open series, any two terms a and m define

  two senses in which the series may be described, the one in which a

  comes before m, and the other in which m comes before a. We can then

say of any two other terms c and g that the sense of the order from c to g

is the same as that of the order from a to m, or different, as the case may

be. In this way, considering a and m fixed, and c and g variable, we get a

  transitive asymmetrical relation between c and g, obtained from a

  transitive symmetrical relation of the pair c, g to the pair a, m (or m, a, as

the case may be). But this transitive symmetrical relation can, by the

  principle of abstraction, be analysed into possession of a common

  property, which is, in this case, the fact that a, m and c, g have the

  generating relation with the same sense. Thus the four-term relation is, inthis case, not essential. But in a closed series, a and m do not define a

  sense of the series, even when we are told that a is to precede m: we can

start from a and get to m in either direction. But if now we take a third

term d, and decide that we are to start from a and reach m taking d on the

  way, then a sense of the series is defined. The stretch adm includes one

  portion of the series, but not the other. Thus we may go from England to

  New Zealand either by the east or by the west; but if we are to take India

on the way, we must go by the east. If now we consider any other term,

say k, this will have some definite position in the series which starts with

a and reaches m by way of d. In this series, k will come either between a

and d, or between d and m, or after m. Thus the three-term relation of a,

d, m seems in this case sufficient to generate a perfectly definite series.

  Vailati’s five-term relation will then consist in this, that with regard to

the order adm, k comes before (or after) any other term l of the collection.

But it is not necessary to call in this relation in the present case, since the

  three-term relation suffices. This three-term relation may be formally

  defined as follows. There is between any two terms of our collection a

  relation which is a power of R less than the nth. Let the relation between
                xy
a and d be R, that between a and m R. Then if x is less than y, we assign

one sense to adm; if x is greater than y, we assign the other. There will be
                                            nx
  also between a and d the relation RŘ−, and between a and m the
            ny
  relation Ř−. If x is less than y, then n − x is greater than n − y; hence the

  asymmetry of the two cases corresponds to that of R and Ř. The terms of

the series are simply ordered by correlation with their numbers x and y,

  those with smaller numbers preceding those with larger ones. Thus there

is here no need of the five-term relation, everything being effected by the

  three-term relation, which is itself reduced to an asymmetrical transitive

  relation of two numbers. But the closed series is still distinguished from

the open one by the fact that its first term is arbitrary.

226. A very similar discussion will apply to the case where our series is

  generated by relations of three terms. To keep the analogy with the one-

one relation of the above case, we will make the following assumptions.

Let there be a relation B of one term to two others, and let the one term

be called the mean, the two others the extremes. Let the mean be

  uniquely determined when the extremes are given, and let one extreme be

  uniquely determined by the mean and the other extreme. Further let each

term that occurs as mean occur also as extreme, and each term that occursas extreme (with at most two exceptions) occur also as mean. Finally, if

there be a relation in which c is mean, and b and d are extremes, let there

be always (except when b or d is one of the two possible exceptional

  terms) a relation in which b is the mean and c one of the extremes, and

  another in which d is the mean and c one of the extremes. Then b and c

will occur together in only two relations. This fact constitutes a relation

  between b and c, and only one other term besides b will have this new

  relation to c. By means of this relation, if there are two exceptional terms,

or if, our collection being infinite, there is only one, we can construct an

open series. If our two-term relation be asymmetrical, this is sufficiently

  evident; but the same result can be proved if our two-term relation is

  symmetrical. For there will be at either end, say a, an asymmetrical

  relation of a to the only term which is the mean between a and some

  other term. This relation multiplied by the nth power of our two-term

  relation, where n + 1 is any integer less than the number of terms in our

  collection, will give a relation which holds between a and a number (not

  exceeding n + 1) of terms of our collection, of which terms one and only

one is such that no number less than n gives a relation of a to this term.

  Thus we obtain a correlation of our terms with the natural numbers,

  which generates an open series with a for one of its ends. If, on the other

hand, our collection has no exceptional terms, but is finite, then we shall

  obtain a closed series. Let our two-term relation be P, and first suppose it

  symmetrical. (It will be symmetrical if our original three-term relation

was symmetrical with regard to the extremes.) Then every term c of our

  collection will have the relation P to two others, which will have to each
                        2m
  other the relation P. Of all the relations of the form P which hold

  between two given terms, there will be one in which m is least: this may

be called the principal relation of our two terms. Let the number of terms

of the collection be n. Then every term of our collection will have to
                                        x
  every other a principal relation P, where x is some integer not greater

than n/2. Given any two terms c and g of the collection, provided we do
              Pn/2x
not have cg (a case which will not arise if n be odd), let us have cPg,

  where x is less than n/2. This assumption defines a sense of the series,
                                              y
  which may be shown as follows. If cPk, where y is also less than n/2,
                                                                                  y−x
three cases may arise, assuming y is greater than x. We may have gPk;
                                                    x + y
or, if x + y is less than n/2, we may have gPk, or, if x + y is greater                                (n/2) − x − y
than n/2, we may have gPk. (We choose always the principal

  relation.) These three cases are illustrated in the accompanying figure.

We shall say, in these three cases, that, with regard to the sense cg, (1) k

  comes after c and g, (2) and (3) k comes before c and g. If y is less than x,
          x–y
and kPg, we shall say that k is between c and g in the sense cg. If n is

odd, this covers all possible cases. But if n is even, we have to consider
                                          n/2
the term c' , which is such that cPc' . This term is, in a certain sense,

  antipodal to c; we may define it as the first term in the series when the

  above method of definition is adopted. If n is odd, the first term will be
                                          (n − 1)/2
that term of class (3) for which cPk. Thus the series acquires a

  definite order, but one in which, as in all closed series, the first term is

  arbitrary.

227. The only remaining case is that where we start from four-term

  relations, and the generating relation has, strictly speaking, five terms.

This is the case of projective Geometry. Here the series is necessarily

  closed; that is, in choosing our three fixed terms for the five-term

  relation, there is never any restriction upon our choice; and any one of

  these three may be defined to be the first.

228. Thus, to sum up: Every series being generated by a transitive

  asymmetrical relation between any two terms of the series, a series is

open when it has either no beginning, or a beginning which is not

  arbitrary; it is closed when it has an arbitrary beginning. Now if R be the

  constitutive relation, the beginning of the series is a term having the

  relation R but not the relation Ř. Whenever R is genuinely a two-term

  relation, the beginning, if it exists, must be perfectly definite. It is only

  when R involves some other term (which may be considered fixed)

  besides the two with regard to which it is transitive and asymmetrical

  (which are to be regarded as variable), that the beginning can be

  arbitrary. Hence in all cases of closed series, though there may be an

  asymmetrical one-one relation if the series is discrete, the transitive

  asymmetrical relation must be one involving one or more fixed terms in

  addition to the two variable terms with regard to which it generates the

  series. Thus although, mathematically, every closed series can be

  rendered open, and every open series closed, yet there is, in regard to the

nature of the generating relation, a genuine distinction between them—a

  distinction, however, which is of philosophical rather than mathematical

  importance.29


PROGRESSIONS AND


ORDINAL NUMBERS




229. It is now time to consider the simplest type of infinite series, namely

that to which the natural numbers themselves belong. I shall postpone to

the next Part all the supposed difficulties arising out of the infinity of

such series, and concern myself here only to give the elementary theory

of them in a form not presupposing numbers.*

The series now to be considered are those which can be correlated, term for

term, with the natural numbers, without requiring any change in the order of

the terms. But since the natural numbers are a particular case of such series,

and since the whole of Arithmetic and Analysis can be developed out of any

one such series, without any appeal to number, it is better to give a definition

of progressions which involves no appeal to number.

A progression is a discrete series having consecutive terms, and a

beginning but no end, and being also connected. The meaning of connection

was explained in Chapter 24 by means of number, but this explanation cannot

be given now. Speaking popularly, when a series is not connected it falls into

two or more parts, each being a series for itself. Thus numbers and instants

together form a series which is not connected, and so do two parallel straight

lines. Whenever a series is originally given by means of a transitive

asymmetrical relation, we can express connection by the condition that any

two terms of our series are to have the generating relation. But progressions

are series of the kind that may be generated in the first of our six ways,

namely, by an asymmetrical one-one relation. In order to pass from this to a

transitive relation, we before employed numbers, defining the transitive

relation as any power of the one-one relation. This definition will not serve

now, since numbers are to be excluded. It is one of the triumphs of modern

mathematics to have adapted an ancient principle to the needs of this case.The definition which we want is to be obtained from mathematical

induction. This principle, which used to be regarded as a mere subterfuge for

eliciting results of which no other proof was forthcoming, has gradually

grown in importance as the foundations of mathematics have been more

closely investigated. It is now seen to be the principle upon which depend, so

far as ordinals are concerned, the commutative law and one form of the

distributive law.* This principle, which gives the widest possible extension to

the finite, is the distinguishing mark of progressions. It may be stated as

follows:

  Given any class of terms s, to which belongs the first term of any

progression, and to which belongs the term of the progression next after any

term of the progression belonging to s, then every term of the progression

belongs to s.

We may state the same principle in another form. Let  (x) be a

propositional function, which is a determinate proposition as soon as x is

given. Then  (x) is a function of x, and will in general be true or false

according to the value of x. If x be a member of a progression, let seq x

denote the term next after x. Let  (x) be true when x is the first term of a

certain progression, and let  (seq x) be true whenever (x) is true, where x is

any term of the progression. It then follows, by the principle of mathematical

induction, that  (x) is always true if x be any term of the progression in

question.

The complete definition of a progression is as follows. Let R be any

asymmetrical one-one relation, and u a class such that every term of u has the

relation of R to some term also belonging to the class u. Let there be at least

one term of the class u which does not have the relation RŘ to any term of u.

Let s be any class to which belongs at least one of the terms of u which do

not have the relation RŘ to any term of u, and to which belongs also every

term of u which has the relation RŘ to some term belonging to both u and s;

and let u be such as to be wholly contained in any class s satisfying the above

conditions. Then u, considered as ordered by the relation R, is a progression.†

230. Of such progressions, everything relevant to finite Arithmetic can be

  proved. In the first place, we show that there can only be one term of u

  which does not have the relation RŘ to any term of u. We then define the

term to which x has the relation R as the successor of x (x being a u),

  which may be written seq x. The definitions and properties of addition,

  subtraction, multiplication, division, positive and negative terms and  rational fractions are easily given; and it is easily shown that between any

  two rational fractions there is always a third. From this point it is easy to

  advance to irrationals and the real numbers.*

  Apart from the principle of mathematical induction, what is chiefly

interesting about this process is, that it shows that only the serial or ordinal

properties of finite numbers are used by ordinary mathematics, what may be

called the logical properties being wholly irrelevant. By the logical properties

of numbers, I mean their definition by means of purely logical ideas. This

process, which has been explained in Part II, may be here briefly

recapitulated. We show, to begin with, that a one-one correlation can be

effected between any two null classes, or between any two classes u, v which

are such that, if x is a u, and x' differs from x, then x' cannot be a u, with a like

condition for v. The possibility of such one-one correlation we call similarity

of the two classes u, v. Similarity, being symmetrical and transitive, must be

analysable (by the principle of abstraction) into possession of a common

property. This we define as the number of either of the classes. When the two

classes u, v have the above-defined property, we say their number is one; and

so on for higher numbers; the general definition of finite numbers demanding

mathematical induction, or the non-similarity of whole and part, but is always

given in purely logical terms.

It is numbers so defined that are used in daily life, and that are essential to

any assertion of numbers. It is the fact that numbers have these logical

properties that makes them important. But it is not these properties that

ordinary mathematics employs, and numbers might be bereft of them without

any injury to the truth of Arithmetic and Analysis. What is relevant to

mathematics is solely the fact that finite numbers form a progression. This is

the reason why mathematicians—e.g. Helmholtz, Dedekind and Kronecker—

have maintained that ordinal numbers are prior to cardinals; for it is solely the

ordinal properties of number that are relevant. But the conclusion that

ordinals are prior to cardinals seems to have resulted from a confusion.

Ordinals and cardinals alike form a progression, and have exactly the same

ordinal properties. Of either, all Arithmetic can be proved without any appeal

to the other, the propositions being symbolically identical, but different in

meaning. In order to prove that ordinals are prior to cardinals, it would be

necessary to show that the cardinals can only be defined in terms of the

ordinals. But this is false, for the logical definition of the cardinals is wholly

independent of the ordinals.* There seems, in fact, to be nothing to choose, asregards logical priority, between ordinals and cardinals, except that the

existence of the ordinals is inferred from the series of cardinals. The ordinals,

as we shall see in the next paragraph, can be defined without any appeal to

the cardinals; but when defined, they are seen to imply the cardinals.

Similarly, the cardinals can be defined without any appeal to the ordinals; but

they essentially form a progression, and all progressions, as I shall now show,

necessarily imply the ordinals.

231. The correct analysis of ordinals has been prevented hitherto by the

  prevailing prejudice against relations. People speak of a series as

  consisting of certain terms taken in a certain order, and in this idea there

is commonly a psychological element. All sets of terms have, apart from

  psychological considerations, all orders of which they are capable; that

is, there are serial relations, whose fields are a given set of terms, which

  arrange those terms in any possible order. In some cases, one or more

  serial relations are specially prominent, either on account of their

  simplicity, or of their importance. Thus the order of magnitude among

  numbers, or of before and after among instants, seems emphatically the

  natural order, and any other seems to be artificially introduced by our

  arbitrary choice. But this is a sheer error. Omnipotence itself cannot give

  terms an order which they do not possess already: all that is

  psychological is the consideration of such and such an order. Thus when

it is said that we can arrange a set of terms in any order we please, what

is really meant is, that we can consider any of the serial relations whose

field is the given set, and that these serial relations will give between

  them any combinations of before and after that are compatible with

  transitiveness and connection. From this it results that an order is not,

  properly speaking, a property of a given set of terms, but of a serial

  relation whose field is the given set. Given the relation, its field is given

with it; but given the field, the relation is by no means given. The notion

of a set of terms in a given order is the notion of a set of terms considered

as the field of a given serial relation; but the consideration of the terms is

  superfluous, and that of the relation alone is quite sufficient.

We may, then, regard an ordinal number as a common property of sets of

serial relations which generate ordinally similar series. Such relations have

what I shall call likeness, i.e. if P, Q be two such relations, their fields can be

so correlated term for term that two terms of which the first has to the second

the relation P will always be correlated with two terms of which the first hasto the second the relation Q, and vice versâ. As in the case of cardinal

numbers,† so here, we may, in virtue of the principle of abstraction, define

the ordinal number of a given finite serial relation as the class of like

relations. It is easy to show that the generating relations of progressions are

all alike; the class of such relations will be the ordinal number of the finite

integers in order of magnitude. When a class is finite, all series that can be

formed of its terms are ordinally similar, and are ordinally different from

series having a different cardinal number of terms. Hence there is a one-one

correlation of finite ordinals and cardinals, for which, as we shall see in Part

V, there is no analogy in respect of infinite numbers. We may therefore

define the ordinal number n as the class of serial relations whose domains

have n terms, where n is a finite cardinal. It is necessary, unless 1 is to be

excluded, to take domains instead of fields here, for no relation which implies

diversity can have one term in its field, though it may have none. This has a

practical inconvenience, owing to the fact that n + 1 must be obtained by

adding one term to the field; but the point involved is one for conventions as

to notation, and is quite destitute of philosophical importance.

232. The above definition of ordinal numbers is direct and simple, but does

not yield the notion of “nth”, which would usually be regarded as the

  ordinal number. This notion is far more complex: a term is not

  intrinsically the nth, and does not become so by the mere specification of

n − 1 other terms. A term is the nth in respect of a certain serial relation,

  when, in respect of that relation, the term in question has n − 1

  predecessors. This is the definition of “nth”, showing that this notion is

  relative, not merely to predecessors, but also to a specified serial relation.

By induction, the various finite ordinals can be defined without

  mentioning the cardinals. A finite serial relation is one which is not like

(in the above sense) any relation implying it but not equivalent to it; and

a finite ordinal is one consisting of finite serial relations. If n be a finite

  ordinal, n + 1 is an ordinal such that, if the last term* of a series of the

type n + 1 be cut off, the remainder, in the same order, is of the type n. In

  more technical language, a serial relation of the type n + 1 is one which,

  when confined to its domain instead of its field, becomes of the type n.

This gives by induction a definition of every particular finite ordinal, in

  which cardinals are never mentioned. Thus we cannot say that ordinals

  presuppose cardinals, though they are more complex, since they

  presuppose both serial and one-one relations, whereas cardinals only  presuppose one-one relations.

Of the ordinal number of the finite ordinals in order of magnitude, several

equivalent definitions may be given. One of the simplest is, that this number

belongs to any serial relation, which is such that any class contained in its

field and not null has a first term, while every term of the series has an

immediate successor, and every term except the first has an immediate

predecessor. Here, again, cardinal numbers are in no way presupposed.

  Throughout the above discussions our serial relations are taken to be

transitive, not one-one. The one-one relations are easily derived from the

transitive ones, while the converse derivation is somewhat complicated.

Moreover the one-one relations are only adequate to define finite series, and

thus their use cannot be extended to the study of infinite series unless they are

taken as derivative from the transitive ones.

233. A few words concerning positive and negative ordinals seem to be

here in place. If the first n terms of a progression be taken away (n being

any finite number), the remainder still form a progression. With regard to

the new progression, negative ordinals may be assigned to the terms that

  have been abstracted; but for this purpose it is convenient to regard the

  beginning of the smaller progression as the 0th term. In order to have a

  series giving any positive or negative ordinal, we need what may be

  called a double progression. This is a series such that, choosing any term

x out of it, two progressions start from x, the one generated by a serial

  relation R, the other by RŘ. To x we shall then assign the ordinal 0, and to

the other terms we shall assign positive or negative ordinals according as

they belong to the one or the other of the two progressions starting from

x. The positive and negative ordinals themselves form such a double

  progression. They express essentially a relation to the arbitrarily chosen

  origin of the two progressions, and + n and − n express mutually

  converse relations. Thus they have all the properties which we recognize

in Chapter 27 as characterizing terms which have signs.

* The present chapter closely follows Peano’s Arithmetic. See Formulaire

de Mathématiques, Vol. II, § 2. I have given a mathematical treatment of the

subject in R. d. M., Vols. VII and VIII. The subject is due, in the main, to

Dedekind and Georg Cantor.

* Namely (α + β)γ = αβ + αγ. The other form, α(β +γ)=αβ +αγ, holds also

for infinite ordinal numbers, and is thus independent of mathematicalinduction.

† It should be observed that a discrete open series generated by a transitive

relation can always be reduced, as we saw in the preceding chapter, to one

generated by an asymmetrical one-one relation, provided only that the series

is finite or a progression.

* See my article on the Logic of Relations, R. d. M., VII.

* Professor Peano, who has a rare immunity from error, has recognized

this fact. See Formulaire, 1898, 210, note (p. 39).

† Cf. § 111.

* The last term of a series (if it exists) is the term belonging to the

converse domain but not to the domain of the generating relation, i.e. the

term which is after but not before other terms.30


DEDEKIND’S THEORY OF


NUMBER




234. The theory of progressions and of ordinal numbers, with which we

  have been occupied in the last chapter, is due in the main to two men—

  Dedekind and Cantor. Cantor’s contributions, being specially concerned

with infinity, need not be considered at present; and Dedekind’s theory of

  irrationals is also to be postponed. It is his theory of integers of which I

  wish now to give an account—the theory, that is to say, which is

  contained in his “Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen?”* In reviewing

this work, I shall not adhere strictly to Dedekind’s phraseology. He

  appears to have been, at the time of writing, unacquainted with symbolic

  logic; and although he invented as much of this subject as was relevant to

his purpose, he naturally adopted phrases which were not usual, and were

not always so convenient as their conventional equivalents.

The fundamental ideas of the pamphlet in question are these:† (1) the

representation (Abbildung) of a system (21); (2) the notion of a chain (37);

(3) the chain of an element (44); (4) the generalized form of mathematical

induction (59); (5) the definition of a singly infinite system (71). From these

five notions Dedekind deduces numbers and ordinary Arithmetic. Let us first

explain the notions, and then examine the deduction.

235. (1) A representation of a class u is any law by which, to every term of u,

say x, corresponds some one and only one term (x). No assumption is

  made, to begin with, as to whether (x) belongs to the class u, or as to

  whether (x) may be the same as (y), when x and y are different terms of

u. The definition thus amounts to this:

A representation of a class u is a many-one relation, whose domain

contains u, by which terms, which may or may not also belong to u, are

correlated one with each of the terms of u.* The representation is similarwhen, if x differs from y, both being u’s, then (x) differs from (y); that is,

when the relation in question is one-one. He shows that similarity between

classes is reflexive, symmetrical and transitive, and remarks (34) that classes

can be classified by similarity to a given class—a suggestion of an idea which

is fundamental in Cantor’s work.

236. (2) If there exists a relation, whether one-one or many-one, which

  correlates with a class u only terms belonging to that class, then this

  relation is said to constitute a representation of u in itself (36), and with

  respect to this relation u is called a chain (37). That is to say, any class u

is, with respect to any many-one relation, a chain, if u is contained in the

  domain of the relation, and the correlate of a u is always itself a u. The

  collection of correlates of a class is called the image (Bild) of the class.

  Thus a chain is a class whose image is part or the whole of itself. For the

  benefit of the non-mathematical reader, it may be not superfluous to

  remark that a chain with regard to a one-one relation, provided it has any

term not belonging to the image of the chain, cannot be finite, for such a

  chain must contain the same number of terms as a proper part of itself.†

237. (3) If a be any term or collection of terms, there may be, with respect

to a given many-one relation, many chains in which a is contained. The

  common part of all these chains, which is denoted by a, is what
                                                                  0

  Dedekind calls the chain of a (44). For example, if a be the number n, or

any set of numbers of which n is the least, the chain of a with regard to

the relation “less by 1” will be all numbers not less than n.

238. (4) Dedekind now proceeds (59) to a theorem which is a generalized

form of mathematical induction. This theorem is as follows: Let a be any

term or set of terms contained in a class s, and let the image of the

  common part of s and the chain of a be also contained in s; then it

  follows that the chain of a is contained in s. This somewhat complicated

  theorem may become clearer by being put in other language. Let us call

the relation by which the chain is generated (or rather the converse of this

  relation) succession, so that the correlate or image of a term will be its

  successor. Let a be a term which has a successor, or a collection of such

  terms. A chain in general (with regard to succession) will be any set of

  terms such that the successor of any one of them also belongs to the set.

The chain of a will be the common part of all the chains containing a.

  Then the data of the theorem inform us that a is contained in s, and, if

any term of the chain of a be an s, so is its successor; and the conclusionis, that every term in the chain of a is an s. This theorem, as is evident, is

very similar to mathematical induction, from which it differs, first by the

fact that a need not be a single term, secondly by the fact that the

  constitutive relation need not be one-one, but may be many-one. It is a

most remarkable fact that Dedekind’s previous assumptions suffice to

  demonstrate this theorem.

239. (5) I come next to the definition of a singly infinite system or class

  (71). This is defined as a class which can be represented in itself by

  means of a one-one relation, and which is further such as to be the chain,

with regard to this one-one relation, of a single term of the class not

  contained in the image of the class. Calling the class N, and the one-one

  relation R, there are, as Dedekind remarks, four points in this definition.

(1) The image of N is contained in N; that is, every term to which an N

has the relation R is an N. (2) N is the chain of one of its terms. (3) This

one term is such that no N has the relation R to it, i.e. it is not the image

of any other term of N. (4) The relation R is one-one, in other words, the

  representation is similar. The abstract system, defined simply as

  possessing these properties, is defined by Dedekind as the ordinal

  numbers (73). It is evident that his singly infinite system is the same as

what we called a progression, and he proceeds to deduce the various

  properties of progressions, in particular mathematical induction (80),

  which follows from the above generalized form. One number m is said to

be less than another n, when the chain of n is contained in the image of

the chain of m (89); and it is shown (88, 90) that of two different

  numbers, one must be the less. From this point everything proceeds

  simply.

240. The only further point that seems important for our present purpose is

the definition of cardinals. It is shown (132) that all singly infinite

  systems are similar to each other and to the ordinals, and that conversely

  (133) any system which is similar to a singly infinite system is singly

  infinite. When a system is finite, it is similar to some system Z, where Z
                                                                            nn

  means all the numbers from 1 to n both inclusive; and vice versâ (160).

  There is only one number n which has this property in regard to any

  given finite system, and when considered in relation to this property it is

  called a cardinal number, and is said to be the number of elements of

  which the said system consists (161). Here at last we reach the cardinal

  numbers. Their dependence on ordinals, if I may venture to interpret  Dedekind, is as follows: owing to the order of the ordinals, every ordinal

n defines a class of ordinals Z, consisting of all that do not succeed it.
                                    n

  They may be defined as all that are not contained in the image of the

  chain of n. This class of ordinals may be similar to another class, which

is then said to have the cardinal number n. But it is only because of the

  order of the ordinals that each of them defines a class, and thus this order

is presupposed in obtaining cardinals.

241. Of the merits of the above deduction it is not necessary for me to

  speak, for they are universally acknowledged. But some points call for

  discussion. In the first case, Dedekind proves mathematical induction,

  while Peano regards it as an axiom. This gives Dedekind an apparent

  superiority, which must be examined. In the second place, there is no

  reason, merely because the numbers which Dedekind obtains have an

order, to hold that they are ordinal numbers; in the third place, his

  definition of cardinals is unnecessarily complicated, and the dependence

of cardinals upon order is only apparent. I shall take these points in turn.

As regards the proof of mathematical induction, it is to be observed that it

makes the practically equivalent assumption that numbers form the chain of

one of them. Either can be deduced from the other, and the choice as to which

is to be an axiom, which a theorem, is mainly a matter of taste. On the whole,

though the consideration of chains is most ingenious, it is somewhat difficult,

and has the disadvantage that theorems concerning the finite class of numbers

not greater than n as a rule have to be deduced from corresponding theorems

concerning the infinite class of numbers greater than n. For these reasons, and

not because of any logical superiority, it seems simpler to begin with

mathematical induction. And it should be observed that, in Peano’s method, it

is only when theorems are to be proved concerning any number that

mathematical induction is required. The elementary Arithmetic of our

childhood, which discusses only particular numbers, is wholly independent of

mathematical induction; though to prove that this is so for every particular

number would itself require mathematical induction. In Dedekind’s method,

on the other hand, propositions concerning particular numbers, like general

propositions, demand the consideration of chains. Thus there is, in Peano’s

method, a distinct advantage of simplicity, and a clearer separation between

the particular and the general propositions of Arithmetic. But from a purely

logical point of view, the two methods seem equally sound; and it is to be

remembered that, with the logical theory of cardinals, both Peano’s andDedekind’s axioms become demonstrable.*

242. On the second point, there is some deficiency of clearness in what

  Dedekind says. His words are (73): “If in the contemplation of a singly

  infinite system N, ordered by a representation , we disregard entirely the

  peculiar nature of the elements, retaining only the possibility of

  distinguishing them, and considering only the relations in which they are

  placed by the ordering representation , then these elements are called

  natural numbers or ordinal numbers or simply numbers.” Now it is

  impossible that this account should be quite correct. For it implies that

the terms of all progressions other than the ordinals are complex, and that

the ordinals are elements in all such terms, obtainable by abstraction. But

this is plainly not the case. A progression can be formed of points or

  instants, or of transfinite ordinals, or of cardinals, in which, as we shall

  shortly see, the ordinals are not elements. Moreover it is impossible that

the ordinals should be, as Dedekind suggests, nothing but the terms of

such relations as constitute a progression. If they are to be anything at all,

they must be intrinsically something; they must differ from other entities

as points from instants, or colours from sounds. What Dedekind intended

to indicate was probably a definition by means of the principle of

  abstraction, such as we attempted to give in the preceding chapter. But a

  definition so made always indicates some class of entities having (or

  being) a genuine nature of their own, and not logically dependent upon

the manner in which they have been defined. The entities defined should

be visible, at least to the mind’s eye; what the principle asserts is that,

  under certain conditions, there are such entities, if only we knew where

to look for them. But whether, when we have found them, they will be

  ordinals or cardinals, or even something quite different, is not to be

  decided off-hand. And in any case, Dedekind does not show us what it is

that all progressions have in common, nor give any reason for supposing

it to be the ordinal numbers, except that all progressions obey the same

laws as ordinals do, which would prove equally that any assigned

  progression is what all progressions have in common.

243. This brings us to the third point, namely the definition of cardinals by

  means of ordinals. Dedekind remarks in his preface (p. ix) that many will

not recognize their old friends the natural numbers in the shadowy shapes

  which he introduces to them. In this, it seems to me, the supposed

  persons are in the right—in other words, I am one among them. What  Dedekind presents to us is not the numbers, but any progression: what he

says is true of all progressions alike, and his demonstrations nowhere—

not even where he comes to cardinals—involve any property

  distinguishing numbers from other progressions. No evidence is brought

  forward to show that numbers are prior to other progressions. We are

  told, indeed, that they are what all progressions have in common; but no

  reason is given for thinking that progressions have anything in common

  beyond the properties assigned in the definition, which do not themselves

  constitute a new progression. The fact is that all depends upon one-one

  relations, which Dedekind has been using throughout without perceiving

that they alone suffice for the definition of cardinals. The relation of

  similarity between classes, which he employs consciously, combined

with the principle of abstraction, which he implicitly assumes, suffice for

the definition of cardinals; for the definition of ordinals these do not

  suffice; we require, as we saw in the preceding chapter, the relation of

  likeness between well-ordered serial relations. The definition of

  particular finite ordinals is effected explicitly in terms of the

  corresponding cardinals: if n be a finite cardinal number, the ordinal

  number n is the class of serial relations which have n terms in their

  domain (or in their field, if we prefer this definition). In order to define

the notion of “nth”, we need, besides the ordinal number n, the notion of

  powers of a relation, i.e. of the relative product of a relation multiplied

into itself a finite number of times. Thus if R be any one-one serial

  relation, generating a finite series or a progression, the first term of the

field of R (which field we will call r) is the term belonging to the domain,

but not to the converse domain, i.e., having the relation R but not the

  relation RŘ. If r has n or more terms, where n is a finite number, the nth
                                                                          n1
term of r is the term to which the first term has the relation R − , or,
                                                    n1n
  again, it is the term having the relation RŘ −  but not the relation RŘ.

  Through the notion of powers of a relation, the introduction of cardinals

is here unavoidable; and as powers are defined by mathematical

  induction, the notion of nth, according to the above definition, cannot be

  extended beyond finite numbers. We can however extend the notion by

the following definition: If P be a transitive aliorelative generating a

  well-ordered series p, the nth term of p is the term x such that, if P' be the

  relation P limited to x and its predecessors, then P' has the ordinal

  number n. Here the dependence upon cardinals results from the fact thatthe ordinal n can, in general, only be defined by means of the cardinal n.

It is important to observe that no set of terms has inherently one order

rather than another, and that no term is the nth of a set except in relation to a

particular generating relation whose field is the set or part of the set. For

example, since in any progression, any finite number of consecutive terms

including the first may be taken away, and the remainder will still form a

progression, the ordinal number of a term in a progression may be diminished

to any smaller number we choose. Thus the ordinal number of a term is

relative to the series to which it belongs. This may be reduced to a relation to

the first term of the series; and lest a vicious circle should be suspected, it

may be explained that the first term can always be defined non-numerically.

It is, in Dedekind’s singly infinite system, the only term not contained in the

image of the system; and generally, in any series, it is the only term which

has the constitutive relation with one sense, but not with the other.* Thus the

relation expressed by nth is not only a relation to n, but also to the first term

of the series; and first itself depends upon the terms included in the series,

and upon the relation by which they are ordered, so that what was first may

cease to be so, and what was not first may become so. Thus the first term of a

series must be assigned, as is done in Dedekind’s view of a progression as the

chain of its first term. Hence nth expresses a four-cornered relation between

the term which is nth, an assigned term (the first), a generating serial relation

and the cardinal number n. Thus it is plain that ordinals, either as classes of

like serial relations, or as notions like “nth”, are more complex than cardinals;

that the logical theory of cardinals is wholly independent of the general

theory of progressions, requiring independent development in order to show

that the cardinals form a progression; and that Dedekind’s ordinals are not

essentially either ordinals or cardinals, but the members of any progression

whatever. I have dwelt on this point, as it is important, and my opinion is at

variance with that of most of the best authorities. If Dedekind’s view were

correct, it would have been a logical error to begin, as this work does, with

the theory of cardinal numbers rather than with order. For my part, I do not

hold it an absolute error to begin with order, since the properties of

progressions, and even most of the properties of series in general, seem to be

largely independent of number. But the properties of number must be capable

of proof without appeal to the general properties of progressions, since

cardinal numbers can be independently defined, and must be seen to form a

progression before theorems concerning progressions can be applied to them.Hence the question, whether to begin with order or with numbers, resolves

itself into one of convenience and simplicity; and from this point of view, the

cardinal numbers seem naturally to precede the very difficult considerations

as to series which have occupied us in the present Part.


* 2nd ed. Brunswick, 1893 (1st ed. 1887). The principal contents of this

book, expressed by the Algebra of Relations, will be found in my article in R.

d. M., VII, 2, 3.

† The numbers in brackets refer, not to pages, but to the small sections into

which the work is divided.

* Cf. Chap. 13.

* A many-one relation is one in which, as in the relation of a quantity to its

magnitude, the right-hand term, to which the relation is, is uniquely

determined when the left-hand term is given. Whether the converse holds is

left undecided. Thus a one-one relation is a particular case of a many-one

relation.

  †Aproper part (Echter Theil) is a phrase analogous to “proper fraction”; it

means a part not the whole.

* Though when the series has two ends, we have to make an arbitrary

selection as to which we will call first, which last. The obviously non-

numerical nature of last illustrates that of its correlative, first.31


DISTANCE




244. The notion of distance is one which is often supposed essential to

  series,* but which seldom receives precise definition. An emphasis on

  distance characterizes, generally speaking, those who believe in relative

  position. Thus Leibniz, in the course of his controversy with Clarke,

  remarks:

“As for the objection, that space and time are quantities, or rather things

endowed with quantity, and that situation and order are not so: I answer, that

order also has its quantity; there is that in it which goes before, and that

which follows; there is distance or interval. Relative things have their

quantity, as well as absolute ones. For instance, ratios or proportions in

mathematics have their quantity, and are measured by logarithms; and yet

they are relations. And therefore, though time and space consist in relations,

yet they have their quantity.”†

In this passage, the remark: “There is that which goes before, and that

which follows; there is distance or interval,” if considered as an inference, is

a non sequitur; the mere fact of order does not prove that there is distance or

interval. It proves, as we have seen, that there are stretches, that these are

capable of a special form of addition closely analogous to what I have called

relational addition, that they have sign and that (theoretically at least)

stretches which fulfil the axioms of Archimedes and of linearity are always

capable of numerical measurement. But the idea, as Meinong rightly points

out, is entirely distinct from that of stretch. Whether any particular series does

or does not contain distances, will be, in most compact series (i.e. such as

have a term between any two), a question not to be decided by argument. In

discrete series there must be distance; in others, there may be—unless,

indeed, they are series obtained from progressions as the rationals or the real

numbers are obtained from the integers, in which case there must be distance.

But we shall find that stretches are mathematically sufficient, and thatdistances are complicated and unimportant.

245. The definition of distance, to begin with, is no easy matter. What has

  been done hitherto towards this end is chiefly due to non-Euclidean

  Geometry;* something also has been done towards settling the definition

by Meinong.† But in both these cases, there is more concern for

  numerical measurement of distance than for its actual definition.

  Nevertheless, distance is by no means indefinable. Let us endeavour to

  generalize the notion as much as possible. In the first place, distance need

not be asymmetrical; but the other properties of distance always allow us

to render it so, and we may therefore take it to be so. Secondly, a distance

  need not be a quantity or a magnitude; although it is usually taken to be

such, we shall find the taking it so to be irrelevant to its other properties,

and in particular to its numerical measurement. Thirdly, when distance is

  taken asymmetrically, there must be only one term to which a given term

has a given distance, and the converse relation to the given distance must

be a distance of the same kind. (It will be observed that we must first

define a kind of distance, and proceed thence to the general definition of

  distance.) Thus every distance is a one-one relation; and in respect to

such relations it is convenient to respect the converse of a relation as its

  −1th power. Further the relative product of two distances of a kind must

be a distance of the same kind. When the two distances are mutually

  converse, their product will be identity, which is thus one among

  distances (their zero, in fact), and must be the only one which is not

  asymmetrical. Again the product of two distances of a kind must be

  commutative.‡ If the distances of a kind be magnitudes, they must form a

kind of magnitude—i.e. any two must be equal or unequal. If they are not

  magnitudes, they must still form a series generated in the second of our

six ways, i.e. every pair of different distances must have a certain

  asymmetrical relation, the same for all pairs except as regards sense. And

  finally, if Q be this relation, and R QR (R, R, being distances of the
                                          1212

kind), then if R be any other distance of the kind, we must have R R
                    313

QR R. All these properties, so far as I can discover, are independent;
    23

and we ought to add a property of the field, namely this: any two terms,

each of which belongs to the field of some distance of the kind (not

  necessarily the same for both), have a relation which is a distance of the

kind. Having now defined a kind of distance, a distance is any relation  belonging to some kind of distance; and thus the work of definition

  seems completed.

The notion of distance, it will be seen, is enormously complex. The

properties of distances are analogous to those of stretches with sign, but are

far less capable of mutual deduction. The properties of stretches

corresponding to many of the above properties of distances are capable of

proof. The difference is largely due to the fact that stretches can be added in

the elementary logical (not arithmetical) way, whereas distances require what

I have called relational addition, which is much the same as relative

multiplication.

246. The numerical measurement of distances has already been partially

  explained in Part III. It requires, as we saw, for its full application, two

further postulates, which, however, do not belong to the definition of

  distances, but to certain kinds of distances only. These are, the postulate

of Archimedes: given any two distances of a kind, there exists a finite

  integer n such that the nth power of the first distance is greater than the

  second distance; and Du Bois Reymond’s postulate of linearity: any

  distance has an nth root, where n is any integer (or any prime, whence the

  result follows for any integer). When these two postulates are satisfied,
                                  x
we can find a meaning for R, where R is a distance of the kind other than

  identity, and x is any real number.* Moreover, any distance of the kind is
                x
of the form R, for some value of x. And x is, of course, the numerical

  measure of the distance.

In the case of series generated in the first of our six ways, the various

powers of the generating relation R give the distances of terms. These various

powers, as the reader can see for himself, verify all the above characteristics

of distances. In the case of series generated from progressions as rationals or

real numbers from integers, there are always distances; thus in the case of the

rationals themselves, which are one-one relations, their differences, which are

again rationals, measure or indicate relations between them, and these

relations are of the nature of distances. And we shall see, in Part V, that these

distances have some importance in connection with limits. For numerical

measurement in some form is essential to certain theorems about limits, and

the numerical measurement of distances is apt to be more practically feasible

than that of stretches.

247. On the general question, however, whether series unconnected with

  number—for instance spatial and temporal series—are such as to contain  distances, it is difficult to speak positively. Some things may be said

  against this view. In the first place, there must be stretches, and these

must be magnitudes. It then becomes a sheer assumption—which must be

set up as an axiom—that equal stretches correspond to equal distances.

This may, of course, be denied, and we might even seek an interpretation

of non-Euclidean Geometry in the denial. We might regard the usual

  coordinates as expressing stretches, and the logarithms of their

  anharmonic ratios as expressing distances; hyperbolic Geometry, at least,

  might thus find a somewhat curious interpretation. Herr Meinong, who

  regards all series as containing distances, maintains an analogous

  principle with regard to distance and stretch in general. The distance, he

  thinks, increases only as the logarithm of the stretch. It may be observed

that, where the distance itself is a rational number (which is possible,

  since rationals are one-one relations), the opposite theory can be made

  formally convenient by the following fact. The square of a distance, as

we saw generally, is said to be twice as great as the distance whose

  square it is. We might, where the distance is a rational, say instead that

the stretch is twice as great, but that the distance is truly the square of the

former distance. For where the distance is already numerical, the usual
                                                                                    2
  interpretation of numerical measurement conflicts with the notation R.

  Thus we shall be compelled to regard the stretch as proportional to the

  logarithm of the distance. But since, outside the theory of progressions, it

is usually doubtful whether there are distances, and since, in almost all

  other series, stretches seem adequate for all the results that are

  obtainable, the retention of distance adds a complication for which, as a

  rule, no necessity appears. It is therefore generally better, at least in a

  philosophy of mathematics, to eschew distances except in the theory of

  progressions, and to measure them, in that theory, merely by the indices

of the powers of the generating relation. There is no logical reason, so far

as I know, to suppose that there are distances elsewhere, except in a finite

  space of two dimensions and in a projective space; and if there are, they

are not mathematically important. We shall see in Part VI how the theory

of space and time may be developed without presupposing distance; the

  distances which appear in projective Geometry are derivative relations,

not required in defining the properties of our space; and in Part V we

  shall see how few are the functions of distance with regard to series in

  general. And as against distance it may be remarked that, if every seriesmust contain distances, an endless regress becomes unavoidable, since

  every kind of distance is itself a series. This is not, I think, a logical

  objection, since the regress is of the logically permissible kind; but it

shows that great complications are introduced by regarding distances as

  essential to every series. On the whole, then, it seems doubtful whether

  distances in general exist; and if they do, their existence seems

  unimportant and a source of very great complications.

248. We have now completed our review of order, in so far as is possible

  without introducing the difficulties of continuity and infinity. We have

seen that all order involves asymmetrical transitive relations, and that

  every series as such is open. But closed series, we found, could be

  distinguished by the mode of their generation, and by the fact that,

  though they always have a first term, this term may always be selected

  arbitrarily. We saw that asymmetrical relations must be sometimes

  unanalysable, and that when analysable, other asymmetrical relations

must appear in the analysis. The difference of sign, we found, depends

  always upon the difference between an asymmetrical relation and its

  converse. In discussing the particular type of series which we called

  progressions, we saw how all Arithmetic applies to every such series, and

how finite ordinals may be defined by means of them. But though we

  found this theory to be to a certain extent independent of the cardinals,

we saw no reason to agree with Dedekind in regarding cardinals as

  logically subsequent to ordinals. Finally, we agreed that distance is a

  notion which is not essential to series, and of little importance outside

  Arithmetic. With this equipment, we shall be able, I hope, to dispose of

all the difficulties which philosophers have usually found in infinity and

  continuity. If this can be accomplished, one of the greatest of

  philosophical problems will have been solved. To this problem Part V is

to be devoted.

* E.g. by Meinong, op. cit. § 17.

† Phil. Werke, Gerhardt’s ed. Vol. vii, p. 404.

* See e.g. Whitehead, Universal Algebra, Cambridge, 1898, Book vi,

Chap. i.

† Op. cit. Section iv.

‡ This is an independent property; consider for instance the difference

between “maternal grandfather” and “paternal grandmother”.* The powers of distances are here understood in the sense resulting from

relative multiplication; thus if a and b have the same distance as b and c, this

distance is the square root of the distance of a and c. The postulate of

linearity, whose expression in ordinary language is: “every linear quantity

can be divided into n equal parts, where n is any integer”, will be found in Du

Bois Reymond’s Allgemeine Functionentheorie (Tübingen, 1882), p. 46.                                    Part V


            Infinity and Continuity32


THE CORRELATION OF


SERIES




249. We come now to what has been generally considered the fundamental

  problem of mathematical philosophy—I mean, the problem of infinity

and continuity. This problem has undergone, through the labours of

  Weierstrass and Cantor, a complete transformation. Since the time of

  Newton and Leibniz, the nature of infinity and continuity had been

  sought in discussions of the so-called Infinitesimal Calculus. But it has

  been shown that this Calculus is not, as a matter of fact, in any way

  concerned with the infinitesimal, and that a large and most important

branch of mathematics is logically prior to it. The problem of continuity,

  moreover, has been to a great extent separated from that of infinity. It

was formerly supposed—and herein lay the real strength of Kant’s

  mathematical philosophy—that continuity had an essential reference to

  space and time, and that the Calculus (as the word fluxion suggests) in

  some way presupposed motion or at least change. In this view, the

  philosophy of space and time was prior to that of continuity, the

  Transcendental Aesthetic preceded the Transcendental Dialectic and the

  antinomies (at least the mathematical ones) were essentially spatio-

  temporal. All this has been changed by modern mathematics. What is

  called the arithmetization of mathematics has shown that all the problems

  presented, in this respect, by space and time, are already present in pure

  arithmetic. The theory of infinity has two forms, cardinal and ordinal, of

  which the former springs from the logical theory of number; the theory of

  continuity is purely ordinal. In the theory of continuity and the ordinal

  theory of infinity, the problems that arise are not specially concerned

with numbers, but with all series of certain types which occur in

  arithmetic and geometry alike. What makes the problems in question  peculiarly easy to deal with in the case of numbers is, that the series of

  rationals, which is what I shall call a compact series, arises from a

  progression, namely that of the integers, and that this fact enables us to

give a proper name to every term of the series of rationals—a point in

  which this series differs from others of the same type. But theorems of

the kind which will occupy us in most of the following chapters, though

  obtained in arithmetic, have a far wider application, since they are purely

  ordinal, and involve none of the logical properties of numbers. That is to

say, the idea which the Germans call Anzahl, the idea of the number of

  terms in some class, is irrelevant, save only in the theory of transfinite

  cardinals—an important but very distinct part of Cantor’s contributions

to the theory of infinity. We shall find it possible to give a general

  definition of continuity, in which no appeal is made to the mass of

  unanalysed prejudice which Kantians call “intuition”; and in Part VI we

  shall find that no other continuity is involved in space and time. And we

  shall find that, by a strict adherence to the doctrine of limits, it is possible

to dispense entirely with the infinitesimal, even in the definition of

  continuity and the foundations of the Calculus.

250. It is a singular fact that, in proportion as the infinitesimal has been

  extruded from mathematics, the infinite has been allowed a freer

  development. From Cantor’s work it appears that there are two respects

in which infinite numbers differ from those that are finite. The first,

  which applies to both cardinals and ordinals, is, that they do not obey

  mathematical induction—or rather, they do not form part of a series of

  numbers beginning with 1 or 0, proceeding in order of magnitude,

  containing all numbers intermediate in magnitude between any two of its

  terms, and obeying mathematical induction. The second, which applies

only to cardinals, is, that a whole of an infinite number of terms always

  contains a part consisting of the same number of terms. The first respect

  constitutes the true definition of an infinite series, or rather of what we

may call an infinite term in a series: it gives the essence of the ordinal

  infinite. The second gives the definition of an infinite collection, and will

  doubtless be pronounced by the philosopher to be plainly self-

  contradictory. But if he will condescend to attempt to exhibit the

  contradiction, he will find that it can only be proved by admitting

  mathematical induction, so that he has merely established a connection

with the ordinal infinite. Thus he will be compelled to maintain that the  denial of mathematical induction is self-contradictory; and as he has

  probably reflected little, if at all, on this subject, he will do well to

  examine the matter before pronouncing judgment. And when it is

  admitted that mathematical induction may be denied without

  contradiction, the supposed antinomies of infinity and continuity one and

all disappear. This I shall endeavour to prove in detail in the following

  chapters.

251. Throughout this Part we shall often have occasion for a notion which

has hitherto been scarcely mentioned, namely the correlation of series. In

the preceding Part we examined the nature of isolated series, but we

  scarcely considered the relations between different series. These

  relations, however, are of an importance which philosophers have wholly

  overlooked, and mathematicians have but lately realized. It has long been

known how much could be done in Geometry by means of homography,

  which is an example of correlation; and it has been shown by Cantor how

  important it is to know whether a series is denumerable, and how similar

  two series capable of correlation are. But it is not usually pointed out that

a dependent variable and its independent variable are, in most

  mathematical cases, merely correlated series, nor has the general idea of

  correlation been adequately dealt with. In the present work only the

  philosophical aspects of the subject are relevant.

Two series s, s' are said to be correlated when there is a one-one relation R

coupling every term of s with a term of s' , and vice versâ, and when, if x, y

be terms of s, and x precedes y, then their correlates x' , y' in s' are such that x'

precedes y' . Two classes or collections are correlated whenever there is a

one-one relation between the terms of the one and the terms of the other,

none being left over. Thus two series may be correlated as classes without

being correlated as series; for correlation as classes involves only the same

cardinal number, whereas correlation as series involves also the same ordinal

type—a distinction whose importance will be explained hereafter. In order to

distinguish these cases, it will be well to speak of the correlation of classes as

correlation simply, and of the correlation of series as ordinal correlation.

Thus whenever correlation is mentioned without an adjective, it is to be

understood as being not necessarily ordinal. Correlated classes will be called

similar; correlated series will be called ordinally similar; and their generating

relations will be said to have the relation of likeness.

  Correlation is a method by which, when one series is given, others may begenerated. If there be any series whose generating relation is P, and any one-

one relation which holds between any term x of the series and some term

which we may call x, then the class of terms x will form a series of the
                      RR

same type as the class of terms x. For suppose y to be any other term of our

original series, and assume xPy. Then we have xŘx, xPy and yRy. Hence
                                                        RR

xŘPRy. Now it may be shown* that if P be transitive and asymmetrical, so
RR

is ŘPR; hence the correlates of terms of the P-series form a series whose

generating relation is ŘPR. Between these two series there is ordinal

correlation, and the series have complete ordinal similarity. In this way a new

series, similar to the original one, is generated by any one-one relation whose

field includes the original series. It can also be shown that, conversely, if P,

P' be the generating relations of two similar series, there is a one-one relation

R, whose domain is the field of P, which is such that P' = ŘPR.

252. We can now understand a distinction of great importance, namely that

  between self-sufficient or independent series, and series by correlation. In

the case just explained there is perfect mathematical symmetry between

the original series and the series by correlation; for, if we denote by Q the

  relation RŘPR, we shall find P = RQRŘ. Thus we may take either the Q-

  series or the P-series as the original, and regard the other as derivative.

But if it should happen that R, instead of being one-one, is many-one, the

  terms of the field of Q, which we will call q, will have an order in which

there is repetition, the same term occurring in different positions

  corresponding to its different correlates in the field of P, which we will

call p. This is the ordinary case of mathematical functions which are not

  linear. It is owing to preoccupation with such series that most

  mathematicians fail to realize the impossibility, in an independent series,

of any recurrence of the same term. In every sentence of print, for

  example, the letters acquire an order by correlation with the points of

  space, and the same letter will be repeated in different positions. Here the

  series of letters is essentially derivative, for we cannot order the points of

  space by relation to the letters: this would give us several points in the

  same position, instead of one letter in several positions. In fact, if P be a

  serial relation, and R be a many-one relation whose domain is the field of

P, and Q = RŘPR, then Q has all the characteristics of a serial relation

  except that of implying diversity; but RQRŘ is not equivalent to P, and

  thus there is a lack of symmetry. It is for this reason that inverse                                              − 1
  functions in mathematics, such as sinx, are genuinely distinct from

  direct functions, and require some device or convention before they

  become unambiguous. Series obtained from a many-one correlation, as q

was obtained above, will be called series by correlation. They are not

  genuine series, and it is highly important to eliminate them from

  discussions of fundamental points.

253. The notion of likeness corresponds, among relations, to similarity

among classes. It is defined as follows: Two relations P, Q are like when

there is a one-one relation S such that the domain of S is the field of P,

and Q = SŠPS. This notion is not confined to serial relations, but may be

  extended to all relations. We may define the relation-number of a relation

P as the class of all relations that are like P; and we can proceed to a very

  general subject which may be called relation-arithmetic. Concerning

  relation-numbers we can prove those of the formal laws of addition and

  multiplication that hold for transfinite ordinals, and thus obtain an

  extension of a part of ordinal arithmetic to relations in general. By means

of likeness we can define a finite relation as one which is not like any

  proper part of itself—a proper part of a relation being a relation which

  implies it but is not equivalent to it. In this way we can completely

  emancipate ourselves from cardinal arithmetic. Moreover the properties

of likeness are in themselves interesting and important. One curious

  property is that, if S be one-one and have the field of P for its domain, the

  above equation Q = ŠPS is equivalent to SQ = PS or to QŠ = ŠP. *

254. Since the correlation of series constitutes most of the mathematical

  examples of functions, and since function is a notion which is not often

clearly explained, it will be well at this point to say something

  concerning the nature of this notion. In its most general form,

  functionality does not differ from relation. For the present purpose it will

be well to recall two technical terms, which were defined in Part I. If x

has a certain relation to y, I shall call x the referent, and y the relatum,

with regard to the relation in question. If now x be defined as belonging

to some class contained in the domain of the relation, then the relation

  defines y as a function of x. That is to say, an independent variable is

  constituted by a collection of terms, each of which can be referent in

  regard to a certain relation. Then each of these terms has one or more

  relata, and any one of these is a certain function of its referent, the

  function being defined by the relation. Thus father defines a function,  provided the independent variable be a class contained in that of male

  animals who have or will have propagated their kind; and if A be the

  father of B, B is said to be a function of A. What is essential is an

  independent variable, i.e. any term of some class, and a relation whose

  extension includes the variable. Then the referent is the independent

  variable, and its function is any one of the corresponding relata.

But this most general idea of a function is of little use in mathematics.

There are two principal ways of particularizing the function: first, we may

confine the relations to be considered to such as are one-one or many-one, i.e.

such as give to every referent a unique relatum; secondly, we may confine the

independent variable to series. The second particularization is very important,

and is specially relevant to our present topics. But as it almost wholly

excludes functions from Symbolic Logic, where series have little importance,

we may as well postpone it for a moment while we consider the first

particularization alone.

The idea of function is so important, and has been so often considered with

exclusive reference to numbers, that it is well to fill our minds with instances

of non-numerical functions. Thus a very important class of functions are

propositions containing a variable.† Let there be some proposition in which

the phrase “any a” occurs, where a is some class. Then in place of “any a”

we may put x, where x is an undefined member of the class a—in other

words, any a. The proposition then becomes a function of x, which is unique

when x is given. This proposition will, in general, be true for some values of

x and false for others. The values for which the function is true form what

might be called, by analogy with Analytic Geometry, a logical curve. This

general view may, in fact, be made to include that of Analytic Geometry. The

equation of a plane curve, for example, is a propositional function which is a

function of two variables x and y, and the curve is the assemblage of points

which give to the variables values that make the proposition true. A

proposition containing the word any is the assertion that a certain

propositional function is true for all values of the variable for which it is

significant. Thus “any man is mortal” asserts that “x is a man implies x is a

mortal” is true for all values of x for which it is significant, which may be

called the admissible values. Propositional functions, such as “x is a number”,

have the peculiarity that they look like propositions, and seem capable of

implying other propositional functions, while yet they are neither true nor

false. The fact is, they are propositions for all admissible values of thevariable, but not while the variable remains a variable, whose value is not

assigned; and although they may, for every admissible value of the variable,

imply the corresponding value of some other propositional function, yet

while the variable remains as a variable they can imply nothing. The question

concerning the nature of a propositional function as opposed to a proposition,

and generally of a function as opposed to its values, is a difficult one, which

can only be solved by an analysis of the nature of the variable. It is important,

however, to observe that propositional functions, as was shown in Chapter 7,

are more fundamental than other functions, or even than relations. For most

purposes, it is convenient to identify the function and the relation, i.e., if y = f

(x) is equivalent to xRy, where R is a relation, it is convenient to speak of R as

the function, and this will be done in what follows; the reader, however,

should remember that the idea of functionality is more fundamental than that

of relation. But the investigation of these points has been already undertaken

in Part I, and enough has been said to illustrate how a proposition may be a

function of a variable.

  Other instances of non-numerical functions are afforded by dictionaries.

The French for a word is a function of the English, and vice versâ, and both

are functions of the term which both designate. The press-mark of a book in a

library catalogue is a function of the book, and a number in a cipher is a

function of the word for which it stands. In all these cases there is a relation

by which the relatum becomes unique (or, in the case of languages, generally

unique) when the referent is given; but the terms of the independent variable

do not form a series, except in the purely external order resulting from the

alphabet.

255. Let us now introduce the second specification, that our independent

  variable is to be a series. The dependent variable is then a series by

  correlation, and may be also an independent series. For example, the

  positions occupied by a material point at a series of instants form a series

by correlation with the instants, of which they are a function; but in

  virtue of the continuity of motion, they also form, as a rule, a geometrical

  series independent of all reference to time. Thus motion affords an

  admirable example of the correlation of series. At the same time it

  illustrates a most important mark by which, when it is present, we can tell

that a series is not independent. When the time is known, the position of

a material particle is uniquely determined; but when the position is given,

there may be several moments, or even an infinite number of them,  corresponding to the given position. (There will be an infinite number of

such moments if, as is commonly said, the particle has been at rest in the

  position in question. Rest is a loose and ambiguous expression, but I

  defer its consideration to Part VII.) Thus the relation of the time to the

  position is not strictly one-one, but may be many-one. This was a case

  considered in our general account of correlation, as giving rise to

  dependent series. We inferred, it will be remembered, that two correlated

  independent series are mathematically on the same level, because if P, Q

be their generating relations, and R the correlating relation, we infer P =

  RQRŘ from Q = RŘPR. But this inference fails as soon as R is not strictly

  one-one, since then we no longer have RRŘ contained in 1’, where 1’

  means identity. For example, my father’s son need not be myself, though

my son’s father must be. This illustrates the fact that, if R be a many-one

  relation, RRŘ and RŘR must be carefully distinguished: the latter is

  contained in identity, but not the former. Hence whenever R is a many-

one relation, it may be used to form a series by correlation, but the series

so formed cannot be independent. This is an important point, which is

  absolutely fatal to the relational theory of time.* For the present let us

  return to the case of motion. When a particle describes a closed curve, or

one which has double points, or when the particle is sometimes at rest

  during a finite time, then the series of points which it occupies is

  essentially a series by correlation, not an independent series. But, as I

  remarked above, a curve is not only obtainable by motion, but is also a

  purely geometrical figure, which can be defined without reference to any

  supposed material point. When, however, a curve is so defined, it must

not contain points of rest: the path of a material point which sometimes

  moves, but is sometimes at rest for a finite time, is different when

  considered kinematically and when considered geometrically; for

  geometrically the point in which there is rest is one, whereas

  kinematically it corresponds to many terms in the series.

The above discussion of motion illustrates, in a non-numerical instance, a

case which normally occurs among the functions of pure mathematics. These

functions (when they are functions of a real variable) usually fulfil the

follow-ing conditions: Both the independent and the dependent variable are

classes

of numbers, and the defining relation of the function is many-one.* This

case covers rational functions, circular and elliptic functions of a real variableand the great majority of the direct functions of pure mathematics. In all such

cases, the independent variable is a series of numbers, which may be

restricted in any way we please—to positive numbers, rationals, integers,

primes or any other class. The dependent variable consists also of numbers,

but the order of these numbers is determined by their relation to the

corresponding term of the independent variable, not by that of the numbers

forming the dependent variable themselves. In a large class of functions the

two orders happen to coincide; in others, again, where there are maxima and

minima at finite intervals, the two orders coincide throughout a finite stretch,

then they become exactly opposite throughout another finite stretch, and so

on. If x be the independent variable, y the dependent variable, and the

constitutive relation be many-one, the same number y will, in general, be a

function of, i.e. correspond to, several numbers x. Hence the y-series is

essentially by correlation, and cannot be taken as an independent series. If,

then, we wish to consider the inverse function, which is defined by the

converse relation, we need certain devices if we are still to have correlation of

series. One of these, which seems the most important, consists in dividing the

values of x corresponding to the same value of y into classes, so that (what

may happen) we can distinguish (say) n different x’s, each of which has a

distinct one-one relation to y, and is therefore simply reversible. This is the

usual course, for example, in distinguishing positive and negative square

roots. It is possible wherever the generating relation of our original function

is formally capable of exhibition as a disjunction of one-one relations. It is

plain that the disjunctive relation formed of n one-one relations, each of

which contains in its domain a certain class u, will, throughout the class u, be

an n-one relation. Thus it may happen that the independent variable can be

divided into n-classes, within each of which the defining relation is one-one,

i.e. within each of which there is only one x having the defining relation to a

given y. In such cases, which are usual in pure mathematics, our many-one

relation can be made into a disjunction of one-one relations, each of which

separately is reversible. In the case of complex functions, this is, mutatis

mutandis, the method of Riemann surfaces. But it must be clearly

remembered that, where our function is not naturally one-one, the y which

appears as dependent variable is ordinally distinct from the y which appears

as independent variable in the inverse function.

The above remarks, which will receive illustration as we proceed, have

shown, I hope, how intimately the correlation of series is associated withmathematical employment of functions. Many other cases of the importance

of correlation will meet us as we proceed. It may be observed that every

denumerable class is related by a one-valued function to the finite integers,

and vice versá. As ordered by correlation with the integers, such a class

becomes a series having the type of order which Cantor calls w. The

fundamental importance of correlation to Cantor’s theory of transfinite

numbers will appear when we come to the definition of the transfinite

ordinals.

256. In connection with functions, it seems desirable to say something

  concerning the necessity of a formula for definition. A function was

  originally, after it had ceased to be merely a power, essentially something

that could be expressed by a formula. It was usual to start with some

  expression containing a variable x, and to say nothing to begin with as to

what x was to be, beyond a usually tacit assumption that x was some kind

of number. Any further limitations upon x were derived, if at all, from the

  formula itself; and it was mainly the desire to remove such limitations

  which led to the various generalizations of number. This algebraical

  generalization* has now been superseded by a more ordinal treatment, in

  which all classes of numbers are defined by means of the integers, and

  formulae are not relevant to the process. Nevertheless, for the use of

  functions, where both the independent and the dependent variables are

  infinite classes, the formula has a certain importance. Let us see what is

its definition.

A formula, in its most general sense, is a proposition, or more properly a

propositional function, containing one or more variables, a variable being any

term of some defined class, or even any term without restriction. The kind of

formula which is relevant in connection with functions of a single variable is

a formula containing two variables. If both variables are defined, say one as

belonging to the class u, the other as belonging to the class v, the formula is

true or false. It is true if every u has to every v the relation expressed by the

formula; otherwise it is false. But if one of the variables, say x, be defined as

belonging to the class u, while the other, y, is only defined by the formula,

then the formula may be regarded as defining y as a function of x. Let us call

the formula P. If in the class u there are terms x such that there is no term y
              xy

which makes P a true proposition, then the formula, as regards those terms,
                xy

is impossible. We must therefore assume that u is a class every term of whichwill, for a suitable value of y, make the proposition P true. If, then, for
                                                              xy

every term x of u, there are some entities y, which make P true, and others
                                                                    xy

which do not do so, then P correlates to every x a certain class of terms y. In
                              xy

this way y is defined as a function of x.

But the usual meaning of formula in mathematics involves another

element, which may also be expressed by the word law. It is difficult to say

precisely what this element is, but it seems to consist in a certain degree of

intensional simplicity of the proposition P. In the case of two languages, for
                                                xy

example, it would be said that there is no formula connecting them, except in

such cases as Grimm’s law. Apart from the dictionary, the relation which

correlates words in different languages is sameness of meaning; but this gives

no method by which, given a word in one language, we can infer the

corresponding word in the other. What is absent is the possibility of

calculation. A formula, on the other hand (say y = 2x), gives the means, when

we know x, of discovering y. In the case of languages, only enumeration of

all pairs will define the dependent variable. In the case of an algebraical

formula, the independent variable and the relation enable us to know all about

the dependent variable. If functions are to extend to infinite classes, this state

of things is essential, for enumeration has become impossible. It is therefore

essential to the correlation of infinite classes, and to the study of functions of

infinite classes, that the formula P should be one in which, given x, the class
                                      xy

of terms y satisfying the formula should be one which we can discover. I am

unable to give a logical account of this condition, and I suspect it of being

purely psychological. Its practical importance is great, but its theoretical

importance seems highly doubtful.

  There is, however, a logical condition connected with the above, though

perhaps not quite identical with it. Given any two terms, there is some

relation which holds between those two terms and no others. It follows that,

given any two classes of terms u, v, there is a disjunctive relation which any

one term of u has to at least one term of v, and which no term not belonging

to u has to any term. By this method, when two classes are both finite, we can

carry out a correlation (which may be one-one, many-one or one-many)

which correlates terms of these classes and no others. In this way any set of

terms is theoretically a function of any other; and it is only thus, for example,

that diplomatic ciphers are made up. But if the number of terms in the class

constituting the independent variable be infinite, we cannot in this waypractically define a function, unless the disjunctive relation consists of

relations developed one from the other by a law, in which case the formula is

merely transferred to the relation. This amounts to saying that the defining

relation of a function must not be infinitely complex, or, if it be so, must be

itself a function defined by some relation of finite complexity. This condition,

though it is itself logical, has again, I think, only psychological necessity, in

virtue of which we can only master the infinite by means of a law of order.

The discussion of this point, however, would involve a discussion of the

relation of infinity to order—a question which will be resumed later, but

which we are not yet in a position to treat intelligently. In any case, we may

say that a formula containing two variables and defining a function must, if it

is to be practically useful, give a relation between the two variables by which,

when one of them is given, all the corresponding values of the other can be

found; and this seems to constitute the mathematical essence of all formulae.

257. There remains an entirely distinct logical notion of much importance in

  connection with limits, namely the notion of a complete series. If R be

the defining relation of a series, the series is complete when there is a

term x belonging to the series, such that every other term which has to x

  either the relation R or the relation RŘ belongs to the series. It is

  connected (as was explained in Part IV) when no other terms belong to

the series. Thus a complete series consists of those terms, and only those

  terms, which have the generating relation or its converse to some one

term, together with that one term. Since the generating relation is

  transitive, a series which fulfils this condition for one of its terms fulfils

it for all of them. A series which is connected but not complete will be

  called incomplete or partial. Instances of complete series are the cardinal

  integers, the positive and negative integers and zero, the rational

  numbers, the moments of time or the points on a straight line. Any

  selection from such a series is incomplete with respect to the generating

  relations of the above complete series. Thus the positive numbers are an

  incomplete series, and so are the rationals between 0 and 1. When a

  series is complete, no term can come before or after any term of the

  series without belonging to the series; when the series is incomplete, this

is no longer the case. A series may be complete with respect to one

  generating relation, but not with respect to another. Thus the finite

  integers are a complete series when the series is defined by powers of the

  relation of consecutiveness, as in the discussion of progressions in PartIV; but when they are ordered by correlation with whole and part, they

form only part of the series of finite and transfinite integers, as we shall

see hereafter. A complete series may be regarded as the extension of a

term with respect to a given relation, together with this term itself; and

  owing to this fact it has, as we shall find, some important differences

from ordinally similar incomplete series. But it can be shown, by the

  Logic of Relations, that any incomplete series can be rendered complete

by a change in the generating relation, and vice versâ. The distinction

  between complete and incomplete series is, therefore, essentially relative

to a given generating relation.

* See my article in R. d. M., Vol. viii, No. 2.

* On this subject see my article in R. d. M., Vol. viii, especially Nos. 2, 6.

† These are what in Part I we called propositional functions.

* See my article “Is position in Time and Space absolute or relative?”

Mind, July 1901.

* I omit for the present complex variables, which, by introducing

dimensions, lead to complications of an entirely distinct kind.

* Of which an excellent account will be found in Couturat, De l’Infini

Mathématique, Paris, 1896, Part I, Book II.33


REAL NUMBERS




258. The philosopher may be surprised, after all that has already been said

  concerning numbers, to find that he is only now to learn about real

  numbers; and his surprise will be turned to horror when he learns that

  real is opposed to rational. But he will be relieved to learn that real

  numbers are really not numbers at all, but something quite different.

The series of real numbers, as ordinarily defined, consists of the whole

assemblage of rational and irrational numbers, the irrationals being defined as

the limits of such series of rationals as have neither a rational nor an infinite

limit. This definition, however, introduces grave difficulties, which will be

considered in the next chapter. For my part I see no reason whatever to

suppose that there are any irrational numbers in the above sense; and if there

are any, it seems certain that they cannot be greater or less than rational

numbers. When mathematicians have effected a generalization of number

they are apt to be unduly modest about it—they think that the difference

between the generalized and the original notions is less than it really is. We

have already seen that the finite cardinals are not to be identified with the

positive integers, nor yet with the ratios of the natural numbers to 1, both of

which express relations, which the natural numbers do not. In like manner

there is a real number associated with every rational number, but distinct

from it. A real number, so I shall contend, is nothing but a certain class of

rational numbers. Thus the class of rationals less than ½ is a real number,

associated with, but obviously not identical with, the rational number ½. This

theory is not, so far as I know, explicitly advocated by any other author,

though Peano suggests it, and Cantor comes very near to it.* My grounds in

favour of this opinion are, first, that such classes of rationals have all the

mathematical properties commonly assigned to real numbers, secondly, that

the opposite theory presents logical difficulties which appear to me

insuperable. The second point will be discussed in the next chapter; for thepresent I shall merely expound my own view, and endeavour to show that

real numbers, so understood, have all the requisite characteristics. It will be

observed that the following theory is independent of the doctrine of limits,

which will only be introduced in the next chapter.

259. The rational numbers in order of magnitude form a series in which

there is a term between any two. Such series, which in Part III we

  provisionally called continuous, must now receive another name, since

we shall have to reserve the word continuous for the sense which Cantor

has given to it. I propose to call such series compact.* The rational

  numbers, then, form a compact series. It is to be observed that, in a

  compact series, there are an infinite number of terms between any two,

there are no consecutive terms and the stretch between any two terms

  (whether these be included or not) is again a compact series. If now we

  consider any one rational number,† say r, we can define, by relation to r,

four infinite classes of rationals: (1) those less than r, (2) those not

  greater than r, (3) those greater than r, (4) those not less than r. (2) and

(4) differ from (1) and (3) respectively solely by the fact that the former

  contain r, while the latter do not. But this fact leads to curious differences

of properties. (2) has a last term, while (1) has none; (1) is identical with

the class of rational numbers less than a variable term of (1), while (2)

does not have this characteristic. Similar remarks apply to (3) and (4), but

  these two classes have less importance in the present case than in (1) and

(2). Classes of rationals having the properties of (1) are called segments.

A segment of rationals may be defined as a class of rationals which is not

  null, nor yet coextensive with the rationals themselves (i.e. which

  contains some but not all rationals), and which is identical with the class

of rationals less than a (variable) term of itself, i.e. with the class of

  rationals x such that there is a rational y of the said class such that x is

  less than y.‡ Now we shall find that segments are obtained by the above

  method, not only from single rationals, but also from finite or infinite

  classes of rationals, with the proviso, for infinite classes, that there must

be some rational greater than any member of the class. This is very

simply done as follows.

Let u be any finite or infinite class of rationals. Then four classes may be

defined by relation to u,* namely (1) those less than every u, (2) those less

than a variable u, (3) those greater than every u, (4) those greater than a

variable u, i.e. those such that for each a term of u can be found which issmaller than it. If u be a finite class, it must have a maximum and a minimum

term; in this case the former alone is relevant to (2) and (3), the latter alone to

(1) and (4). Thus this case is reduced to the former, in which we had only a

single rational. I shall therefore assume in future that u is an infinite class,

and further, to prevent reduction to our former case, I shall assume, in

considering (2) and (3), that u has no maximum, that is, that every term of u

is less than some other term of u; and in considering (1) and (4), I shall

assume that u has no minimum. For the present I confine myself to (2) and

(3), and I assume, in addition to the absence of a maximum, the existence of

rationals greater than any u, that is, the existence of the class (3). Under these

circumstances, the class (2) will be a segment. For (2) consists of all rationals

which are less than a variable u; hence, in the first place, since u has no

maximum, (2) contains the whole of u. In the second place, since every term

of (2) is less than some u, which in turn belongs to (2), every term of (2) is

less than some other term of (2); and every term less than some term of (2) is

a fortiori less than some u, and is therefore a term of (2). Hence (2) is

identical with the class of terms less than some term of (2), and is therefore a

segment.

  Thus we have the following conclusion: If u be a single rational, or a class

of rationals all of which are less than some fixed rational, then the rationals

less than u, if u be a single term, or less than a variable term of u, if u be a

class of terms, always form a segment of rationals. My contention is, that a

segment of rationals is a real number.

260. So far, the method employed has been one which may be employed in

any compact series. In what follows, some of the theorems will depend

  upon the fact that the rationals are a denumerable series. I leave for the

  present the disentangling of the theorems dependent upon this fact, and

  proceed to the properties of segments of rationals.

  Some segments, as we have seen, consist of the rationals less than some

given rational. Some, it will be found, though not so defined, are nevertheless

capable of being so defined. For example, the rationals less than a variable

term of the series ·9, ·99, ·999, etc., are the same as the rationals less than 1.

But other segments, which correspond to what are usually called irrationals,

are incapable of any such definition. How this fact has led to irrationals we

shall see in the next chapter. For the present I merely wish to point out the

well-known fact that segments are not capable of a one-one correlation with

rationals. There are classes of rationals defined as being composed of allterms less than a variable term of an infinite class of rationals, which are not

definable as all the rationals less than some one definite rational.* Moreover

there are more segments than rationals, and hence the series of segments has

continuity of a higher order than the rationals. Segments form a series in

virtue of the relation of whole and part, or of logical inclusion (excluding

identity). Any two segments are such that one of them is wholly contained in

the other, and in virtue of this fact they form a series. It can be easily shown

that they form a compact series. What is more remarkable is this: if we apply

the above process to the series of segments, forming segments of segments by

reference to classes of segments, we find that every segment of segments can

be defined as all segments contained in a certain definite segment. Thus the

segment of segments defined by a class of segments is always identical with

the segment of segments defined by some one segment. Also every segment

defines a segment of segments which can be defined by an infinite class of

segments. These two properties render the series of segments perfect, in

Cantor’s language; but the explanation of this term must be left till we come

to the doctrine of limits.

We might have defined our segments as all rationals greater than some

term of a class u of rationals. If we had done this, and inserted the conditions

that u was to have no minimum, and that there were to be rationals less than

every u, we should have obtained what may be called upper segments, as

distinguished from the former kind, which may be called lower segments. We

should then have found that, corresponding to every upper segment, there is a

lower segment which contains all rationals not contained in the upper

segment, with the occasional exception of a single rational. There will be one

rational not belonging to either the upper or the lower segment, when the

upper segment can be defined as all rationals greater than a single rational. In

this case, the corresponding lower segment will consist of all rationals less

than this single rational, which will itself belong to neither segment. Since

there is a rational between any two, the class of rationals not greater than a

given rational cannot ever be identical with the class of rationals less than

some other; and a class of rationals having a maximum can never be a

segment. Hence it is impossible, in the case in question, to find a lower

segment containing all the rationals not belonging to the given upper

segment. But when the upper segment cannot be defined by a single rational,

it will always be possible to find a lower segment containing all rationals not

belonging to the upper segment.  Zero and infinity may be introduced as limiting cases of segments, but in

the case of zero the segment must be of the kind which we called (1) above,

not of the kind (2) hitherto discussed. It is easy to construct a class of

rationals such that some term of the class will be less than any given rational.

In this case, the class (1) will contain no terms, and will be the null-class.

This is the real number zero, which, however, is not a segment, since a

segment was defined as a class which is not null. In order to introduce zero as

a class of the kind which we called (2), we should have to start with a null

class of rationals. No rational is less than a term of a null class of rationals,

and thus the class (2), in such a case, is null. Similarly the real number

infinity may be introduced. This is identical with the whole class of rationals.

If we have any class u of rationals such that no rational is greater than all u’s,

then every rational is contained in the class of rationals less than some u. Or

again, if we have a class of rationals of which a term is less than any assigned

rational, the resulting class (4) (of terms greater than some u) will contain

every rational, and will thus be the real number infinity. Thus both zero and

infinity may be introduced as extreme terms among the real numbers, but

neither is a segment according to the definition.

261. A given segment may be defined by many different classes of

  rationals. Two such classes u and v may be regarded as having the

  segment as a common property. Two infinite classes u and v will define

the same lower segment if, given any u, there is a v greater than it, and

  given any v, there is a u greater than it. If each class has no maximum,

this is also a necessary condition. The classes u and v are then what

Cantor calls coherent (zusammengehörig). It can be shown, without

  considering segments, that the relation of being coherent is symmetrical

and transitive,* whence we should infer, by the principle of abstraction,

that both have to some third term a common relation which neither has to

any other term. This third term, as we see from the preceding discussion,

may be taken to be the segment which both define. We may extend the

  word coherent to two classes u and v, of which one defines an upper

  segment, the other a lower segment, which between them include all

  rationals with at most one exception. Similar remarks, mutatis mutandis,

will still apply in this case.

We have now seen that the usual properties of real numbers belong to

segments of rationals. There is therefore no mathematical reason for

distinguishing such segments from real numbers. It remains to set forth, firstthe nature of a limit, then the current theories of irrationals, and then the

objections which make the above theory seem preferable.

Note. The above theory is virtually contained in Professor Peano’s article

already referred to (“Sui Numeri Irrazionali”, Rivista di Matematica, vi, pp.

126–140), and it was from this article, as well as from the Formulaire de

Mathématiques, that I was led to adopt the theory. In this article, separate

definitions of real numbers (§ 2, No. 5) and of segments (§ 8, ·0) are given,

which makes it seem as though the two were distinguished. But after the

definition of segments, we find the remark (p. 133): “Segments so defined

differ only in nomenclature from real numbers.” Professor Peano proceeds

first to give purely technical reasons for distinguishing the two by the

notation, namely that the addition, subtraction, etc. of real numbers is to be

differently conducted from analogous operations which are to be performed

on segments. Hence it would appear that the whole of the view I have

advocated is contained in this article. At the same time, there is some lack of

clearness, since it appears from the definition of real numbers that they are

regarded as the limits of classes of rationals, whereas a segment is in no sense

a limit of a class of rationals. Also it is nowhere suggested—indeed, from the

definition of real numbers the opposite is to be inferred—that no real number

can be a rational, and no rational can be a real number. And this appears

where he points out (p. 134) that 1 differs from the class of proper fractions

(which is no longer the case as regards the real number 1, when this is

distinguished both from the integer 1 and from the rational number 1:1), or

that we say 1 is less than √2 (in which case, I should say, 1 must be

interpreted as the class of proper fractions, and the assertion must be taken to

mean: the proper fractions are some, but not all, of the rationals whose square

is less than 2). And again he says (ib.): “The real number, although

determined by, and determining, a segment u, is commonly regarded as the

extremity, or end, or upper limit, of the segment”; whereas there is no reason

to suppose that segments not having a rational limit have a limit at all. Thus

although he confesses (ib.) that a complete theory of irrationals can be

constructed by means of segments, he does not seem to perceive the reasons

(which will be given in the next chapter) why this must be done—reasons

which, in fact, are rather philosophical than mathematical.


* Cf. Cantor, Math. Annalen, Vol. xlvi, § 10; Peano, Rivista di

Matematica, Vol. vi, pp. 126–140, esp. p. 133.* Such series are called by Cantor überall dicht.

† I shall for simplicity confine myself entirely to rationals without sign.

The extension to such as are positive or negative presents no difficulty

whatever.

‡ See Formulaire de Mathématiques, Vol. ii, Part iii, § 61 (Turin, 1899).

* Eight classes may be defined, but four are all that we need.

* Cf. Part I, Chap. 5, p. 60.

* Cf. Cantor, Math. Annalen, xlvi, and Rivista di Matematica, v, pp. 158,

159.34


LIMITS AND IRRATIONAL


NUMBERS




262. The mathematical treatment of continuity rests wholly upon the

  doctrine of limits. It has been thought by some mathematicians and some

  philosophers that this doctrine had been superseded by the Infinitesimal

  Calculus, and that this has shown true infinitesimals to be presupposed in

  limits.* But modern mathematics has shown, conclusively as it seems to

me, that such a view is erroneous. The method of limits has more and

  more emerged as fundamental. In this chapter, I shall first set forth the

  general definition of a limit, and then examine its application to the

  creation of irrationals.

A compact series we defined as one in which there is a term between any

two. But in such a series it is always possible to find two classes of terms

which have no term between them, and it is always possible to reduce one of

these classes to a single term. For example, if P be the generating relation and

x any term of the series, then the class of terms having to x the relation P is

one between which and x there is no term.† The class of terms so defined is

one of the two segments determined by x; the idea of a segment is one which

demands only a series in general, not necessarily a numerical series. In this

case, if the series be compact, x is said to be the limit of the class; when there

is such a term as x, the segment is said to be terminated, and thus every

terminated segment in a compact series has its defining term as a limit.

But this does not constitute a definition of a limit. To obtain the general

definition of a limit, consider any class u contained in the series generated by

P. Then the class u will in general, with respect to any term x not belonging

to it, be divisible into two classes, that whose terms have to x the relation P

(which I shall call the class of terms preceding x), and that whose terms have

to x the relation P (which I shall call the class of terms following x). If x beitself a term of u, we consider all the terms of u other than x, and these are

still divisible into the above two classes, which we may call π x and  x
                                                                        uu

respectively. If, now, π x be such that, if y be any term preceding x, there is a
                          u

term of π x following y, i.e. between x and y, then x is a limit of π x.
        uu

Similarly if  x be such that, if z be any term after x, there is a term of  x
              uu

between x and z, then x is a limit of  x. We now define that x is a limit of u
                                          u

if it is a limit of either π x or  x. It is to be observed that u may have many
                          uu

limits, and that all the limits together form a new class contained in the series

generated by P. This is the class (or rather this, by the help of certain further

assumptions, becomes the class) which Cantor designates as the first

derivative of the class u.

263. Before proceeding further, it may be well to make some general

  remarks of an elementary character on the subject of limits. In the first

place, limits belong usually to classes contained in compact series—

  classes which may, as an extreme case, be identical with the compact

  series in question. In the second place, a limit may or may not belong to

the class u of which it is a limit, but it always belongs to some series in

  which u is contained, and if it is a term of u, it is still a limit of the class

  consisting of all terms of u except itself. In the third place, no class can

  have a limit unless it contains an infinite number of terms. For, to revert to

our former division, if u be finite, π x and  x will both be finite. Hence
                                            uu

each of them will have a term nearest to x, and between this term and x no

term of u willd lie. Hence x is not a limit of u; and since x is any term of

the series, u will have no limits at all. It is common to add a theorem that

  every infinite class, provided its terms are all contained between two

  specified terms of the series generated by P, must have at least one limit;

but this theorem, we shall find, demands an interpretation in terms of

  segments, and is not true as it stands. In the fourth place, if u be co-

  extensive with the whole compact series generated by P, then every term

of this series is a limit of u. There can be no other terms that are limits in

the same sense, since limits have only been defined in relation to this

  compact series. To obtain other limits, we should have to regard the series

  generated by P as forming part of some other compact series—a case

  which, as we shall see, may arise. In any case, if u be any compact series,

  every term of u is a limit of u; whether u has also other limits, depends

  upon further circumstances. A limit may be defined generally as a term  which immediately follows (or precedes) some class of terms belonging to

an infinite series, without immediately following (or preceding, as the case

may be) any one term of the series. In this way, we shall find, limits may

be defined generally in all infinite series which are not progressions—as,

for instance, in the series of finite and transfinite integers.

264. We may now proceed to the various arithmetical theories of irrationals,

all of which depend upon limits. We shall find that, in the exact form in

  which they have been given by their inventors, they all involve an axiom,

for which there are no arguments, either of philosophical necessity or of

  mathematical convenience; to which there are grave logical objections;

and of which the theory of real numbers given in the preceding chapter is

  wholly independent.

  Arithmetical theories of irrationals could not be treated in Part II, since

they depend essentially upon the notion of order. It is only by means of them

that numbers become continuous in the sense now usual among

mathematicians; and we shall find in Part VI that no other sense of continuity

is required for space and time. It is very important to realize the logical

reasons for which an arithmetical theory of irrationals is imperatively

necessary. In the past, the definition of irrationals was commonly effected by

geometrical considerations. This procedure was, however, highly illogical;

for if the application of numbers to space is to yield anything but tautologies,

the numbers applied must be independently defined; and if none but a

geometrical definition were possible, there would be, properly speaking, no

such arithmetical entities as the definition pretended to define. The

algebraical definition, in which irrationals were introduced as the roots of

algebraic equations having no rational roots, was liable to similar objections,

since it remained to be shown that such equations have roots; moreover this

method will only yield the so-called algebraic numbers, which are an

infinitesimal proportion of the real numbers, and do not have continuity in

Cantor’s sense, or in the sense required by Geometry. And in any case, if it is

possible, without any further assumption, to pass from Arithmetic to

Analysis, from rationals to irrationals, it is a logical advance to show how this

can be done. The generalizations of number—with the exception of the

introduction of imaginaries, which must be independently effected—are all

necessary consequences of the admission that the natural numbers form a

progression. In every progression the terms have two kinds of relations, the

one constituting the general analogue of positive and negative integers, theother that of rational numbers. The rational numbers form a denumerable

compact series; and segments of a denumerable compact series, as we saw in

the preceding chapter, form a series which is continuous in the strictest sense.

Thus all follows from the assumption of a progression. But in the present

chapter we have to examine irrationals as based on limits; and in this sense,

we shall find that they do not follow without a new assumption.

  There are several somewhat similar theories of irrational numbers. I will

begin with that of Dedekind.*

265. Although rational numbers are such that, between any two, there is

  always a third, yet there are many ways of dividing all rational numbers

into two classes, such that all numbers of one class come after all

  numbers of the other class, and no rational number lies between the two

  classes, while yet the first class has no first term and the second has no

last term. For example, all rational numbers, without exception, may be

  classified according as their squares are greater or less than 2. All the

  terms of both classes may be arranged in a single series, in which there

  exists a definite section, before which comes one of the classes, and after

  which comes the other. Continuity seems to demand that some term

  should correspond to this section. A number which lies between the two

  classes must be a new number, since all the old numbers are classified.

This new number, which is thus defined by its position in a series, is an

  irrational number. When these numbers are introduced, not only is there

  always a number between any two numbers, but there is a number

  between any two classes of which one comes wholly after the other, and

the first has no minimum, while the second has no maximum. Thus we

can extend to numbers the axiom by which Dedekind defines the

  continuity of the straight line (op. cit. p. 11):—

“If all the points of a line can be divided into two classes such that every

point of one class is to the left of every point of the other class, then there

exists one and only one point which brings about this division of all points

into two classes, this section of the line into two parts.”

266. This axiom of Dedekind’s is, however, rather loosely worded, and

  requires an emendation suggested by the derivation of irrational numbers.

If all the points of a line are divided into two classes, no point is left over

to represent the section. If all be meant to exclude the point representing

the section, the axiom no longer characterizes continuous series, but

  applies equally to all series, e.g. the series of integers. The axiom must beheld to apply, as regards the division, not to all the points of the line, but

to all the points forming some compact series, and distributed throughout

the line, but consisting only of a portion of the points of the line. When

this emendation is made, the axiom becomes admissible. If, from among

the terms of a series, some can be chosen out to form a compact series

  which is distributed throughout the previous series; and if this new series

can always be divided in Dedekind’s manner into two portions, between

  which lies no term of the new series, but one and only one term of the

  original series, then the original series is continuous in Dedekind’s sense

of the word. The emendation, however, destroys entirely the self-

  evidence upon which alone Dedekind relies (p. 11) for the proof of his

  axiom as applied to the straight line.

  Another somewhat less complicated emendation may be made, which

gives, I think, what Dedekind meant to state in his axiom. A series, we may

say, is continuous in Dedekind’s sense when, and only when, if all the terms

of the series, without exception, be divided into two classes, such that the

whole of the first class precedes the whole of the second, then, however the

division be effected, either the first class has a last term, or the second class

has a first term, but never both. This term, which comes at one end of one of

the two classes, may then be used, in Dedekind’s manner, to define the

section. In discrete series, such as that of finite integers, there is both a last

term of the first class and a first term of the second class;* while in compact

series such as the rationals, where there is not continuity, it sometimes

happens (though not for every possible division) that the first class has no last

term and the last class has no first term. Both these cases are excluded by the

above axiom. But I cannot see any vestige of self-evidence in such an axiom,

either as applied to numbers or as applied to space.

267. Leaving aside, for the moment, the general problem of continuity, let

us return to Dedekind’s definition of irrational numbers. The first

  question that arises is this: What right have we to assume the existence of

such numbers? What reason have we for supposing that there must be a

  position between two classes of which one is wholly to the right of the

other, and of which one has no minimum and the other no maximum?

This is not true of series in general, since many series are discrete. It is

not demanded by the nature of order. And, as we have seen, continuity in

a certain sense is possible without it. Why then should we postulate such

a number at all? It must be remembered that the algebraical and  geometrical problems, which irrationals are intended to solve, must not

here be brought into the account. The existence of irrationals has, in the
                                                                  2
past, been inferred from such problems. The equation x − 2 = 0 must
                                                                          2
  have a root, it was argued, because, as x grows from 0 to 2, x − 2

  increases, and is first negative and then positive; if x changes
                                            2
  continuously, so does x − 2; hence x − 2 must assume the value 0 in

  passing from negative to positive. Or again, it was argued that the

  diagonal of unit square has evidently a precise and definite length x, and
                                  2
that this length is such that x − 2 = 0. But such arguments were

  powerless to show that x is truly a number. They might equally well be

  regarded as showing the inadequacy of numbers to Algebra and

  Geometry. The present theory is designed to prove the arithmetical

  existence of irrationals. In its design, it is preferable to the previous

  theories; but the execution seems to fall short of the design.

Let us examine in detail the definition of √2 by Dedekind’s method. It is a

singular fact that, although a rational number lies between any two single

rational numbers, two classes of rational numbers may be defined so that no

rational number lies between them, though all of one class are higher than all

of the other. It is evident that one at least of these classes must consist of an

infinite number of terms. For if not, we could pick out the two of opposite

kinds which were nearest together, and insert a new number between them.

This one would be between the two classes, contrary to the hypothesis. But

when one of the classes is infinite, we may arrange all or some of the terms in

a series of terms continually approaching the other class, without reaching it,

and without having a last term. Let us, for the moment, suppose our infinite

class to be denumerable. We then obtain a denumerable series of numbers a,
                                                                                        n

all belonging to the one class, but continually approaching the other class. Let

B be a fixed number of the other class. Then between a and B there is always
                                                                n

another rational number; but this may be chosen to be another of the a’s, say

a; and since the series of a’s is infinite, we do not necessarily obtain, in
n + 1

this way, any number not belonging to the series of a’s. In the definition of

irrationals, the series of b’s is also infinite. Moreover, if the b’s also be

denumerable, any rational number between a and b, for suitable values of p
                                                    nm

and q, either is a +  or b + , or else lies between a +  and a + p +  or
                  npmqnpn1

between b +  and b + q . In fact, a +  always lies between a and b. By
          mqm1npnm

successive steps, no term is obtained which lies between all the b’s and all thea’s. Nevertheless, both the a’s and the b’s are convergent. For, let the a’s

increase, while the b’s diminish. Then b − a and b continually diminish,
                                              nnn + 1

and therefore a − a, which is less than either, is less than a continually
                n + 1n

diminishing number. Moreover this number diminishes without limit; for if

b − a had a limit ε, the number a + ε/2 would finally lie between the two
nnn

classes. Hence a − a becomes finally less than any assigned number.
                  n + 1n

Thus the a’s and b’s are both convergent. Since, moreover, their difference

may be made less than any assigned number ε, they have the same limit, if

they have any. But this limit cannot be a rational number, since it lies

between all the a’s and all the b’s. Such seems to be the argument for the

existence of irrationals. For example, if


                      2
      x =√2 + 1, x − 2x − 1 = 0.

 


  Thus




 



The successive convergents to the continued fraction  are

such that all the odd convergents are less than all the even convergents, while

the odd convergents continually grow, and the even ones continually

diminish. Moreover the difference between the odd and the next even

convergent continually diminishes. Thus both series, if they have a limit,

have the same limit, and this limit is defined as √2.

But the existence of a limit, in this case, is evidently a sheer assumption. In

the beginning of this chapter, we saw that the existence of a limit demands a

larger series of which the limit forms part. To create the limit by means of the

series whose limit is to be found would therefore be a logical error. It is

essential that the distance from the limit should diminish indefinitely. But

here, it is only the distance of consecutive terms which is known to diminish

indefinitely. Moreover all the a’s are less than b. Hence they continually
                                                        n

differ less and less from b. But whatever n may be, b cannot be the limit of
                            nn

the a’s for b +  lies between b and all the a’s. This cannot prove that a limit
            n1nexists, but only that, if it existed, it would not be any one of the a’s or b’s, nor

yet any other rational number. Thus irrationals are not proved to exist, but

may be merely convenient fictions to describe the relations of the a’s and b’s.

268. The theory of Weierstrass concerning irrationals is somewhat similar

to that of Dedekind. In Weierstrass’s theory, we have a series of terms a,
                                                                                        1

a, …, a, …, such that Σ a, for all values of n, is less than some given
  2nn

  number. This case is presented, e.g., by an infinite decimal. The fraction

3 ·14159 …, however many terms we take, remains less than 3 ·1416. In

this method, as Cantor points out,* the limit is not created by the

  summation, but must be supposed to exist already in order that  a may
                                                                                    n

be defined by means of it. This is the same state of things as we found in

  Dedekind’s theory: series of rational numbers cannot prove the existence

of irrational numbers as their limits, but can only prove that, if there is a

limit, it must be irrational.

  Thus the arithmetical theory of irrationals, in either of the above forms, is

liable to the following objections. (1) No proof is obtained from it of the

existence of other than rational numbers, unless we accept some axiom of

continuity different from that satisfied by rational numbers; and for such an

axiom we have as yet seen no ground. (2) Granting the existence of

irrationals, they are merely specified, not defined, by the series of rational

numbers whose limits they are. Unless they are independently postulated, the

series in question cannot be known to have a limit; and a knowledge of the

irrational number which is a limit is presupposed in the proof that it is a limit.

Thus, although without any appeal to Geometry, any given irrational number

can be specified by means of an infinite series of rational numbers, yet, from

rational numbers alone, no proof can be obtained that there are irrational

numbers at all, and their existence must be proved from a new and

independent postulate.

  Another objection to the above theory is that it supposes rationals and

irrationals to form part of one and the same series generated by relations of

greater and less. This raises the same kind of difficulties as we found to

result, in Part II, from the notion that integers are greater or less than

rationals, or that some rationals are integers. Rationals are essentially

relations between integers, but irrationals are not such relations. Given an

infinite series of rationals, there may be two integers whose relation is a

rational which limits the series, or there may be no such pair of integers. Theentity postulated as the limit, in this latter case, is no longer of the same kind

as the terms of the series which it is supposed to limit; for each of them is,

while the limit is not, a relation between two integers. Of such heterogeneous

terms, it is difficult to suppose that they can have relations of greater and less;

and in fact, the constitutive relation of greater and less, from which the series

of rationals springs, has to receive a new definition for the case of two

irrationals, or of a rational and an irrational. This definition is, that an

irrational is greater than a rational, when the irrational limits a series

containing terms greater than the given rational. But what is really given here

is a relation of the given rational to a class of rationals, namely the relation of

belonging to the segment defined by the series whose limit is the given

irrational. And in the case of two irrationals, one is defined to be greater than

the other when its defining series contains terms greater than any terms of the

defining series of the other—a condition which amounts to saying that the

segment corresponding to the one contains as a proper part the segment

corresponding to the other. These definitions define a relation quite different

from the inequality of two rationals, namely the logical relation of inclusion.

Thus the irrationals cannot form part of the series of rationals, but new terms

corresponding to the rationals must be found before a single series can be

constructed. Such terms, as we saw in the last chapter, are found in segments;

but the theories of Dedekind and Weierstrass leave them still to seek.

269. The theory of Cantor, though not expressed, philosophically speaking,

with all the requisite clearness, lends itself more easily to the

  interpretation which I advocate, and is specially designed to prove the

  existence of limits. He remarks* that, in his theory, the existence of the

  limit is a strictly demonstrable proposition; and he strongly emphasizes

the logical error involved in attempting to deduce the existence of the

  limit from the series whose limit it is (ib., p. 22).* Cantor starts by

  considering what he calls fundamental series (which are the same as what

I have called progressions) contained in a larger series. Each of these

  fundamental series is to be wholly ascending or wholly descending. Two

such series are called coherent (zusammengehörig) under the following

  circumstances:—

    If both are ascending, and after any term of either there is always a term1. 

    of the other;

2. If both are descending, and before any term of either there is always a

    term of the other;3. If one is ascending, the other descending, and the one wholly precedes

    the other, and there is at most one term which is between the two

    fundamental series.


The relation of being coherent is symmetrical, in virtue of the definition;

and Cantor shows that it is transitive. In the article from which the above

remarks are extracted, Cantor is dealing with more general topics than the

definition of irrationals. But the above general account of coherent series will

help us to understand the theory of irrationals. This theory is set forth as

follows in the Mannichfaltigkeitslehre (p. 23 ff.):—

A fundamental series of rationals is defined as a denumerable series such

that, given any number ε, there are at most a finite number of terms in the

series the absolute values of whose differences from subsequent terms exceed

ε. That is to say, given any number ε, however small, any two terms of the

series which both come after a certain term have a difference which lies

between + ε and − ε. Such series must be of one of three kinds: (1) any

number ε being mentioned, the absolute values of the terms, from some term

onwards, will all be less than ε, whatever ε may be; (2) from some term

onwards, all the terms may be greater than a certain positive number ρ; (3)

from some term onwards, all the terms may be less than a certain negative

number − ρ. A real number b is to be defined by the fundamental series, and

is said in the first case to be zero, in the second to be positive and in the third

to be negative. To define the addition, etc., of these new real numbers, we

observe that, if a, a' be the νth terms of two fundamental series, the series
                  νν

whose νth term is a + a' or a − a' or a × a' is also a fundamental series;
                      νννννν

while if the real number defined by the series (a)† is not zero, (a'/a) also
                                                        ννν

defines a fundamental series. If b, b' be the real numbers defined by the series

(a), (a'), the real numbers defined by (a + a'), (a − a'), (a × a') and
  νννννννν

(a'/a) are defined to be b + b' , b − b' , b × b' and b' /b respectively. Hence
νν

we proceed to the definitions of equal, greater and less among real numbers.

We define that b = b' means b − b' = 0; b > b' means that b − b' is positive;

and b <b' means that b − b' is negative—all terms which have been already

defined. Cantor remarks further that in these definitions one of the numbers

may be rational. This may be formally justified, in part, by the remark that a

denumerable series whose terms are all one and the same rational number is a

fundamental series, according to the definition; hence in constructing thedifferences a − a', by which b − b' is defined, we may put some fixed
              νν

rational a in place of a' for all values of ν. But the consequence that we can
                          ν

define b − a does not follow, and that for the following reason. There is

absolutely nothing in the above definition of the real numbers to show that a

is the real number defined by a fundamental series whose terms are all equal

to a. The only reason why this seems self-evident is, that the definition by

limits is unconsciously present, making us think that, since a is plainly the

limit of a series whose terms are all equal to a, therefore a must be the real

number defined by such a series. Since, however, Cantor insists—rightly, as I

think—that his method is independent of limits, which, on the contrary, are to

be deduced from it (pp. 24–5), we must not allow this preconception to weigh

with us. And the preconception, if I am not mistaken, is in fact erroneous.

There is nothing in the definitions above enumerated to show that a real

number and a rational number can ever be either equal or unequal, and there

are very strong reasons for supposing the contrary. Hence also we must reject

the proposition (p. 24) that, if b be the real number defined by a fundamental

series (a), then
        ν



 


Cantor is proud of the supposed fact that his theory renders this proposition

strictly demonstrable. But, as we have seen, there is nothing to show that a

rational can be subtracted from a real number, and hence the supposed proof

is fallacious. What is true, and what has all the mathematical advantages of

the above theorem, is this: connected with every rational a there is a real

number, namely that defined by the fundamental series whose terms are all

equal to a; if b be the real number defined by a fundamental series (a) and if
                                                                                ν

b be the real number defined by a fundamental series whose terms are all
ν

equal to a, then (b) is a fundamental series of real numbers whose limit is b.
          νν

But from this we cannot infer, as Cantor supposes (p. 24), that Lim a exists;
                                                                                ν

this will only be true in the case where (a) has a rational limit. The limit of a
                                                ν

series of rationals either does not exist, or is rational; in no case is it a real

number. But in all cases a fundamental series of rationals defines a real

number, which is never identical with any rational.

270. Thus to sum up what has been said on Cantor’s theory: By proving that  two fundamental series may have the relation of being coherent, and that

this relation is symmetrical and transitive, Cantor shows, by the help of

the principle of abstraction (which is tacitly assumed), that two such

  series both have some one relation to one third term, and to no other.

This term, when our series consist of rationals, we define as the real

  number which both determine. We can then define the rules of operation

for real numbers, and the relations of equal, greater and less between

  them. But the principle of abstraction leaves us in doubt as to what the

real numbers really are. One thing, however, seems certain. They cannot

form part of any series containing rationals, for the rationals are relations

  between integers, while the real numbers are not so; and the constitutive

  relation in virtue of which rationals form a series is defined solely by

  means of the integers between which they are relations, so that the same

  relation cannot hold between two real numbers, or between a real and a

  rational number. In this doubt as to what real numbers may be, we find

that segments of rationals, as defined in the preceding chapter, fulfil all

the requirements laid down in Cantor’s definition, and also those derived

from the principle of abstraction. Hence there is no logical ground for

  distinguishing segments of rationals from real numbers. If they are to be

  distinguished, it must be in virtue of some immediate intuition, or of

  some wholly new axiom, such as, that all series of rationals must have a

limit. But this would be fatal to the uniform development of Arithmetic

and Analysis from the five premisses which Peano has found sufficient,

and would be wholly contrary to the spirit of those who have invented the

  arithmetical theory of irrationals. The above theory, on the contrary,

  requires no new axiom, for if there are rationals, there must be segments

of rationals; and it removes what seems, mathematically, a wholly

  unnecessary complication, since, if segments will do all that is required

of irrationals, it seems superfluous to introduce a new parallel series with

  precisely the same mathematical properties. I conclude, then, that an

  irrational actually is a segment of rationals which does not have a limit;

  while a real number which would be commonly identified with a rational

is a segment which does have a rational limit; and this applies, e.g., to the

real number defined by a fundamental series of rationals whose terms are

all equal. This is the theory which was set forth positively in the

  preceding chapter, and to which, after examining the current theories of

  irrationals, we are again brought back. The greater part of it applies to  compact series in general; but some of the uses of fundamental series, as

we shall see hereafter, presuppose either numerical measurement of

  distances or stretches, or that a denumerable compact series is contained

in our series in a certain manner.* The whole of it, however, applies to

any compact series obtained from a progression as the rationals are

  obtained from the integers; and hence no property of numbers is involved

  beyond the fact that they form a progression.

* This is the view, for instance, of Cohen, Das Princip der Infinitesimal-

Methode und seine Geschichte, Berlin, 1883; see pp. 1, 2.

† It is perhaps superfluous to explain that a term is between two classes u,

v, when it has the relation P to every term of u, and the relation  to every

term of v, or vice versû.

* Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen, 2nd ed., Brunswick, 1892.

* If the series contains a proper part which is a progression, it is only true

in general, not without exception, that the first class must have a last term.

* Mannichfaltigkeitslehre, p. 22. I quote Weierstrass’s theory from the

account in Stolz, Vorlesungen über allgemeine Arithmetik, I.

* Op. cit., p. 24.

* Cantor’s theory of irrationals will be found in op. cit., p. 23, and in Stolz,

Vorlesungen über allgemeine Arithmetik, I, 7. I shall follow, to begin with, a

later account, which seems to me clearer; this forms § 10 in an article

contained in Math. Annalen, xlvi, and in Rivista di Matematica, v.

† The symbol (a) denotes the whole series whose νth term is a, not this
                    νν

term alone.

* See Chapter 36.35


CANTOR’S FIRST DEFINITION


OF CONTINUITY




271. The notion of continuity has been treated by philosophers, as a rule, as

  though it were incapable of analysis. They have said many things about

it, including the Hegelian dictum that everything discrete is also

  continuous and vice versâ.* This remark, as being an exemplification of

  Hegel’s usual habit of combining opposites, has been tamely repeated by

all his followers. But as to what they meant by continuity and

  discreteness, they preserved a discreet and continuous silence; only one

  thing was evident, that whatever they did mean could not be relevant to

  mathematics, or to the philosophy of space and time.

In the last chapter of Part III, we agreed provisionally to call a series

continuous if it had a term between any two. This definition usually satisfied

Leibniz,† and would have been generally thought sufficient until the

revolutionary discoveries of Cantor. Nevertheless there was reason to

surmise, before the time of Cantor, that a higher order of continuity is

possible. For, ever since the discovery of incommensurables in Geometry—a

discovery of which is the proof set forth in the tenth Book of Euclid—it was

probable that space had continuity of a higher order than that of the rational

numbers, which, nevertheless, have the kind of continuity defined in Part III.

The kind which belongs to the rational numbers, and consists in having a

term between any two, we have agreed to call compactness; and to avoid

confusion, I shall never again speak of this kind as continuity. But that other

kind of continuity, which was seen to belong to space, was treated, as Cantor

remarks,* as a kind of religious dogma, and was exempted from that

conceptual analysis which is requisite to its comprehension. Indeed it was

often held to show, especially by philosophers, that any subject-matter

possessing it was not validly analysable into elements. Cantor has shown thatthis view is mistaken, by a precise definition of the kind of continuity which

must belong to space. This definition, if it is to be explanatory of space, must,

as he rightly urges,† be effected without any appeal to space. We find,

accordingly, in his final definition, only ordinal notions of a general kind,

which can be fully exemplified in Arithmetic. The proof that the notion so

defined is precisely the kind of continuity belonging to space, must be

postponed to Part VI. Cantor has given his definition in two forms, of which

the earlier is not purely ordinal, but involves also either number or quantity.

In the present chapter, I wish to translate this earlier definition into language

as simple and untechnical as possible, and then to show how series which are

continuous in this sense occur in Arithmetic, and generally in the theory of

any progression whatever. The later definition will be given in the following

chapter.

272. In order that a series should be continuous, it must have two

  characteristics: it must be perfect and cohesive (zusammenhängend, bien

  enchaînée).‡ Both these terms have a technical meaning requiring

  considerable explanation. I shall begin with the latter.

(1) Speaking popularly, a series is cohesive, or has cohesion, when it

contains no finite gaps. The precise definition, as given by Cantor, is as

follows: “We call T a cohesive collection of points, if for any two points t and

t' of T, for a number ε given in advance and as small as we please, there are

always, in several ways, a finite number of points t, t, … t, belonging to T,
                                                          12ν

such that the distances tt, tt, tt, … tt' are all less than ε.”§ This
                            11223ν

condition, it will be seen, has essential reference to distance. It is not

necessary that the collection considered should consist of numbers, nor that ε

should be a number. All that is necessary is, that the collection should be a

series in which there are distances obeying the axiom of Archimedes and

having no minimum, and that ε should be an arbitrary distance of the kind

presented by the series. If the series be the whole field of some asymmetrical

transitive relation, or if it be the whole of the terms having a certain

asymmetrical transitive relation to a given term, we may substitute stretch for

distance; and even if the series be only part of such a series, we may

substitute the stretch in the complete series of which our series forms part.

But we must, in order to give any meaning to cohesion, have something

numerically measurable. How far this condition is necessary, and what can be

done without it, I shall show at a later stage. It is through this condition that

our discussions of quantity and measurement, in Part III, become relevant tothe discussion of continuity.

If the distances or stretches in our series do not obey the axiom of

Archimedes, there are some among them that are incapable of a finite

numerical measure in terms of some others among them. In this case, there is

no longer an analogy of the requisite kind with either the rational or the real

numbers, and the series is necessarily not cohesive. For let δ, d be two

distances; let them be such that, for any finite number n, nδ is less than d. In

this case, if δ be the distance ε, and d be the distance tt' , it is plain that the

condition of cohesion cannot be satisfied. Such cases actually occur, and—

what seems paradoxical—they can be created by merely interpolating terms

in certain cohesive series. For example, the series of segments of rationals is

cohesive; and when these segments have rational limits, the limits are not

contained in them. Add now to the series what may be called the completed

segments, i.e. the segments having rational limits together with their limits.

These are new terms, forming part of the same series, since they have the

relation of whole and part to the former terms. But now the difference

between a segment and the corresponding completed segment consists of a

single rational, while all other differences in the series consist of an infinite

number of rationals. Thus the axiom of Archimedes fails, and the new series

is not cohesive.

The condition that distances in the series are to have no minimum is

satisfied by real or rational numbers; and it is necessary, if cohesion is to be

extended to non-numerical series, that, when any unit distance is selected,

there should be distances whose numerical measure is less than ε, where ε is

any rational number. For, if there be a minimum distance, we cannot make

our distances tt, t t … less than this minimum, which is contrary to the
                112

definition of cohesion. And there must not only be no minimum to distances

in general, but there must be no minimum to distances from any given term.

Hence every cohesive series must be compact, i.e. must have a term between

any two.

It must not be supposed, however, that every compact series is cohesive.

Consider, for example, the series formed of 0 and 2 − m/n, where m, n are

any integers such that m is less than n. Here there is a term between any two,

but the distance from 0 cannot be made less than 1. Hence the series, though

compact, is not cohesive. This series, however, is not complete, being part

only of the series of rationals, by means of which its distances are measured.

In a complete series, the conditions are somewhat different. We mustdistinguish two cases, according as there are or are not distances. (a) If there

are distances, and equal distances do not correspond to equal stretches, it may

happen that, though the series is compact, the distances from some term

never become less than some finite distance. This case would be presented by

magnitudes, if we were to accept Meinong’s opinion that the distance of any

finite magnitude from zero is always infinite (op. cit. p. 84). It is presented by

numbers, if we measure distances (as there are many reasons for doing) by

log x/y. Thus in this case, with regard to distances, the series is not cohesive,

though it is complete and compact. (b) If there are no distances, but only

stretches, then, assuming the axiom of Archimedes, any stretch will be less

than nε, for a suitable value of n. Hence, dividing the stretch into n parts, one

at least of these will be less than ε. But there is no way of proving that all can

be made less than ε, unless we assume either the axiom of linearity (that any

stretch can be divided into n equal parts), or a more complicated but more

general axiom, to the effect that a stretch d can be divided into n parts, each

of which is greater than d/(n + 1) and less than d/(n − 1), whatever integer n

may be. With this axiom and the axiom of Archimedes, a complete compact

series must be cohesive; but these two axioms together render completeness

superfluous and compactness redundant. Thus we see that cohesion is in

almost all cases a condition distinct from compactness. Compactness is

purely serial, while cohesion has essential reference to numbers or to the

conditions of numerical measurement. Cohesion implies compactness, but

compactness never implies cohesion, except in the sole case of the complete

series of rationals or real numbers.

273. (2) To explain what is meant by a perfect series is more difficult. A

  series is perfect when it coincides with its first derivative.* To explain

this definition, we must examine the notion of the derivatives of a

  series,† and this demands an explanation of a limiting-point of a series.

  Speaking generally, the terms of a series are of two kinds, those which

Cantor calls isolated points, and those which he calls limiting-points. A

  finite series has only isolated points; an infinite series must define at least

one limiting-point, though this need not belong to the series. A limiting-

  point of a series is defined by Cantor to be a term such that, in any

  interval containing the term, there are an infinite number of terms of the

  series (ib. p. 343). The definition is given in terms of the points on a line,

but it has no essential reference to space. The limiting-point may or may

not be a term of the original series. The assemblage of all limiting-pointsis called the first derivative of the series. The first derivative of the first

  derivative is called the second derivative, and so on. Peano gives the

  definition of the first derivative of a class of real numbers as follows: Let

u be a class of real numbers, and let x be a real number (which may or

may not be a u) such that the lower limit of the absolute values of the

  differences of x from terms of u other than x is zero; then the class of

  terms x satisfying this condition is the first derivative of u.* This

  definition is virtually identical with that of Cantor, but it brings out more

  explicitly the connection of the derivative with limits. A series, then, is

  perfect, when it consists of exactly the same terms as its first derivative;

i.e. when all its points are limiting-points, and all its limiting-points

belong to it.

274. But with regard to the latter point, namely, that all limiting-points of

the series must belong to it, some explanation is necessary. Take, for

  example, the series of rational numbers. Every rational number is the

  limit of some series of rational numbers, and thus the rationals are

  contained in their first derivative. But as regards those series of rationals

  which do not have a rational limit, we agreed in the preceding chapter

that they do not have a limit at all. Hence all series of rationals which

  have a limit have a rational limit, and therefore, by the letter of the

  definition, the rationals should form a perfect series. But this is not the

  case. Cantor, as we saw in connection with irrationals, believes, what we

were compelled to regard as erroneous, that every series fulfilling certain

  conditions, which may be called the conditions of convergency, must

  have a limit. Hence he regards those series of rationals which have no

  rational limit as having an irrational limit, and as therefore having a limit

not belonging to the series of rationals; and therefore the series of

  rationals does not contain all the terms of its first derivative. In fact, the

  first derivative of the rational numbers is held to be the real numbers. But

  when we regard the real numbers as segments of rationals, it is

  impossible to take this view; and when we deny the existence-theorem

for limits, it is necessary to modify Cantor’s definition of perfection.†

This modification we must now examine.

  What we must say is, that a series is perfect when all its points are

limiting-points, and when further, any series being chosen out of our first

series, if this new series is of the sort which is usually regarded as defining a

limit, then it actually has a limit belonging to our first series. To make thisstatement precise, we must examine what are the conditions usually

considered as defining a limit. In the case of denumerable series, they are

simple, and have already been set forth. They come to this, that, given any

distance ε, however small, all the terms of our series after some definite term,

say the mth, are such that any two of them have a difference whose absolute

value is less than ε. This statement, it will be seen, involves either number or

quantity, i.e. it is not purely ordinal. It is a curious fact that, though the

supposed condition for the existence of a limit cannot, by our present method,

be stated in purely ordinal terms, the limit of a denumerable series, if there be

one, can always be defined in purely ordinal terms. I shall distinguish

Cantor’s fundamental series in a compact series into progressions and

regressions, according as earlier terms have to later ones always the relation

P, or always the relation  (where P is the generating relation of the compact

series in which the said progressions and regressions are contained). The

compact series is further assumed to be complete. A term x is then the limit of

a progression, if every term of the progression has to x the relation P, while

every term which has to x the relation P also has this relation to some term of

the progression. This definition, it will be seen, is purely ordinal; and a

similar definition will apply to a regression.

Let us examine next what are the usual conditions for the existence of a

limit to a non-denumerable series. When we come to examine non-numerical

series, we shall find it inconvenient to be restricted to denumerable series,

and therefore it will be well to consider other series at once. Here, of course,

if any denumerable series contained in our larger series fulfils the conditions

for a limit, there will be a corresponding definition of a limiting-point in our

larger series. And the upper or lower limit of the whole or part of our larger

series, if there is one, may be defined exactly as in the case of a progression

or a regression. But general conditions for the existence of a limit cannot be

laid down, except by reference to denumerable series contained in our larger

series. And it will be observed that Cantor’s definition of a limiting-point

assumes the existence of such a point, and cannot be turned into a definition

of the conditions under which there are such points. This illustrates the great

importance of Cantor’s fundamental series.

The method of segments will, however, throw some light on this matter.

We saw in Chapter 33 that any class of terms in a series defines a segment,

and that this segment sometimes can, but sometimes cannot, be defined by a

single term. When it can be so defined, this term is its upper limit: and if thisterm does not belong to the class by which the segment was defined, then it is

also the upper limit of that class. But when the segment has no upper limit,

then the class by which the segment was defined also has no upper limit. In

all cases, however—and this is one of the chief virtues of segments—the

segment defined by an infinite class which has no upper limit is the upper

limit of the segments defined by the several members of the class. Thus,

whether or not the class has an upper limit, the segments which its various

terms define always have one—provided, that is, that the compact series in

which the class is contained has terms coming after all terms of the class.

We can now express, without assuming the existence of limits in cases

where this is not demonstrable, what is meant by a series containing its first

derivative. When any class of terms is contained in a compact series, the

conditions which are commonly said to insure the existence of an upper limit

to the class, though they do not insure this, do insure an upper limit to the

class of segments defined by the several members of the class. And as

regards lower limits, the same proposition holds concerning what we called

upper segments. Hence we may define: A class u of terms forming the whole

or part of a series is perfect when each of the terms of u is the upper or lower

limit of some class contained in u, and when, if v be any class contained in u,

and the lower segments defined by the several members of v have an upper

limit, or the upper segments have a lower limit, this limiting segment is one

of those that can be defined by a single term of u, i.e. have a term of u for

their upper or lower limit respectively. This definition, it must be admitted, is

more complicated than Cantor’s, but it is free from the unjustifiable

assumption of the existence of limits.

We may repeat the definition of perfection in what is perhaps less difficult

language. Given any series, and any class of terms u contained in this series,

there are an upper and a lower segment corresponding to every term of u.

Any infinite set of terms v being chosen out of u, there are certain conditions

which are commonly said to insure that v has an upper limit, which, it is

admitted, may belong neither to u, nor to the series in which u is contained.

What these conditions do insure, however, is that the class of lower segments

corresponding to v has an upper limit. If the series is perfect, v will have an

upper limit whenever the corresponding class of segments has one, and this

upper limit of v will be a term of u. The definition of perfection requires that

this should hold both for upper and lower limits, and for any class v contained

in u.275. As the question concerning the existence of limits, which has

  necessitated the above complication, is one of some philosophical

  importance, I shall repeat the arguments against assuming the existence

of limits in the class of series to which the rational numbers belong.

  Where a series is imperfect, while its first derivative is perfect, there the

  first derivative is logically prior to its own formation. That is to say, it is

only by presupposing the perfect series that it can be shown to be the

  derivative of the imperfect series. We have already seen that this is the

case with individual irrational numbers; it is easy to see that the principle

is general. Wherever the derivative contains a term not belonging to the

  original series, that term is the limit of some denumerable series forming

an integral part of the first series. If this series with a limit has the general

term a, then—wording the definition so as not to apply only to series of
        n

  numbers—there is always a definite number m, for any specified distance

ε, however small, such that, if n is greater than m, the distance between

a +  and a is less than ε, whatever positive integer p may be. From this
  npn

it is inferred that the series (a) has a limit, and it is shown that, in many
                                    n

cases, this limit cannot belong to the series out of which the series (a)
                                                                                    n

was chosen. But the inference that there is a limit is precarious. It may be

  supported either by previous knowledge of the term which is the limit, or

by some axiom necessitating the existence of such a term. When the term

  which is the limit is independently known, it may be easily shown to be

the limit. But when it is not known, it cannot be proved to exist at all,

  unless we introduce some axiom of continuity. Such an axiom is

  introduced by Dedekind, but we saw that his axiom is unsatisfactory. The

  principle of abstraction, which shows that two coherent series have

  something in common, is fully satisfied by segments. And in some cases,

among which is that of the rationals, it seems that the constitutive relation

of the imperfect series cannot hold between any terms not belonging to

this series, so that the existence of limits not belonging to the series is

  wholly impossible. For a limit must have a certain position in a series of

  which the series which it limits forms part, and this requires some

  constitutive relation of which the limit, as well as the terms limited, must

be capable. An independent complete series, such as the rationals,

  cannot, in fact, have any limiting-points not belonging to it. For, if R be

the constitutive relation, and two terms a, b, have the relation R, any thirdterm c, which has this relation or its converse to either, and therefore

both, of the terms a, b, belongs to the same series as a and b. But the

limit, if it exists, must have the constitutive relation to the terms which it

  limits; hence it must belong to the complete series to which they belong.

  Hence any series which has actual limiting-points not belonging to it is

only part of some complete series; and a complete series which is not

  perfect is one in which the limits defined in the usual way, but not

  belonging to the series, do not exist at all. Hence, in any complete series,

  either some definable limits do not exist, or the series contains its first

  derivative.

In order to render the arbitrariness of assuming the existence of limits still

more evident, let us endeavour to set up an axiom of continuity more

irreproachable than Dedekind’s. We shall find that it can still be denied with

perfect impunity.

  When a number of positions in a series continually differ less and less from

each other, and are known to be all on one side of some given position, there

must exist (so our axiom might run) some position to which they approximate

indefinitely, so that no distance can be specified so small that they will not

approach nearer than by this distance. If this axiom be admitted, it will follow

that all imperfect series, whose first derivatives are perfect, presuppose these

first derivatives, and are to be regarded as selections from them. Let us

examine the consequences of denying our axiom in the case of a series of

numbers. In this case, the unwary might suppose, the position next to all the

terms a, but not belonging to them, would be (say) p, where p − a is greater
      nn

than ε, for a suitable value of ε, whatever n may be. But if our series is

compact, there is a term between p and p − ε, say p' . Thus p' − a is less than
                                                                            n

p − a, whatever n may be. Thus p' is nearer all the a’s than p is, contrary to
    n

the hypothesis. But the above denial was not direct, and the fact that it

seemed correct illustrates the fallacies which in this subject are hard to avoid.

The axiom is: There is a term to which the a’s approach as near as we like.

The denial was: There is a term nearest to the a’s, but at a finite distance. The

denial should have been: There is no term to which the a’s approach as near

as we like. In other words, whatever term we specify, say p, there is some

finite distance ε, such that p − a is greater than ε, whatever a may be. This
                                    nn

is true in the case of series of rational numbers which have no rational limit.

In this case, there is no term nearest to the a’s, but at a finite distance, whilealso, whatever term beyond all the a’s we specify (except where our series

has a rational limit), none of the a’s approach nearer to this term than by a

certain finite distance ε. Every term beyond the a’s is at more than some

finite distance from all of them, but there is no finite distance which every

term beyond the a’s exceeds. The introduction of irrationals introduces

symmetry into this odd state of things, so that there is a term to which the a’s

approach indefinitely, as well as a series of terms indefinitely approaching the

a’s. When irrationals are not admitted, if we have a term p after all the a’s,

and a small distance ε, then, if ε be specified, p can be chosen so that p − a is
                                                                                        n

less than ε, whatever n may be; but if p be specified, an ε can always be

found (except when the limit is rational) so that p − a is greater than ε,
                                                              n

whatever n may be. This state of things, though curious, is not self-

contradictory. The admission of irrationals, as opposed to segments, is thus

logically unnecessary; as it is also mathematically superfluous, and fatal to

the theory of rationals, there are no reasons in its favour, and strong reasons

against it. Hence, finally, any axiom designed to show the existence of limits

in cases where they cannot otherwise be shown to exist, is to be rejected; and

Cantor’s definition of perfection must be modified as above. This conclusion

will, in future, be regarded as established.

  Having now analysed Cantor’s earlier definition of continuity, I shall

proceed to examine his later ordinal definition, and the application of its

various portions to series more general than those of numbers, showing, if

possible, the exact points in which these various portions are required.


* Logic, Wallace’s Translation, p. 188; Werke, v, p. 201.

† Phil. Werke, Gerhardt’s ed., Vol. ii, p. 515. But cf. Cassirer, Leibniz’

System, Berlin, 1901, p. 183.

* Mannichfaltigkeitslehre, p. 28.

† Acta Math., ii, p. 403.

‡ Acta Math., ii, pp. 405, 406; Mannichfaltigkeitslehre, p. 31.

§ The words “in several ways” seem superfluous. They are omitted by

Vivanti: see Formulaire de Mathématiques, Vol. i, vi, § 1, No. 22.

* Acta Math, ii, p. 405.

† Ib., pp. 341–4.

* Formulaire, Vol. ii, No. 3 (1899), § 71, 1·0 and 4 ·0.

† This point is ably discussed by Couturat, Revue de Mét. et de Morale,

March, 1900, p. 167.36


ORDINAL CONTINUITY*




276. The definition of continuity which we examined in the preceding

  chapter was, as we saw, not purely ordinal; it demanded, in at least two

  points, some reference to either numbers or numerically measurable

  magnitudes. Nevertheless continuity seems like a purely ordinal notion;

and this has led Cantor to construct a definition which is free from all

  elements extraneous to order.† I shall now examine this definition, as

well as others which may be suggested. We shall find that, so long as all

  references to number and quantity are excluded, there are theorems of

great importance, especially as regards fundamental series, which, with

any suggested ordinal definition except that of Cantor, remain

  indemonstrable, and are presumably sometimes false‡—a fact from

  which the merits of Cantor’s definition, now to be given, are apparent.

277. Cantor’s definition of the continuum in his later article§ is as follows.

We start (§ 9) from the type of series presented by the rational numbers

  greater than 0 and less than 1, in their order of magnitude. This type we

call η. A series of this type we define by the following marks. (1) It is

  denumerable, that is, by taking its terms in a suitable order (which,

  however, must be different from that in which they are given), we can

give them a one-one correspondence with the finite integers. (2) The

  series has no first or last term. (3) There is a term between any two, i.e.

the series is compact (überall dicht). It is then proved that these three

  characteristics completely define the type of order presented by the

  rationals, that is to say, there is a one-one correspondence, between any

  two series having these three properties, in which earlier terms

  correspond to earlier terms, and later ones to later ones. This is

  established by the use of mathematical induction, which is applicable in

  virtue of the fact that series of this type are denumerable. Thus all series

  which are denumerable, endless,* and compact, are ordinally similar. Wenow proceed (§ 10) to the consideration of fundamental series contained

in any one-dimensional series M. We show (as has been already

  explained) what is meant by calling two fundamental series coherent, and

we give an ordinal definition of the limit of a fundamental series, namely,

in the case of a progression, the limit comes after the whole progression,

but every term before the limit comes before some term of the

  progression; with a corresponding definition for the limit of a regression.

We prove that no fundamental series can have more than one limit, and

that, if a fundamental series has a limit, this is also the limit of all

  coherent series; also that two fundamental series, of which one is part of

the other, are coherent. Any term of M which is the limit of some

  fundamental series in M is called a principal term of M. If all the terms of

M are principal terms, M is called condensed in itself (insichdicht). If

  every fundamental series in M has a limit in M, M is called closed

  (abgeschlossen).† If M is both closed and condensed in itself, it is

  perfect. All these properties, if they belong to M, belong to any series

  which is ordinally similar to M. With these preparations, we advance at

last to the definition of the continuum (§ 11). Let θ be the type of the

  series to which belong the real numbers from 0 to 1, both inclusive. Then

θ, as we know, is a perfect type. But this alone does not characterize θ. It

has further the property of containing within itself a series of the type η,

to which the rationals belong, in such a way that between any two terms

of the θ-series there are terms of the η-series. Hence the following

  definition of the continuum:

A one-dimensional continuum M is a series which (1) is perfect, (2)

contains within itself a denumerable series S of which there are terms

between any two terms of M.

In this definition, it is not necessary to add the other properties which are

required to show that S is of the type η. For if S had a first or last term, this

would be also the first or last term of M; hence we could take it away from S,

and the remaining series would still satisfy the condition (2), but would have

no first or last term; and the condition (2) together with (1) insures that S is a

compact series. Cantor proves that any series M satisfying the above

conditions is ordinally similar to the number-continuum, i.e. the real numbers

from 0 to 1, both inclusive; and hence it follows that the above definition

includes precisely the same class of series as those that were included in his

former definition. He does not assert that his new definition is purely ordinal,and it might be doubted, at first sight, whether it is so. Let us see for

ourselves whether any extra-ordinal notions are contained in it.

278. The only point as to which any doubt could arise is with regard to the

  condition of being denumerable. To be a denumerable collection is to be

a collection whose terms are all the terms of some progression. This

  notion, so far, is purely ordinal. But in the case supposed, that of the

  rationals or of any ordinally similar series, the terms forming the series

must be capable of two orders, in one of which they form a compact

  series, while in the other they form a progression. To discover whether or

not a given set of terms is capable of these two orders, will in general

  demand other than ordinal conditions; nevertheless, the notion itself is

  purely ordinal. Now we know, from the similarity of all such series to the

  series of rationals (which involves only ordinal ideas), that no such series

is perfect. But it remains to be seen whether we can prove this without

  appealing to the special properties of the rationals which result from there

  being a series in which there is distance. We know, as a matter of fact,

that no denumerable series can be perfect,* but we want here a purely

  ordinal proof of this theorem. Such a proof, however, is easily given. For

take the terms of our denumerable compact series S in the order in which

they form a progression, and in this order call them u. Starting with the

  first in this order, which we will call x, there must be one which, in the
                                              0

  other order S, follows this term. Take the first such term, x, as the
                                                                      1

  second in a fundamental series v. This term has a finite number of

  predecessors in the progression u, and therefore has successors in S

  which are also successors in u; for the number of successors in S is

  always infinite. Take the first of these common successors, say x, as the
                                                                              2

  third term of our fundamental series v. Proceeding in this way, we can

  construct an ascending fundamental series in S, the terms of which have

the same order in u as in S. This series cannot have a limit in S, for each

term x succeeds, in S, every term which precedes it in u. Hence any term
        n

of S will be surpassed by some term x of our fundamental series v, and
                                              n

  hence this fundamental series has no limit in S. The theorem that a

  denumerable endless series cannot be perfect is, therefore, purely ordinal.

  From this point onwards there is no difficulty, and our former theory of

  segments enables us to state the matter simply. Given a denumerable,

  endless, compact series S, construct all the segments defined by  fundamental series in S. These form a perfect series, and between any

  two terms of the series of segments there is a segment whose upper (or

  lower) limit is a term of S. Segments of this kind, which may be called

  rational segments, are a series of the same type as S, and are contained in

the whole series of segments in the required manner. Hence the ordinal

  definition of the continuum is complete.

279. It must not be supposed that continuity as above defined can only be

  exemplified, in Arithmetic, by the devious course from integers to

  rationals, and thence to real numbers. On the contrary, the integers

  themselves can be made to illustrate continuity. Consider all possible

  infinite classes of integers, and let them be arranged on the following

  plan. Of two classes u, v, of which the smallest number in u is less than

the smallest in v, u comes first. If the first n terms of u and v are identical,
                  thth
but the (n + 1) terms are different, that which has the smaller (n + 1)

term is to come first. This series has a first term, namely, the whole class

of the integers, but no last term. Any completed segment of the series,

  however, is a continuous series, as the reader can easily see for himself.

The denumerable compact series contained in it is composed of those

  infinite classes which contain all numbers greater than some number, i.e.

  those containing all but a finite number of numbers. Thus classes of finite

  integers alone suffice to generate continuous series.

280. The above definition, it will be observed, depends upon progressions.

As progressions are the very essence of discreteness, it seems paradoxical

that we should require them in defining continuity.* And, after all, as it is

certain that people have not in the past associated any precise idea with

the word continuity, the definition we adopt is, in some degree, arbitrary.

  Series having the properties enumerated in Cantor’s definition would

  generally be called continuous, but so would many others which his

  definition excludes. In any case it will be a valuable inquiry to ask what

can be done by compact series without progressions.

Let u be any endless compact series, whose generating relation is P, and

concerning which nothing further is known. Then, by means of any term or

any class of terms in u, we can define a segment of u. Let us denote by U the

class of all lower segments of u. A lower segment, it may be well to repeat, is

a class v of terms contained in u, not null, and not coextensive with u, and

such that v has no last term, and every term preceding a v is a v. In the

converse case, when v has no first term, and every term following a v is a v, vis called an upper segment. It is then easy to prove that every segment

consists of all the terms preceding (or following) either some single term of

u, or a variable term of some class of terms of u; and that every single term,

and every class of terms, defines an upper and a lower segment in this

manner. Then, if V

  denote the class of upper segments, it is easy to prove that both U and V

are again endless compact series, whose generating relation is that of whole

or part; while if u has one or two ends, so have U and V, though the end-

terms are not segments according to the definition. If we now proceed to the

consideration of segments in U or V (U say), we shall find that the segment of

U’s defined by any class whatever of U’s can always be defined by a single

U, which, if the class is infinite and has no last term, is the upper limit of the

class, and which, in all cases, is the logical sum of all the members of the

class—members which, it must be remembered, are all themselves classes

contained in u.* Hence all classes contained in U and having no last term

have an upper limit in U; and also (what is a distinct proposition) all classes

contained in U and having no first term have a lower limit in U, except in the

case where the lower limit is the logical zero or null-class; and the lower limit

is always the logical product of all the classes composing the class which it

limits. Thus by adding to U the null-class, we insure that U shall be a closed

series. There is a sense in which U is condensed in itself, namely, this: every

term of U is the upper limit of a suitably chosen class contained in U, for

every term is the upper limit of the segment of U’s which it defines; and

every term of U is a lower limit of the class of those U’s of which it is a

proper part. But there is absolutely no proof, so far at least as I have been

able to discover, that every term of U is the upper or lower limit of a

fundamental series. There is no à priori reason why, in any series, the limit of

any class should always be also the limit of a fundamental series; this seems,

in fact, to be a prerogative of series of the types to which rationals and real

numbers respectively belong. In our present case, at least, though our series

is, in the above general sense, condensed in itself, there seems no reason for

supposing its terms to be all of them limits of fundamental series, and in this

special sense the series may not be condensed in itself.

281. It is instructive to examine the result of confining the terms of U to

such segments as can be defined by fundamental series. In this case it is

well to consider, in addition to upper and lower segments, their

  supplements, as they may be called, of which I shall shortly give the  definition. Let a compact series v be given, generated by a transitive

  asymmetrical relation P, and let u be any fundamental series in v. If

  earlier terms of u have to later ones the relation P, I shall call u a

  progression; if the relation , I shall call u a regression. If now w be any

class whatever contained in v, w defines, as we have already seen, four

  other classes in v, namely: (1) the class of terms before every w, which I

  shall call wπ; (2) the class of terms after every w, which I shall call w; (3)

the class of terms before some w, which I shall call πw; (4) the class of

  terms after some w, which I shall call w. The classes (3) and (4) are lower

and upper segments respectively; the classes (1) and (2) are supplements to

(4) and (3) respectively, and I shall call them supplemental segments.

  When w has an upper limit, this is the first term of w and thus w is not a

  segment, since no upper segment has a first term. But when w has no upper

limit, then, whether w be finite or infinite, w is a segment. Similar

  remarks apply to lower limits. If w has a last term, this belongs neither to

πw nor to w, but all other terms of v belong to one or other class; if w has

no last term, all terms of v belong to πw or w. Similar remarks apply to

wπ and w. Applying these general definitions to the cases of progressions

and regressions, we shall find that, for a progression, only the classes (2)

and (3) are important; for a regression, only the classes (1) and (4). The

  question where a progression begins or a regression ends is quite

  unimportant. Since a progression has no last term, and a regression no first

term, the segment defined by either, together with its supplement, contains

  every term of v. Whether progressions and regressions in v have limits

  always, sometimes, or never, there seems no way of deciding from the

  given premisses. I have not been able to discover an instance of a compact

  series where they never have limits, but I cannot find any proof that such

an instance is impossible.

  Proceeding now to classes of segments, as we proceeded before to our

class U, we have here four such classes to consider, namely: (1) The class vπ,

each of whose terms is the class uπ defined by some regression u, i.e., the

terms of v which come before all the terms of some regression in v; (2) the

class v, consisting of all the classes u defined by progressions u; (3) the

class πv, whose terms are πu, where u is some progression; (4) the class vπ,

whose terms are uπ, where u is some regression. Each of these four classes is

a class of classes, for its terms are classes contained in v. Each of the four is

itself a compact series. There is no way of proving, so far as I know, that (1)and (3), or (2) and (4), have any common terms. Each pair would have a

common term if v contained a progression and a regression which were

coherent, and had no limit in v, but there is no way of discovering whether

this case ever arises in the given series v.

  When we come to examine whether the four classes thus defined are

condensed in themselves, we obtain the most curious results. Every

fundamental series in any one of the four classes has a limit, but not

necessarily in the series of which its terms are composed, and conversely,

every term of each of our four classes is the limit of a fundamental series, but

not necessarily of a series contained in the same class to which the limiting

term belongs. The state of things, in fact, is as follows:


Every progression in vπ or πv has a limit in πv.

Every progression in v or v has a limit in v.

Every regression in vπ or πv has a limit in vπ.

Every regression in v or v has a limit in v.

Every term of vπ is the limit of a regression in vπ and of one in πv.

Every term of v is the limit of a regression in v and of one in v.

Every term of πv is the limit of a progression in vπ and of one in πv.

Every term of v is the limit of a progression in v and of one in v.

Hence vπ is identical with the class of limits of regressions in vπ or πv;

v is identical with the class of limits of regressions in v or v;

πv is identical with the class of limits of progression in vπ or πv;

πv is identical with the class of limits of progressions in v or v.


  Thus each of our four classes has a kind of one-sided perfection; two of the

four are perfect on one side, the other two on the other. But I cannot prove of

any one of the four classes that it is wholly perfect. We might attempt the

combination of vπ and πv, and also of v and v. For vπ and πv together form

one series, whose generating relation is still whole and part. This series will

be perfect, and will contain the limits alike of progressions and of regressions

in itself. But this series may not be compact; for if there be any progression u

and regression u' in v, which both have the same limit in v (a case which, as

we know, occurs in some compact series), then πu and u' π will be

consecutive terms of the series formed of πv and vπ together, for u' π will

contain the common limit, while πu will not contain it, but all other terms of vwill belong to both or to neither. Hence when our series is compact, we

cannot show that it is perfect; and when we have made it perfect, we can

show that it may not be compact. And a series which is not compact can

hardly be called continuous.

  Although we can prove that, in our original compact series v, there are an

infinite number of progressions coherent with a given progression and having

no term in common with it, we cannot prove that there is even one regression

coherent with a given progression; nor can we prove that any progression or

regression in v has a limit, or that any term of v is a limit of a progression or

regression. We cannot prove that any progression u and regression u' are such

that πu = u' π, nor yet that πu and u' π may differ by only a single term of v.

Nor, finally, can we prove that any single progression in vπ has a limit in vπ,

with similar propositions concerning the other three classes v, πv, v. At

least, I am unable to discover any way of proving any of these theorems,

though in the absence of instances of the falsity of some of them it seems not

improbable that these may be demonstrable. If it is the fact—as it seems to be

—that, starting only from a compact series, so many of the usual theorems

are indemonstrable, we see how fundamental is the dependence of Cantor’s

ordinal theory upon the condition that the compact series from which we start

is to be denumerable. As soon as this assumption is made, it becomes easy to

prove all those of the above propositions which hold concerning the types η

and θ respectively. This is a fact which is obviously of considerable

philosophical importance; and it is with a view of bringing it out clearly that I

have dwelt so long upon compact series which are not assumed to be

denumerable.

282. The remark which we made just now, that two compact series may be

  combined to form one which sometimes has consecutive terms, is rather

  curious, and applies equally to continuity as defined by Cantor. Segments

of rationals form a continuous series, and so do completed segments (i.e.

  segments together with their limits); but the two together form a series

  which is not compact, and therefore not continuous. It is certainly

  contrary to the usual idea of continuity that a continuous series should

  cease to be so merely by the interpolation of new terms between the old

ones. This should, according to the usual notions, make our series still

  more continuous. It might be suggested that, philosophically speaking, a

  series cannot be called continuous unless it is complete, i.e. contains a

certain term together with all the terms having to the given term a  specified asymmetrical transitive relation or its converse. If we add this

  condition, the series of segments of rationals is not complete with regard

to the relation by which we have hitherto regarded it as generated, since it

does not consist of all classes of rationals to which a given segment has

the relation of whole and part, and each of which contains all terms less

than any one of its terms—this condition is also satisfied by completed

  segments. But every series is complete with regard to some relation,

  simple or complex. This is the reason why completeness need not, from a

  mathematical standpoint, be mentioned in the definition of continuity,

  since it can always be insured by a suitable choice of the generating

  relation.

We have now seen in what Cantor’s definition of continuity consists, and

we have seen that, while instances fulfilling the definition may be found in

Arithmetic, the definition itself is purely ordinal—the only datum required is

a denumerable compact series. Whether or not the kind of series which

Cantor defines as continuous is thought to be the most similar to what has

hitherto been vaguely denoted by the word, the definition itself, and the steps

leading to it, must be acknowledged to be a triumph of analysis and

generalization.

Before entering upon the philosophical questions raised by the continuum,

it will be well to continue our review of Cantor’s most remarkable theorems,

by examining next his transfinite cardinal and ordinal numbers. Of the two

problems with which this Part is concerned, we have hitherto considered only

continuity; it is now time to consider what mathematics has to say concerning

infinity. Only when this has been accomplished, shall we be in a position

adequately to discuss the closely allied philosophical problems of infinity and

continuity.


* The present chapter deals with the same subject as M. Couturat’s article,

“Sur la définition du Continu”, Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale, March,

1900. I agree in the main with this article, in which much of what I said in the

preceding chapter, and shall say in this, will be found.

† Math. Annalen, xlvi.

‡ Mathematical proofs of such theorems as are not already well known will

be found in R. d. M., vii, 3.

§ Math. Annalen, xlvi, § 11.

* I.e. having neither a beginning nor an end.† Not to be confounded with the elementary sense of a closed series

discussed in Part IV.

* Acta Mathematica, ii, p. 409.

* Mr Whitehead has shown that the following simpler definition is

equivalent to Cantor’s. A series is continuous when (1) every segment, upper

or lower, has a limit, and the series has a first and a last term; (2) a

denumerable compact series is contained in it in such a way that there are

terms of this latter series between any two terms of our original series. In this

definition, progressions are relevant only in defining a denumerable series.

* The definition of the logical sum of the members of a class of classes, in

a form not involving finitude, is, I believe, due to Peano. It is as follows: let

w be a class of classes; then the logical sum of the members of w is the class

of terms x such that there is some class belonging to w, to which x belongs.

See Formulaire, Vol. ii, Part I (1897), No. 461.37


TRANSFINITE CARDINALS




283. The mathematical theory of infinity may almost be said to begin with

  Cantor. The Infinitesimal Calculus, though it cannot wholly dispense

with infinity, has as few dealings with it as possible, and contrives to hide

it away before facing the world. Cantor has abandoned this cowardly

  policy, and has brought the skeleton out of its cupboard. He has been

  emboldened in this course by denying that it is a skeleton. Indeed, like

  many other skeletons, it was wholly dependent on its cupboard, and

  vanished in the light of day. Speaking without metaphor, Cantor has

  established a new branch of Mathematics, in which, by mere correctness

of deduction, it is shown that the supposed contradictions of infinity all

  depend upon extending, to the infinite, results which, while they can be

  proved concerning finite numbers, are in no sense necessarily true of all

  numbers. In this theory, it is necessary to treat separately of cardinals and

  ordinals, which are far more diverse in their properties when they are

  transfinite than when they are finite. Following the same order as

  previously—the order which seems to me to be alone philosophically

  correct—I shall begin with transfinite cardinals.*

284. The transfinite cardinals, which are also called powers, may be defined

in the first place so as to include the finite cardinals, leaving it to be

  investigated in what respects the finite and the transfinite are

  distinguished. Thus Cantor gives the following definition.†

“We call the power or cardinal number of M that general idea which, by

means of our active faculty of thought, is deduced from the collection M, by

abstracting from the nature of its diverse elements and from the order in

which they are given.”

This, it will be seen, is merely a phrase indicating what is to be spoken of,

not a true definition. It presupposes that every collection has some such

property as that indicated—a property, that is to say, independent of thenature of its terms and of their order; depending, we might feel tempted to

add, only upon their number. In fact, number is taken by Cantor to be a

primitive idea, and it is, in his theory, a primitive proposition that every

collection has a number. He is therefore consistent in giving a specification of

number which is not a formal definition.

By means, however, of the principle of abstraction, we can give, as we saw

in Part II, a formal definition of cardinal numbers. This method, in essentials,

is given by Cantor immediately after the above informal definition. We have

already seen that, if two classes be called similar when there is a one-one

relation which couples every term of either with one and only one term of the

other, then similarity is symmetrical and transitive, and is reflexive for all

classes. A one-one relation, it should be observed, can be defined without any

reference to number, as follows: A relation is one-one when, if x has the

relation to y, and x' differs from x, y' from y, then it follows that x' does not

have the relation to y, nor x to y' . In this there is no reference to number; and

the definition of similarity also is therefore free from such reference. Since

similarity is reflexive. transitive and symmetrical, it can be analysed into the

product of a many-one relation and its converse, and indicates at least one

common property of similar classes. This property, or, if there be several, a

certain one of these properties, we may call the cardinal number of similar

classes, and the many-one relation is that of a class to the number of its terms.

In order to fix upon one definite entity as the cardinal number of a given

class, we decide to identify the number of a class with the whole class of

classes similar to the given class. This class, taken as a single entity, has, as

the proof of the principle of abstraction shows, all the properties required of a

cardinal number. The method, however, is philosophically subject to the

doubt resulting from the contradiction set forth in Part I, Chapter 10.*

In this way we obtain a definition of the cardinal number of a class. Since

similarity is reflexive for classes, every class has a cardinal number. It might

be thought that this definition would only apply to finite classes, since, to

prove that all terms of one class are correlated with all of another, complete

enumeration might be thought necessary. This, however, is not the case, as

may be seen at once by substituting any for all—a word which is generally

preferable where infinite classes are concerned. Two classes u, v are similar

when there is some one-one relation R such that, if x be any u, there is some

term y of v such that xRy; and if y' be any v, there is some term x' of u such

that x' Ry' . Here there is no need whatever of complete enumeration, but onlyof propositions concerning any u and any v. For example, the points on a

given line are similar to the lines through a given point and meeting the given

line; for any point on the given line determines one and only one line through

the given point, and any line through the given point meeting the given line

determines one and only one point on the given line. Thus where our classes

are infinite, we need some general proposition about any term of either class

to establish similarity, but we do not need enumeration. And in order to prove

that every (or any) class has a cardinal number, we need only the observation

that any term of any class is identical with itself. No other general proposition

about the terms of a class is requisite for the reflexive property of similarity.

285. Let us now examine the chief properties of cardinal numbers. I shall

not give proofs of any of these properties, since I should merely repeat

what has been said by Cantor. Considering first their relations to classes,

we may observe that, if there be two sets of classes which are similar in

pairs, and no two of the one set have any common part, nor yet any two

of the other set, then the logical sum of all the classes of one set is similar

to the logical sum of all the classes of the other set. This proposition,

  familiar in the case of finite classes, holds also of infinite classes. Again,

the cardinal number of a class u is said to be greater than that of a class v,

  when no part of v is similar to u, but there is a part of u which is similar

to v. In this case, also, the number of v is said to be less than that of u. It

can be proved that, if there is a part of u which is similar to v, and a part

of v which is similar to u, then u and v are similar.* Thus equal, greater,

and less are all incompatible with each other, all transitive, and the last

  two asymmetrical. We cannot prove at all simply—and it seems more or

  less doubtful whether we can prove at all—that of two different cardinal

  numbers one must be greater and the other less.† It is to be observed that

the definition of greater contains a condition not required in the case of

  finite cardinals. If the number of v be finite, it is sufficient that a proper

part of u should be similar to v. But among transfinite cardinals this is not

  sufficient. For the general definition of greater, therefore, both parts are

  necessary. This difference between finite and transfinite cardinals results

from the defining difference of finite and infinite, namely that when the

  number of a class is not finite, it always has a proper part which is similar

to the whole; that is, every infinite class contains a part (and therefore an

  infinite number of parts) having the same number as itself. Certain

  particular cases of this proposition have long been known, and have been  regarded as constituting a contradiction in the notion of infinite number.

  Leibniz, for example, points out* that, since every number can be

  doubled, the number of numbers is the same as the number of even

  numbers, whence he deduces that there is no such thing as infinite

  number. The first to generalize this property of infinite collections, and to

treat it as not contradictory, was, so far as I know, Bolzano.† But the

  strict proof of the proposition, when the finite cardinals are defined by

  means of mathematical induction, as well as the demonstration that it is

not contradictory, are due to Cantor and Dedekind. The proposition itself

may be taken as the definition of the transfinite among cardinal numbers,

for it is a property belonging to all of them, and to none of the finite

  cardinals.‡ Before examining this property further, however, we must

  acquire a more intimate acquaintance with the other properties of cardinal

  numbers.

286. I come now to the strictly arithmetical properties of cardinals, i.e. their

  addition, multiplication, etc.§ The addition of numbers is defined, when

they are transfinite, exactly as it was defined in the case of finite

  numbers, namely by means of logical addition. The number of the logical

  sum of two classes which have no common term is the sum of the

  numbers of the two classes. This can be extended by successive steps to

any finite number of classes; for an infinite number of classes, forming a

class of classes, the sum of their numbers, if no two have any common

term, is still the number of their logical sum—and the logical sum of any

class of classes, finite or infinite, is logically definable. For sums of two

or three numbers, so defined, the commutative and associative laws still

hold, i.e. we still have

      a + b = b + a and a + (b + c) = (a + b) + c.

 


The multiplication of two numbers is thus defined by Cantor: If M and N

be two classes, we can combine any element of M with any element of N to

form a couple (m, n); the number of all such couples is the product of the

numbers of M and N. If we wish to avoid the notion of a couple in the

definition, we may substitute the following:¶ let u be a class of classes, a in

number; let each of these classes belonging to u contain b terms; and let no

two of these classes have any common term; then ab is the number of the

logical sum of all these classes. This definition is still purely logical, andavoids the notion of a couple. Multiplication so defined obeys the

commutative, associative, and distributive laws, i.e. we have


      ab = ba, a (bc) = (ab) c, a (b + c) = ab + ac.

 


  Hence addition and multiplication of cardinals, even when these are

transfinite, satisfy all the elementary rules of Arithmetic.
                                                b
The definition of powers of a number (a) is also effected logically (ib. §

4). For this purpose, Cantor first defines what he calls a covering (Belegung)

of one class N by another M. This is a law by which, to every element n of N

is joined one and only one element m of M, but the same element m may be

joined to many elements of N. That is, a Belegung is a many-one relation,

whose domain includes N, and which correlates with the terms of N always

terms of M. If a be the number of terms in M, b the number in N, then the
                                                                  b
number of all such many-one relations is defined to be a. It is easy to see

that, for finite numbers, this definition agrees with the usual one. For

transfinite numbers, indices have still the usual properties, i.e.


          bcbccccbcbc
      aa = a + , ab = (ab),(a) = a.

 


                                b
In the case where a = 2, a is capable of a simpler definition, deduced from
                      b
the above. If a = 2, 2 will be the number of ways in which b terms can be

related each to one of two terms. Now when those which are related to one of

the two are given, the rest are related to the other. Hence it is enough, in each

case, to specify the class of terms related to one of the two. Hence we get in

each case a class chosen out of the b terms, and in all cases we get all such
                  b
classes. Hence 2 is the number of classes that can be formed out of b terms,

or the number of combinations of b things any number at a time—a familiar

theorem when b is finite, but still true when b is transfinite. Cantor has a
            b
proof that 2 is always greater than b—a proof which, however, leads to

difficulties when b is the number of all classes, or, more generally, when

there is some collection of b terms in which all the sets chosen out of the b

terms are themselves single terms of b.*

The definitions of multiplication given by Cantor and Vivanti require that

the number of factors in a product should be finite; and this makes itnecessary to give a new and independent definition of powers, if the exponent

is allowed to be infinite. Mr A. N. Whitehead† has given a definition of

multiplication which is free from this restriction, and therefore allows powers

to be defined in the ordinary way as products. He has also found proofs of the

formal laws when the number of summands, brackets, or factors is infinite.

The definition of a product is as follows: Let k be a class of classes, no two of

which have any terms in common. Choose out, in every possible way, one

term and only one from each of the classes composing k. By doing this in all

possible ways, we get a class of classes, called the multiplicative class of k.

The number of terms in this class is defined to be the product of the numbers

of terms in the various classes which are members of k. Where k has a finite

number of members, it is easy to see that this agrees with the usual definition.

Let u, v, w be the members of k, and let them have respectively α, β, γ terms.

Then one term can be chosen out of u in α ways: for every way there are β

ways of choosing one term out of v, and for every way of choosing one term

out of u and one out of v, there are γ way of choosing one out of ω. Hence

there are α β γ ways of choosing one term out of each, when multiplication is

understood in its usual sense. The multiplicative class is an important notion,

by means of which transfinite cardinal Arithmetic can be carried a good deal

further than Cantor has carried it.

287. All the above definitions apply to finite and transfinite integers alike,

and, as we see, the formal laws of Arithmetic still hold. Transfinite

  integers differ from finite ones, however, both in the properties of their

  relation to the classes of which they are the numbers, and also in regard

to the properties of classes of the integers themselves. Classes of

  numbers have, in fact, very different properties according as the numbers

are all finite or are in part at least transfinite.

  Among transfinite cardinals, some are particularly important, especially the

number of finite numbers, and the number of the continuum. The number of

finite numbers, it is plain, is not itself a finite number; for the class finite

number is similar to the class even finite number, which is a part of itself. Or

again the same conclusion may be proved by mathematical induction—a

principle which also serves to define finite numbers, but which, being of a

more ordinal nature, I shall not consider until the next chapter. The number of

finite numbers, then, is transfinite. This number Cantor denotes by the

Hebrew Aleph with the suffix 0; for us it will be more convenient to denote it

by α. Cantor proves that this is the least of all the transfinite cardinals. This
  0results from the following theorems (loc. cit. § 6):


A. Every transfinite collection contains others as parts whose number is α.
                                                                                        0

B. Every transfinite collection which is part of one whose number is α,
                                                                                    0

    also has the number α.
                              0

C. No finite collection is similar to any proper part of itself.

D. Every transfinite collection is similar to some proper part of itself.*


  From these theorems it follows that no transfinite number is less than the

number of finite numbers. Collections which have this number are said to be

denumerable, because it is always possible to count such collections, in the

sense that, given any term of such a collection, there is some finite number n

such that the given term is the nth. This is merely another way of saying that

all the terms of a denumerable collection have a one-one correlation with the

finite numbers, which again is equivalent to saying that the number of the

collection is the same as that of the finite numbers. It is easy to see that the

even numbers, the primes, the perfect squares, or any other class of finite

numbers having no maximum, will form a denumerable series. For, arranging

any such class in order of magnitude, there will be a finite number of terms,

say n, before any given term, which will thus be the (n + 1)th term. What is

more remarkable is, that all the rationals, and even all real roots of equations

of a finite degree and with rational coefficients (i.e. all algebraic numbers),

form a denumerable series. And even an n-dimensional series of such terms,

where n is a finite number, or the smallest transfinite ordinal, is still

denumerable.† That the rational numbers are denumerable can be easily seen,

by arranging them in the order in which those with smaller sum of numerator

and denominator precede those with larger sum, and of those with equal

sums, those with the smaller numerators precede those with larger ones. Thus

we get the series


      1, 1/2, 2, 1/3, 3, 1/4, 2/3, 3/2, 4, 1/5…

 


This is a discrete series, with a beginning and no end; every rational

number will occur in this series, and will have a finite number of

predecessors. In the other cases the proof is rather more difficult.

All denumerable series have the same cardinal number α, however
                                                                    0different they may appear. But it must not be supposed that there is no

number greater than α. On the contrary, there is an infinite series of such
                        0

numbers.‡ The transfinite cardinals are asserted by Cantor to be well-ordered,

that is, such that every one of them except the last of all (if there be a last) has

an immediate successor, and so has every class of them which has any

numbers at all after it. But they do not all have an immediate predecessor; for

example, α itself has no immediate predecessor. For if it had one, this would
          0

have to be the last of the finite numbers; but we know that there is no last

finite number. But Cantor’s grounds for his assertion that the cardinals are

well-ordered seem insufficient, so that for the present this must remain an

open question.

288. Of the transfinite numbers other than α, the most important is the
                                                  0

  number of the continuum. Cantor has proved that this number is not α,*
                                                                                    0

and hopes to prove that it is α†—a hope which, though he has long
                                    1

  cherished it, remains unfulfilled. He has shown that the number of the
                  α
  continuum is 2‡—a most curious theorem; but it must still remain
                    0

  doubtful whether this number is α, though there are reasons which
                                          1

  rendered this probable.§ As to the definition of α and of the whole
                                                            1

  succession of transfinite cardinals, this is a matter which is better

  postponed until we have discussed the transfinite ordinals. It must not be

  supposed that we can obtain a new transfinite cardinal by merely adding

one to it, or even by adding any finite number or α. On the contrary,
                                                              0

such puny weapons cannot disturb the transfinite cardinals. It is known

that in the case of α and a certain class of transfinite cardinals, a number
                        0

is equal to its double; also that in the case of α and a presumably
                                                        0

  different class of transfinite cardinals, a number is equal to its square.

The sum of two numbers belonging to the former of these classes is equal

to the greater of the two numbers. It is not known whether all transfinite

  cardinals belong to one or both of these classes.¶

289. It may be asked: In what respect do the finite and transfinite cardinals

  together form a single series? Is not the series of finite numbers complete

in itself, without the possibility of extending its generating relation? If we

define the series of integers by means of the generating relation of

  differing by one—the method which is most natural when the series is to

be considered as a progression—then, it must be confessed, the finite  integers form a complete series, and there is no possibility of adding

  terms to them. But if, as is appropriate in the theory of cardinals, we

  consider the series as arising by correlation with that of whole and part

among classes of which the integers can be asserted, then we see that this

  relation does extend beyond finite numbers. There are an infinite number

of infinite classes in which any given finite class is contained; and thus,

by correlation with these, the number of the given finite class precedes

that of any one of the infinite classes. Whether there is any other sense in

  which all integers, finite and transfinite, form a single series, I leave

  undecided; the above sense would be sufficient to show that there is no

logical error in regarding them as a single series, if it were known that of

any two cardinals one must be the greater. But it is now time to turn our

  attention to the transfinite ordinals.

* This is the order followed in Math. Annalen, xlvi, but not in the

  Mannich-faltigkeitslehre.

† Math. Annalen, xlvi,§ 1.

* See Appendix.

* Bernstein and Schröder’s theorem; for proofs see Borel, Leçons sur la

théorie des fonctions, Paris, 1898, Note I, and Zermelo, Göttinger

Nachrichten, 1901, pp. 34–38.

† Cantor’s grounds for holding that this is so are vague, and do not appear

to me to be valid. They depend upon the postulate that every class is the field

of some well-ordered relation. See Cantor, Math. Annalen, xlvi, note to § 2.

* Gerhardt’s ed. I, p. 338.

† Paradoxien des Unendlichen, § 21.

‡ See Dedekind, Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen? No. 64.

§ Cantor, Math. Annalen, xlvi, § 3; Whitehead, American Journal of Math.

Vol. xxiv, No. 4.

¶ Vivanti, Théorie des Ensembles, Formulaire de Mathématiques, Vol. i,

Part vi, § 2, No. 4.

* See Chapter 43, infra.

† American Journal of Mathematics, loc. cit.

* Theorems C and D require that the finite should be defined by

mathematical induction, or else they become tautologous.

† See Acta Mathematica, II, pp. 306, 313, 326.

‡ See Jahresbericht der deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung i, 1892;Rivista di Matematica, ii, pp. 165–7. Cantor’s assertion that there is no

greatest transfinite cardinal is open to question. See Chap. 43, infra.

* Acta Math. ii, p. 308.

† Ib. p. 404, α is the number next after α.
                  10

‡ Math. Annalen, xlvi, § 4, note.

§ See Couturat, De l’lnfini Mathématique, Paris, 1896, p. 655. The ground

alleged by Cantor for identifying the second power with that of the

continuum is, that every infinite linear collection of points has either the first

power, or that of the continuum, whence it would seem to follow that the

power of the continuum must be the next after the first. (Math. Annalen, 23,

p. 488; see also Acta Math., vii.) But the inference seems somewhat

precarious. Consider, for example, the following analogy: in a compact

series, the stretch determined by two terms consists either of an infinite

number of terms, or, when the two terms coincide, of one term only, and

never of a finite number of terms other than one. But finite stretches are

presented by other types of series, e.g. progressions.
                                                              α
The theorem that the number of the continuum is 2 results very simply
                                                              0

from the proposition of Chapter 36, that infinite classes of finite integers form
                                                                              α
a continuous series. The number of all classes of finite integers is 2 (vide
                                                                                0

supra), and the number of finite classes is α. Hence the number of all infinite
                                                  0
                                α
classes of finite integers is 2 for the subtraction of α does not diminish any
                                00
                            α
number greater than α; 2 is therefore the number of the continuum. To
                        00

prove that this number is α it would therefore be sufficient to show that the
                              1

number of infinite classes of finite integers is the same as the number of types

of series that can be formed of all the finite integers; for the latter number, as

we shall see in the next chapter, is α.
                                        1

¶ Cf. Whitehead, loc. cit. pp. 392–4.38


TRANSFINITE ORDINALS




290. The transfinite ordinals are, if possible, even more interesting and

  remarkable than the transfinite cardinals. Unlike the latter, they do not

obey the commutative law, and their arithmetic is therefore quite

  different from elementary arithmetic. For every transfinite cardinal, or at

any rate for any one of a certain class, there is an infinite collection of

  transfinite ordinals, although the cardinal number of all ordinals is the

  same as or less than that of all cardinals. The ordinals which belong to

  series whose cardinal number is α are called the second class of
                                          0

  ordinals; those corresponding to α are called the third class, and so on.
                                          1

The ordinal numbers are essentially classes of series, or better still,

  classes of generating relations of series; they are defined, for the most

  part, by some relation to mathematical induction. The finite ordinals,

also, may be conceived as types of series: for example, the ordinal

  number n may be taken to mean “a serial relation of n terms;” or, in

  popular language, n terms in a row. This is an ordinal notion, distinct

from “nth”, and logically prior to it.* In this sense, n is the name of a

class of serial relations. It is this sense, not that expressed by “nth”,

  which is generalized by Cantor so as to apply to infinite series.

291. Let us begin with Cantor’s definition of the second class of ordinal

  numbers.† “It is now to be shown”, he says, “how we are led to the

  definitions of the new numbers, and in what way are obtained the natural

  sections, which I call classes of numbers, in the absolutely endless series

of real integers… . The series (1) of positive real whole numbers 1, 2, 3,

… ν, … arises from repeated positing and combination of units which are

  presupposed and regarded as equal; the number ν is the expression both

for a certain finite amount (Anzahl) of such successive positings, and for

the combination of the units posited into a whole. Thus the formation of

  finite real whole numbers rests on the addition of a unit to a number  which has already been formed; I call this moment, which, as we shall

see immediately, also plays an essential part in the formation of the

  higher integers, the first principle of formation. The amount (Anzahl) of

  possible numbers ν of the class (1) is infinite, and there is no greatest

among them. Thus however contradictory it would be to speak of a

  greatest number of the class (1), there is yet nothing objectionable in

  imagining a new number, which we will call ω, which is to express that

the whole collection (1) is given by its law in its natural order of

  succession. (In the same way as ν expresses the combination of a certain

  finite amount of units into a whole.) It is even permissible to think of the

  newly created number ω as a limit, towards which the numbers ν tend, if

by this nothing else is understood but that ω is the first integer which

  follows all the numbers ν, i.e. is to be called greater than each of the

  numbers ν. By allowing further additions of units to follow the positing

of the number ω we obtain, by the help of the first principle of formation,

the further numbers

      ω + 1, ω + 2,……… ω + ν,………;

 


  Since here again we come to no greatest number, we imagine a new one,

which we may call 2ω, and which is to be the first after all previous numbers

ν and ω + ν.

  ‘The logical function which has given us the two numbers ω and 2ω is

evidently different from the first principle of formation; I call it the second

principle of formation of real integers, and define it more exactly as follows:

If we have any determinate succession of defined real integers, among which

there is no greatest number, by means of this second principle of formation a

new number is created, which is regarded as the limit of those numbers, i.e. is

defined as the next number greater than all of them.”

The two principles of formation will be made clearer by considering that

an ordinal number is merely a type or class of series, or rather of their

generating relations. Thus if we have any series which has no last term, every

part of such a series which can be defined as all the terms up to and including

a certain term of the series will have a last term. But since the series itself has

no last term, it is of a different type from any such part or segment of itself.

Hence the ordinal number representing the series as a whole must be different

from that representing any such segment of itself, and must be a numberhaving no immediate predecessor, since the series has no last term. Thus ω is

simply the name of the class progression, or of the generating relations of

series of this class. The second principle of formation, in short, is that by

which we define a certain type of series having no last term. Considering the

ordinals preceding any ordinal α which is obtained by the second principle as

representing segments of a series represented by α, the ordinal α itself

represents the limit of such segments; and as we saw before, the segments

always have a limit (provided they have no maximum), even when the

original series has none.*

In order to define a class among transfinite ordinals (of which, as is

evident, the succession is infinite), Cantor introduces what he calls a principle

of limitation (Hemmungsprincip).† According to this principle, the second

class of ordinals is to consist only of those whose predecessors, from 1

upwards, form a series of the first power, i.e. a series whose cardinal number

is α, or one whose terms, in a suitable order, have a one-one relation to the
  0

finite integers. It is then shown that the power, or cardinal number, of the

second class of ordinals as a whole, is different from α (p. 35), and is further
                                                                0

the very next cardinal number after α (p. 37). What is meant by the next
                                          0

cardinal number to α results clearly from the following proposition (p. 38):
                      0

“If M be any well-defined collection of the power of the second class of

numbers, and if any infinite portion M of M be taken, then either the

collection M' can be considered as a simply infinite series, or it is possible to

establish a unique and reciprocal correspondence between M and M' .” That is

to say, any part of a collection of the second power is either finite, or of the

first power, or of the second; and hence there is no power between the first

and second.

292. Before proceeding to the addition, multiplication, etc., of ordinals, it

will be well to take the above propositions, as far as possible, out of their

  mathematical dress, and to state, in ordinary language, exactly what it is

they mean. As for the ordinal ω, this is simply the name for the class of

  generating relations of progressions. We have seen how a progression is

  defined: it is a series which has a first term, and a term next after each

term, and which obeys mathematical induction. By mathematical

  induction itself we can show that every part of a progression, if it has a

last term, has some finite ordinal number n, where n denotes the class of

  series consisting of n terms in order; while every part which has no lastterm is itself a progression; also we can show (what is indeed obvious)

that no finite ordinal will represent a progression. Now progressions are a

  perfectly definite class of series, and the principle of abstraction shows

that there is some entity to which all of them have a relation which they

  have to nothing else—for all progressions are ordinally similar (i.e. have

a one-one relation such that earlier terms are correlated with earlier ones,

and later with later), and ordinal similarity is symmetrical, transitive and

  (among series) reflexive. This entity, to which the principle of abstraction

  points, may be taken to be the type or class of serial relations, since no

  series can belong to more than one type of series. The type to which

  progressions belong, then, is what Cantor calls ω. Mathematical

  induction, starting from any finite ordinal, can never reach ω, since ω is

not a member of the class of finite ordinals. Indeed, we may define the

  finite ordinals or cardinals—and where series are concerned, this seems

the best definition—as those which, starting from 0 or 1, can be reached

by mathematical induction. This principle, therefore, is not to be taken as

an axiom or postulate, but as the definition of finitude. It is to be

  observed that, in virtue of the principle that every number has an

  immediate successor, we can prove that any assigned number, say,

  10,937, is finite—provided, of course, that the number assigned is a finite

  number. That is to say, every proposition concerning 10,937 can be

  proved without the use of mathematical induction, which, as most of us

can remember, was not mentioned in the Arithmetic of our childhood.

  There is therefore no kind of logical error in using the principle as a

  definition of the class, of finite numbers, nor is there a shadow of a

  reason for supposing that the principle applies to all ordinal or all

  cardinal numbers.

At this point, a word to the philosophers may be in season. Most of them

seem to suppose that the distinction between the finite and the infinite is one

whose meaning is immediately evident, and they reason on the subject as

though no precise definitions were needed. But the fact is, that the distinction

of the finite from the infinite is by no means easy, and has only been brought

to light by modern mathematicians. The numbers 0 and 1 are capable of

logical definition, and it can be shown logically that every number has a

successor. We can now define finite numbers either by the fact that

mathematical induction can reach them, starting from 0 or 1—in Dedekind’s

language, that they form the chain of 0 or 1—or by the fact that they are thenumbers of collections such that no proper part of them has the same number

as the whole. These two conditions may be easily shown to be equivalent.

But they alone precisely distinguish the finite from the infinite, and any

discussion of infinity which neglects them must be more or less frivolous.

293. With regard to numbers of the second class other than ω, we may make

the following remark. A collection of two or more terms is always,

  except possibly for some very large infinite collections, the field of more

than one serial relation. Men may be arranged by their rank, age, wealth

or in alphabetical order: all these relations among men generate series,

and each places mankind in a different order. But when a collection is

finite, all possible orders give one and the same ordinal number, namely

that corresponding to the cardinal number of the collection. That is to

say, all series which can be formed of a certain finite number of terms are

  ordinally similar. With infinite series, this is quite different. An infinite

  collection of terms which is capable of different orders may belong, in its

  various orders, to quite different types. We have already seen that the

  rationals, in one order, form a compact series with no beginning or end,

  while in another order they form a progression. These are series of

  entirely different types; and the same possibility extends to all infinite

  series. The ordinal type of a series is not changed by the interchange of

  two consecutive terms, nor, consequently, in virtue of mathematical

  induction, by any finite number of such interchanges. The general

  principle is, that the type of a series is not changed by what may be called

a permutation. That is, if P be a serial relation by which the terms of u

are ordered, R a one-one relation whose domain and whose converse

  domain are both u, then RŘPR is a serial relation of the same type as P;

and all serial relations whose field is u, and which are of the same type as

P, are of the above form RŘPR. But by a rearrangement not reducible to a

  permutation, the type, in general, is changed. Consider, for example, the

  natural numbers, first in their natural order, and then in the order in

  which 2 comes first, then all the higher numbers in their natural order,

and last of all 1. In the first order, the natural numbers form a

  progression; in the second, they form a progression together with a last

term. In the second form, mathematical induction no longer applies; there

are propositions which hold of 2, and of every subsequent finite number,

but not of 1. The first form is the type of any fundamental series of the

kind we considered in Chapter 36; the second is the type of any such  series together with its limit. Cantor has shown that every denumerable

  collection can be given an order which corresponds to any assigned

  ordinal number of the second class.* Hence the second class of ordinal

  numbers may be defined as all the types of well-ordered series in which

any one given denumerable collection can be arranged by means of

  different generating relations. The possibility of such different types

  depends upon the fundamental property of infinite collections, that an

  infinite part of an infinite collection can always be found, which will

  have a one-one correlation with the whole. If the original collection was a

  series, the part, by this correlation, becomes a series ordinally similar to

the whole: the remaining terms, if added after all the terms of the infinite

  part, will then make the whole ordinally different from what it was.†

We may assimilate the theory of ordinals to that of cardinals as follows.

Two relations will be said to be like when there is a one-one relation S, whose

domain is the field of one of them (P), and which is such that the other

relation is SŠPS. If P be a well-ordered relation, i.e. one which generates a

well-ordered series, the class of relations like P may be defined as the ordinal

number of P. Thus ordinal numbers result from likeness among relations as

cardinals from similarity among classes.

294. We can now understand the rules for the addition and multiplication of

  transfinite ordinals. Both operations obey the associative, but not the

  commutative, law. The distributive law is true, in general, only in the

form

      γ (α + β) = γα + γβ,

 


  where α + β, α, β are multipliers.* That addition does not obey the

commutative law may be easily seen. Take for example ω + 1 and 1 + ω. The

first denotes a progression followed by a single term: this is the type

presented by a progression and its limit, which is different from a simple

progression. Hence ω + 1 is a different ordinal from ω. But 1 + ω denotes a

progression preceded by a single term, and this is again a progression. Hence

1 + ω = ω, but 1 + ω does not equal ω + 1.† The numbers of the second class

are, in fact, of two kinds, (1) those which have an immediate predecessor, (2)
                                                                    23ω
those which have none. Numbers such as ω, ω.2, ω.3, … ω, ω … ω …

have no immediate predecessor. If any of these numbers be added to a finite

number, the same transfinite number reappears; but if a finite number beadded to any of these numbers, we get a new number. The numbers with no

predecessor represent series which have no end, while those which have a

predecessor represent series which have an end. It is plain that terms added at

the beginning of a series with no end leave it endless; but the addition of a

terminating series after an endless one produces a terminating series, and

therefore a new type of order. Thus there is nothing mysterious about these

rules of addition, which simply express the type of series resulting from the

combination of two given series.

  Hence it is easy to obtain the rules of subtraction.‡ If α is less than β, the

equation


      α + ξ = β

 


has always one and only one solution in ξ, which we may represent by β −

α. This gives the type of series that must be added after α to produce β. But

the equation


      ξ + α = β

 


will sometimes have no solution, and at other times an infinite number of

solutions. Thus the equation


      ξ + ω = ω + 1

 


has no solution at all: no number of terms added at the beginning of a

progression will produce a progression together with a last term. In fact, in

the equation ξ + α = β, if α represents an endless type, while β represents a

terminating type, it is sufficiently evident that terms added before α can never

produce a terminating type, and therefore can never produce the type β. On

the other hand, if we consider the equation


      ξ + ω = ω.2

 


this will be satisfied by ξ = ω + n, where n is zero or any finite number. Forn before the second ω will coalesce with this to form ω, and thus ω + n + ω =

ω.2. In this case, therefore, ξ has an infinite number of values. In all such

cases, however, the possible values of ξ have a minimum, which is a sort of

principal value of the difference between β and α. Thus subtraction is of two

kinds, according as we seek a number which, added to α, will give β, or a

number to which α may be added so as to give β. In the first case, provided α

is less than β, there is always a unique solution; in the second case, there may

be no solution, and there may be an infinite number of solutions.

295. The multiplication of ordinals is defined as follows.* Let M and N be

  two series of the types α and β. In N, in place of each element n,

  substitute a series M of the type α; and let S be the series formed of all
                          n

the terms of all series M, taken in the following order: (1) any two
                              n

  elements of S which belong to the same series M are to preserve the
                                                          n

  order they had in M; two elements which belong to different series M,
                        nn

M are to have the order which n and n' have in N. Then the type of S
    n'

  depends only upon α and β, and is defined to be their product αβ, where α

is the multiplicand, and β the multiplicator. It is easy to see that products

do not always obey the commutative law. For example, 2. ω is the type of

  series presented by

      e, f; e, f; e, f; … e, f; ……
        112233vν

 


  which is a progression, so that 2.ω = ω. But ω.2 is the type


      e, e, e … e, …; f, f, f, … f, …
        123ν123ν

 


  which is a combination of two progressions, but not a single progression.

In the former series, there is only one term, e, which has no immediate
                                                    1

predecessor; in the latter there are two, e and f.
                                              11

Of division, as of subtraction, two kinds must be distinguished.* If there

are three ordinals α, β, γ, such that β = αγ, then the equation β = αξ has no

other solution than ξ = γ, and we may therefore denote γ by β/α.† But the

equation β = ξα, if soluble at all, may have several or even an infinity of

roots; of which, however, one is always the smallest. This smallest root is

denoted by β// α.  Multiplication of ordinals is the process of representing a series of series as

a single series, each series being taken as a whole, and preserving its place in

the series of series. Division, on the other hand, is the process of splitting up

a single series into a series of series, without altering the order of its terms.

Both these processes have some importance in connection with dimensions.

Division, as is plain, is only possible with some types of series; those with

which it is not possible may be called primes. The theory of primes is

interesting, but it is not necessary for us to go into it.‡

296. Every rational integral or exponential function of ω is a number of the
                                                      ωω2
  second class, even when such numbers as ω, ω, etc., occur.§ But it

must not be supposed that all types of denumerable series are capable of

such a form. For example, the type η, which represents the rationals in

  order of magnitude,¶ is wholly incapable of expression in terms of ω.

  Such a type is not called by Cantor an ordinal number. The term ordinal

  number is reserved for well-ordered series, i.e. such as have the

  following two properties:||

    I. There is in the series F a first term.


    II. If F' is a part of F, and if F possesses one or more terms which come

    after all the terms of F' , then there is a term f' of F which immediately

    follows F' , so that there is no term of F before f' and after all terms of F'

    .


All possible functions of ω and finite ordinals only, to the exclusion of

other types such as that of the rationals, represent well-ordered series, though

the converse does not hold. In every well-ordered series, there is a term next

after any given term, except the last term if there be one; and provided the

series is infinite, it always contains parts which are progressions. A term

which comes next after a progression has no immediate predecessor, and the

type of the segment formed of its predecessors is of what is called the second

species. The other terms have immediate predecessors, and the type of the

segments formed of their predecessors are said to be of the first species.

297. The consideration of series which are not well-ordered is important,

  though the results have far less affinity to Arithmetic than in the case of

  well-ordered series. Thus the type η is not expressible as a function of ω,

  since all functions of ω represent series with a first term, whereas η has

no first term, and all functions of ω represent series in which every termhas an immediate successor, which again is not the case with η. Even the

  series of negative and positive integers and zero cannot be expressed in

  terms of ω, since this series has no beginning. Cantor defines for this

  purpose a serial type *ω, which may be taken as the type of a regression

(ib. § 7). The definition of a progression, as we have seen, is relative to

  some one-one aliorelative P.† When  generates a progression, this

  progression with respect to  is a regression with respect to P, and its type,

  considered as generated by P, is denoted by *ω. Thus the whole series of

  negative and positive integers is of the type *ω + ω. Such a series can be

  divided anywhere into two progressions, generated by converse relations;

but in regard to one relation, it is not reducible to any combination of

  progressions. Such a series is completely defined, by the methods of Part

IV, as follows: P is a one-one aliorelative; the field of P is identical with

that of P0; the disjunctive relation “some finite positive power of P” is

  transitive and asymmetrical; and the series consists of all terms having this

  relation or its converse to a given term together with the given term. The

class of series corresponding to any transfinite ordinal type may always be

  thus defined by the methods of Part IV; but where a type cannot be

  expressed as a function of ω or *ω or both, it will usually be necessary, if

we are to define our type completely, either to bring in a reference to some

  other relation, in regard to which the terms of our series form a

  progression, or to specify the behaviour of our series with respect to limits.

  Thus the type of the series of rationals is not defined by specifying that it is

  compact, and has no beginning or end; this definition applies also, for

  example, to what Cantor calls the semi-continuum, i.e. the continuum with

its ends cut off. We must add that the rationals are denumerable, i.e. that,

with respect to another relation, they form a progression. I doubt whether,

in this case, the behaviour of the rationals with regard to limits can be used

for definition. Their chief characteristics in this respect are: (1) that they

are condensed in themselves, i.e. every term of them is the limit of certain

  progressions and regressions; (2) in any interval, a progression or a

  regression which has no limit is contained. But both these characteristics

belong to the series of irrational numbers, i.e. to the series obtained by

  omitting all rationals from the series of real numbers; yet this series is not

  denumerable. Thus it would seem that we cannot define the type η, to

  which the rationals belong, without reference to two generating relations.

The type η is that of endless compact series whose terms, with reference to  another relation, form a progression.

  From the last remark, we see clearly the importance of the correlation of

series, with which we began the discussions of Part V. For it is only by means

of correlation that the type of the rationals, and hence the continuum, can be

defined. Until we bring in some other relation than that by which the order of

magnitude among rationals arises, there is nothing to distinguish the type of

the rationals from that of the irrationals.

298. The consideration of ordinals not expressible as functions of ω shows

clearly that ordinals in general are to be considered—as I suggested at the

  beginning of this chapter—as classes or types of serial relations, and to

this view Cantor himself now apparently adheres; for in the article in the

  Mathematische Annalen, Vol. xlvi, he speaks of them always as types of

order, not as numbers, and in the following article (Math. Annalen, xlix,

§ 12), he definitely restricts ordinal numbers to well-ordered series. In his

  earlier writings, he confined himself more to functions of ω, which bear

  many analogies to more familiar kinds of numbers. These are, in fact,

  types of order which may be presented by series of finite and transfinite

  cardinals which begin with some cardinal. But other types of order, as we

  have now seen, have very little resemblance to numbers.

299. It is worth while to repeat the definitions of general notions involved

in terms of what may be called relation-arithmetic.* If P, Q be two

  relations such that there is a one-one relation S whose domain is the field

of P and which is such that Q = SŠPS, then P and Q are said to be like.

The class of relations like P, which I denote by λP, is called P’s relation-

  number. If the fields of P and Q have no common terms, P + Q is defined

to be P or Q or the relation which holds between any term of the field of

P and any term of the field of Q, and between no other terms. Thus P + Q

is not equal to Q + P. Again λP + λQ is defined as λ (P + Q). For the

  summation of an infinite number of relations, we require an aliorelative

  whose field is composed of relations whose fields are mutually exclusive.

Let P be such a relation, p its field, so that p is a class of relations. Then

Σp is to denote either one of the relations of the class p or the relation of
  P

any term belonging to the field of some relation Q of the class p to a term

  belonging to the field of another relation R (of the class p) to which Q has

the relation P. (If P be a serial relation, and p a class of serial relations,

Σp will be the generating relation of the sum of the various series
  P

  generated by terms of p taken in the order generated by P.) We maydefine the sum of the relation-numbers of the various terms of p as the

  relation-number of Σp. If all the terms of p have the same relation-
                          P

  number, say α, and if β be the relation-number of P, α × β will be defined

to be the relation-number of Σp. Proceeding in this way, it is easy to
                                    P

  prove generally the three formal laws which hold of well-ordered series,

  namely:

      (α + β) + γ = α + (β + γ)

      α (β + γ) = αβ + αγ

      (αβ) γ = α (βγ).

 


The proofs are very closely analogous to those discovered by Mr

Whitehead for cardinal numbers (Amer. Journal of Math., Vol. xxiv); but

they differ by the fact that no method has yet been discovered for defining an

infinite product of relation-numbers, or even of ordinal numbers.

300. It is to be observed that the merit of the above method is that it allows

no doubt as to existence-theorems—a point in which Cantor’s work

leaves something to be desired. As this is an important matter, and one in

  which philosophers are apt to be sceptical, I shall here repeat the

  argument in outline. It may be shown, to begin with, that no finite class

  embraces all terms: this results, with a little care, from the fact that, since

0 is a cardinal number, the number of numbers up to and including a

  finite number n is n + 1. Further, if n be a finite number, n + 1 is a new

  finite number different from all its predecessors. Hence finite cardinals

form a progression, and therefore the ordinal number ω and the cardinal

  number α exist (in the mathematical sense). Hence, by mere
            0

  rearrangements of the series of finite cardinals, we obtain all ordinals of

  Cantor’s second class. We may now define the ordinal number ω as the
                                                                              1

class of serial relations such that, if u be a class contained in the field of

one of them, to say that u has successors implies and is implied by saying

that u has α terms or a finite number of terms; and it is easy to show that
              0

the series of ordinals of the first and second classes in order of magnitude

is of this type. Hence the existence of ω is proved; and α is defined to
                                                11

be the number of terms in a series whose generating relation is of the

type ω. Hence we can advance to ω and α and so on, and even to ω
        122ω

and α, whose existence can be similarly proved: ω will be the type of
        ωω  generating relation of a series such that, if u be a class contained in the

  series, to say that u has successors is equivalent to saying that u is finite

or has, for a suitable finite value of n, α terms. This process gives us a
                                                n

  one-one correlation of ordinals with cardinals: it is evident that, by

  extending the process, we can make each cardinal which can belong to a

  well-ordered series correspond to one and only one ordinal. Cantor

  assumes as an axiom that every class is the field of some well-ordered

  series, and deduces that all cardinals can be correlated with ordinals by

the above method. This assumption seems to me unwarranted, especially

in view of the fact that no one has yet succeeded in arranging a class of
  α
2 terms in a well-ordered series. We do not know that of any two
    0
                                                                                      α
  different cardinal numbers one must be the greater, and it may be that 2
                                                                                        0

is neither greater nor less than α and α and their successors, which may
                                        12

be called well-ordered cardinals because they apply to well-ordered

  classes.

301. There is a difficulty as regards the type of the whole series of ordinal

  numbers. It is easy to prove that every segment of this series is well-

  ordered, and it is natural to suppose that the whole series is also well-

  ordered. If so, its type would have to be the greatest of all ordinal

  numbers, for the ordinals less than a given ordinal form, in order of

  magnitude, a series whose type is the given ordinal. But there cannot be a

  greatest ordinal number, because every ordinal is increased by the

  addition of 1. From this contradiction, M. Burali-Forti, who discovered

it,* infers that of two different ordinals, as of two different cardinals, it is

not necessary that one should be greater and the other less. In this,

  however, he consciously contradicts a theorem of Cantor’s which affirms

the opposite.† I have examined this theorem with all possible care, and

  have failed to find any flaw in the proof.‡ But there is another premiss in

M. Burali-Forti’s argument, which appears to me more capable of denial,

and that is, that the series of all ordinal numbers is well-ordered. This

does not follow from the fact that all its segments are well-ordered, and

must, I think, be rejected, since, so far as I know, it is incapable of proof.

In this way, it would seem, the contradiction in question can be avoided.

302. We may now return to the subject of the successive derivatives of a

  series, already briefly discussed in Chapter 36. This forms one of the

most interesting applications of those ordinals which are functions of ω,and may even be used as an independent method of defining them. We

  have already seen how, from a series P, its first derivative is obtained.*

The first derivative of P, which is denoted by P' , is the class of its

  limiting points. P'' , the second derivative of P' , consists of the limiting-

  points of P' , and so on. Every infinite collection has at least one limiting-

  point: for example, ω is the limit of the finite ordinals. By induction we
                                                  νν
can define any derivative of finite order P. If P consists of a finite
                        ν1
  number of points, P +  vanishes; if this happens for any finite number v,

P is said to be of the 1st genus and the vth species. But it may happen
            ν
that no P vanishes, and in this case all finite derivatives may have

  common points. The points which all have in common form a collection
                          ωω
  which is defined as P. It is to be observed that P is thus defined
                                                                        ω
  without requiring the definition of ω. A term x belongs to P if, whatever
                                              ν
  finite integer ν may be, x belongs to P. It is to be observed that, though

P' may contain points not belonging to P, yet subsequent derivatives

  introduce no new points. This illustrates the creative nature of the method

of limits, or rather of segments: when it is first applied, it may yield new

  terms, but later applications give no further terms. That is, there is an

  intrinsic difference between a series which has been, or may have been,

  obtained as the derivative of some other series, and one not so obtainable.

  Every series which contains its first derivative is itself the derivative of

an infinite number of other series.† The successive derivatives, like the

  segments determined by the various terms of a regression, form a series
                                                                            ω
in which each term is part of each of its predecessors; hence P, if it
                                                                                  ω
  exists, is the lower limit of all the derivatives of finite order. From P it
                          ωω.2
is easy to go on to P + ν, P, etc. Series can be actually constructed in

  which any assigned derivative, finite or transfinite of the second class, is

the first to vanish. When none of the finite derivatives vanishes, P is said

to be of the second genus. It must not be inferred, however, that P is not

  denumerable. On the contrary, the first derivative of the rationals is the

  number-continuum, which is perfect, so that all its derivatives are

  identical with itself; yet the rationals, as we know, are denumerable. But
          ν
  when P vanishes, P is always denumerable, if v be finite or of the

  second class.

The theory of derivatives is of great importance to the theory of real

functions,‡ where it practically enables us to extend mathematical inductionto any ordinal of the second class. But for philosophy, it seems unnecessary

to say more of it than is contained in the above remarks and in those of

Chapter 36. Popularly speaking, the first derivative consists of all points in

whose neighbourhood an infinite number of terms of the collection are

heaped up; and subsequent derivatives give, as it were, different degrees of

concentration in any neighbourhood. Thus it is easy to see why derivatives

are relevant to continuity: to be continuous, a collection must be as

concentrated as possible in every neighbourhood containing any terms of the

collection. But such popular modes of expression are incapable of the

precision which belongs to Cantor’s terminology.


* Cf. supra Part IV, Chap. 29, §§ 231, 232.

† Mannichfaltigkeitslehre, § 11, pp. 32, 33.

* On the segments of well-ordered series see Cantor’s article in Math.

Annalen, xlix, § 13. It is important to observe that the ordinals above

explained are analogous, in their genesis, to the real numbers considered as

segments (vide Chap. 33, supra). Here, as there, the existence of ω is not

open to question when the segment-theory is adopted, whereas on any other

theory the existence-theorem is indemonstrable and unplausible.

† Mannichfaltigkeitslehre, p. 34.

* Acta Math., ii, p. 394.

† The remaining terms, if they be finite in number, will often not alter the

type if added at the beginning; but if they be infinite, they will in general alter

it even then. This will soon be more fully explained.

* Mannichfaltigkeitslehre, p. 39; α + β will be the type of a series

consisting of two parts, namely a part of the type α followed by a part of the

type β; γα will be the type of a series consisting of a series of the type α of

series of the type γ. Thus a series composed of two progressions is of the type

ω.2.

† Math. Annalen, xlvi,§ 8.

‡ Mannichfaltigkeitslehre, p. 39.

* Math. Annalen, xlvi,§ 8.

* Mannichfaltigkeitslehre, p. 40.

† Cantor has changed his notation in regard to multiplication: formerly, in

α.β, α was the multiplicator, and β the multiplicand; now, the opposite order

is adopted. In following older works, except in actual quotations, I have

altered the order to that now adopted.‡ See Mannichfaltigkeitslehre, p. 40.

§ On the exponential function, see Math. Annalen, xlix, §§ 18–20.

¶ Math. Annalen, xlvi,§ 9.

† An aliorelative is a relation which no term can have to itself. This term is

due to Pierce. See Schröder, Algebra u. Logik der Relative, p. 131.

* Cf. Part IV, Chap. 29, § 231.

* “Una questione sui numeri transfiniti”, Rendiconti del circolo

Matematico di Palermo, Vol. xi (1897).

† Theorem n of § 13 of Cantor’s article in Math. Annalen, Vol. xlix.

‡ I have reproduced the proof in symbolic form, in which errors are more

easily detected, in R. d. M., Vol. viii, Prop. 5.47 of my article.

* What follows is extracted from Acta Math. ii, pp. 341–360. I shall

assume for simplicity that all definable limits exist, i.e. that a series has a

limit whenever the corresponding segments have one. I have shown in

Chapter 36 how to state results so as to avoid this assumption; but the

necessary circumlocution is tiresome.

† Formulaire de Mathématiques, Vol. ii, Part iii, § 71, 4–8.

‡ See Dini, Theorie der Functionen, Leipzig, 1892; esp. Chap. xiii and

Translator’s preface.

|| Math. Annalen, xlix, § 12. The definition may be replaced by the

following, which is equivalent to it: a series is well-ordered if every class

contained in the series (except of course the null-class) has a first term.39


THE INFINITESIMAL


CALCULUS




303. The Infinitesimal Calculus is the traditional name for the differential

and integral calculus together, and as such I have retained it; although, as

we shall shortly see, there is no allusion to, or implication of, the

  infinitesimal in any part of this branch of mathematics.

The philosophical theory of the Calculus has been, ever since the subject

was invented, in a somewhat disgraceful condition. Leibniz himself—who,

one would have supposed, should have been competent to give a correct

account of his own invention—had ideas, upon this topic, which can only be

described as extremely crude. He appears to have held that, if metaphysical

subtleties are left aside, the Calculus is only approximate, but is justified

practically by the fact that the errors to which it gives rise are less than those

of observation.* When he was thinking of Dynamics, his belief in the actual

infinitesimal hindered him from discovering that the Calculus rests on the

doctrine of limits, and made him regard his dx and dy as neither zero, nor

finite, nor mathematical fictions, but as really representing the units to which,

in his philosophy, infinite division was supposed to lead.† And in his

mathematical expositions of the subject, he avoided giving careful proofs,

contenting himself with the enumeration of rules.‡ At other times, it is true,

he definitely rejects infinitesimals as philosophically valid;§ but he failed to

show how, without the use of infinitesimals, the results obtained by means of

the Calculus could yet be exact, and not approximate. In this respect, Newton

is preferable to Leibniz: his Lemmas* give the true foundation of the

Calculus in the doctrine of limits, and, assuming the continuity of space and

time in Cantor’s sense, they give valid proofs of its rules so far as spatio-

temporal magnitudes are concerned. But Newton was, of course, entirely

ignorant of the fact that his Lemmas depend upon the modern theory of