Principles of Mathematics




  “Unless we are very much mistaken, its lucid application and

development of the great discoveries of Peano and Cantor mark the

opening of a new epoch in both philosophical and mathematical thought”

                                                                        – The Spectator  Routledge Classics contains the very best of Routledge publishing over the

past century or so, books that have, by popular consent, become established

as classics in their feild. Drawing on a fantastic heritage of innovative writing

published by Routledge and its associated imprints, this series makes

available in attractive, affordable form some of the most important works of

modern times.


For a complete list of titles visit

    www.routledge.com/classics          Principles of Mathematics                            Bertrand RussellFirst published in 1903



First published in the Routledge Classics in 2010 

by Routledge 

2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN



Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business



This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2009.



To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s

collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.



© 2010 The Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation Ltd



Introduction © 1992 John G. Slater



All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or

utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now

known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any

information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from

the publishers.



British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British LibraryLibrary of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 

A catalog record for this book has been requested



ISBN 0-203-86476-X Master e-book ISBN



ISBN 10: 0-415-48741-2

ISBN 10: 0-203-86476-X (ebk)



ISBN 13: 978-0-415-48741-2

ISBN 13: 978-0-203-86476-0 (ebk)INTRODUCTION TO THE 1992


EDITION




  The Principles of Mathematics, Russell’s fourth book, was first published

in 1903; it was reprinted unchanged in 1937 with a new introduction. The

original edition was the first member in one of two series of books that

Russell proposed to write during his lifetime. In the first volume of his

Autobiography (1967), covering the years 1872 to 1914, he recollected one of

the most important days of his life: “I remember a cold bright day in early

spring when I walked by myself in the Tiergarten, and made projects of

future work. I thought that I would write one series of books on the

philosophy of the sciences from pure mathematics to physiology, and another

series of books on social questions. I hoped that the two series might

ultimately meet in a synthesis at once scientific and practical. My scheme

was largely inspired by Hegelian ideas. Nevertheless, I have to some extent

followed it in later years, as much at any rate as could have been expected.

The moment was an important and formative one as regards my purposes.”

The year was 1895, and the city was Berlin, where Russell and his first wife

had gone to study German social democracy. In other writings Russell added

that the first series of books would begin at a very high level of abstraction

and gradually grow more practical, whereas the second set would begin with

practical matters and aim at becoming always more abstract; the final volume

in each series would then be a similar blend of the practical and the abstract,

and thus permit a grand synthesis of the two series in one magnum opus.

  Russell was not yet 23 when this vision occurred to him, but, as is clear

from the above quotation, the initial planning of The Principles of

Mathematics had already begun. At other places in his writings he states that

his interest in the foundations of mathematics stemmed from an earlier

interest in the foundations of physics, or “the problem of matter” as he

usually referred to it, which was stymied when he realized the dependence of

physics on a soundly based mathematics. His preliminary examination of theproblem of matter must then have occurred at about the same time as the

Tiergarten experience. By 1895 he already had two books in the works: the

first, German Social Democracy (1896), reported the results of his Berlin

studies; the second, An Essay on the Foundations of Geometry (1897), was

his dissertation for a Fellowship at Trinity College, Cambridge. On the

strength of it he was elected a Fellow on 10 October 1895. For book

publication it had to be revised, which accounts for the delay of two years.

While he was revising it he began work on Principles.

  There exist in the Bertrand Russell Archives, housed at McMaster

University in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, a large number of manuscripts

documenting in part his slow progress toward a final version of Principles.

The earlier papers have now been published in Volume 2 of The Collected

Papers of Bertrand Russell (1990), edited by Nicholas Griffin and Albert C.

Lewis; the remaining ones will be published in Volume 3, edited by Greg

Moore, which is nearly ready for publication. Russell entitled the earliest

manuscript, which survives only in part, “An Analysis of Mathematical

Reasoning, Being an Inquiry into the Subject-Matter, the Fundamental

Conceptions, and the Necessary Postulates of Mathematics”. Begun after 1

April 1898, it was finished some time in July of that year. Griffin notes that it

was written when Russell was very much under the influence of Alfred North

Whitehead’s first book, A Treatise on Universal Algebra with Applications

(1898). Whitehead had been one of Russell’s teachers at Cambridge, and later

agreed to collaborate with him in completing his work on the foundations of

mathematics. This early draft, like his Fellowship dissertation, displays a

strong Kantian influence. Russell discussed this draft at various times with

both G. E. Moore and Whitehead; Moore appears, from the evidence

available, to have been more critical of it than Whitehead. We do not know

why Russell abandoned this attempt. Some parts of it were incorporated in

later versions, but large parts of it remain untouched.

His next attempt was called “On the Principles of Arithmetic”, and the

evidence goes to show that it was also written in 1898, shortly after he had

abandoned the first draft. Only two chapters of this projected book remain:

one incomplete chapter on cardinal numbers, and a complete one on ordinals.

The scope of this project is very much narrower than the first one, which

ranged well beyond arithmetic. When he abandoned this project, for reasons

unknown, he started to write “The Fundamental Ideas and Axioms of

Mathematics”, which was drafted in 1899. There exists a very full synoptictable of contents for the whole book and a large number of preliminary notes

for various sections of it. Why he abandoned this project also remains a

mystery. It is worth noting that Russell had already developed the habit of

recycling parts, often large parts, of abandoned manuscripts into new works.

Griffin makes the important point that both the first and third of these

preliminary drafts almost certainly existed at one time in full book-length

form, but they were dismembered by Russell when he found that parts of

them fitted nicely into a later manuscript.

  There was still another draft to go before Principles was ready for the

printers. During the years 1899 and 1900 Russell wrote a book which he

called by its published name. In My Philosophical Development (1959), his

intellectual autobiography, he wrote that he finished this draft “on the last day

of the nineteenth century—i.e. December 31, 1900”. In his Autobiography he

remarks that he wrote the entire draft, about 200,000 words, during October,

November and December, averaging ten pages of manuscript per day. In

view of the fragmentary nature of the third draft, it seems more likely that he

incorporated large portions of it into this penultimate draft. Only parts of this

draft were later rewritten: Parts III to VI required no changes; Parts I, II and

VII were extensively revised before publication.

In July 1900 Russell and Whitehead attended an International Congress of

Philosophy in Paris, at which Russell read a paper on the idea of order and

absolute position in space and time. This Congress turned out to be of

immense importance for his work on the foundations of mathematics.

Giuseppe Peano also read a paper at the meeting and he attended other

sessions and participated in the ensuing discussions. In his Autobiography

Russell calls the Congress “a turning point in my intellectual life” and gives

the credit to Peano: “In discussions at the Congress I observed that he was

always more precise than anyone else, and that he invariably got the better of

any argument upon which he embarked. As the days went by, I decided that

this must be owing to his mathematical logic.” Peano supplied him with

copies of all his publications and Russell spent August mastering them. In

September he extended Peano’s symbolic notation to the logic of relations.

Nearly every day he found that some problem, such as the correct analysis of

order or of cardinal number, that had baffled him for years yielded to the new

method and a definitive answer to it emerged. On the problems bothering

him, he made more progress during that month than he had in the years

preceding it. “Intellectually, the month of September 1900 was the highestpoint of my life. I went about saying to myself that now at last I had done

something worth doing, and I had the feeling that I must be careful not to be

run over in the street before I had written it down.” The penultimate draft is

the written record of this extraordinary period.

But within this logical paradise lurked a serpent, and it revealed itself to

Russell during the spring of 1901 when he was polishing his manuscript for

publication. It concerned the notion of class and it arose from premisses

which had been accepted by all logicians from Aristotle onward. Every

logician had accepted the principle that every predicate determines a class.

The class of human beings, for example, is formed by placing within it all

those things of which it is true to say that they are human beings. Logicians

refer to a class as the extension of a predicate. Russell, in checking a proof

that there was no greatest cardinal number, considered certain peculiar

classes. He noticed that some classes were members of themselves, e.g. the

class of abstract ideas is itself an abstract idea, but most are not, e.g. the class

of bicycles is not itself a bicycle. All of the latter classes have a common

property, namely, that they are non-self-membered; Russell called them

“ordinary” classes. Next he took the predicate, “x is not a member of x”, and

formed a new class, which we may call O (to remind ourselves that these are

ordinary classes), which has as its members all and only those classes which

are not members of themselves. Then he asked whether O was a member of

itself or not, and was both astonished and dismayed at the answer. Suppose,

on the one hand, that O is a member of O, then since all members of O are

non-self-membered, it follows that O is not a member of O. Now suppose, on

the other hand, that O is not a member of O, then it follows directly that O is

a member of O, because all non-self-membered classes are members of O.

We may restate these two conclusions as a paradox: O is a member of O, if,

and only if, O is not a member of O. This is now called Russell’s paradox.

  When he discovered the paradox Russell attempted in every way he could

to dispose of it. But all of his attempts failed. He communicated it to other

logicians and found that they were unable to find anything wrong with his

reasoning. Whitehead, indeed, lamented “never glad, confident morning

again”, which only served to deepen Russell’s gloom. But one thing was

clear, large parts of Principles would have to be rewritten. Russell first

published his paradox in Principles (§78). The discovery of the contradiction

delayed publication of his book. If it was at all possible, he wanted to include

in the book a way of taming the paradox. For a year he wrestled with theproblem, trying out one idea after another, but usually coming back to a

solution he called “the theory of types”, as the best of a disappointing lot.

Finally, he decided to delay publication no longer, and he included an

appendix in which he sketched the theory of types as the best remedy for the

paradox he had been able to discover.

In addition to being an original and important book in logic and the

philosophy of mathematics, Principles is also a very solid work in

metaphysics. It is a pity that this fact is not more widely known. Widespread

ignorance of it is in large part traceable to the book’s title. The Principles of

Mathematics, with no sub-title, seems to tell the potential reader that its

subject-matter is confined to mathematics. However, nearly all of the

classical metaphysical problems are considered at length, a notable exception

being the problem of the existence or non-existence of God. Space and time,

matter and motion and causality, the one and the many, and classes and

numbers are all accorded the Russellian treatment, and he has interesting

things to say about all of them. There is another reason why the book is not

widely known for its metaphysical discussions. When Principia Mathematica

(1910–13), which Russell wrote with Whitehead, was published, it was

assumed on all sides that it superseded Principles. Certainly it did in part, but

only in part. Most of Russell’s metaphysical discussions have no counterparts

in Principia. Thus, The Principles of Mathematics can be read not only as a

stepping-stone to Principia Mathematica, but also as an important account of

the way in which Russell viewed the world, especially at the turn of the

century.


                                                                          John G. Slater 

                                                                  University of TorontoINTRODUCTION TO THE


SECOND EDITION




“The Principles of Mathematics” was published in 1903, and most of it

was written in 1900. In the subsequent years the subjects of which it treats

have been widely discussed, and the technique of mathematical logic has

been greatly improved; while some new problems have arisen, some old ones

have been solved, and others, though they remain in a controversial

condition, have taken on completely new forms. In these circumstances, it

seemed useless to attempt to amend this or that, in the book, which no longer

expresses my present views. Such interest as the book now possesses is

historical, and consists in the fact that it represents a certain stage in the

development of its subject. I have therefore altered nothing, but shall

endeavour, in this Introduction, to say in what respects I adhere to the

opinions which it expresses, and in what other respects subsequent research

seems to me to have shown them to be erroneous.

The fundamental thesis of the following pages, that mathematics and logic

are identical, is one which I have never since seen any reason to modify. This

thesis was, at first, unpopular, because logic is traditionally associated with

philosophy and Aristotle, so that mathematicians felt it to be none of their

business, and those who considered themselves logicians resented being

asked to master a new and rather difficult mathematical technique. But such

feelings would have had no lasting influence if they had been unable to find

support in more serious reasons for doubt. These reasons are, broadly

speaking, of two opposite kinds: first, that there are certain unsolved

difficulties in mathematical logic, which make it appear less certain than

mathematics is believed to be; and secondly that, if the logical basis of

mathematics is accepted, it justifies, or tends to justify, much work, such as

that of Georg Cantor, which is viewed with suspicion by many

mathematicians on account of the unsolved paradoxes which it shares with

logic. These two opposite lines of criticism are represented by the formalists,led by Hilbert, and the intuitionists, led by Brouwer.

The formalist interpretation of mathematics is by no means new, but for

our purposes we may ignore its older forms. As presented by Hilbert, for

example in the sphere of number, it consists in leaving the integers

undefined, but asserting concerning them such axioms as shall make possible

the deduction of the usual arithmetical propositions. That is to say, we do not

assign any meaning to our symbols 0, 1, 2, … except that they are to have

certain properties enumerated in the axioms. These symbols are, therefore, to

be regarded as variables. The later integers may be defined when 0 is given,

but 0 is to be merely something having the assigned characteristics.

Accordingly the symbols 0, 1, 2, … do not represent one definite series, but

any progression whatever. The formalists have forgotten that numbers are

needed, not only for doing sums, but for counting. Such propositions as

“There were 12 Apostles” or “London has 6,000,000 inhabitants” cannot be

interpreted in their system. For the symbol “0” may be taken to mean any

finite integer, without thereby making any of Hilbert’s axioms false; and thus

every number-symbol becomes infinitely ambiguous. The formalists are like

a watchmaker who is so absorbed in making his watches look pretty that he

has forgotten their purpose of telling the time, and has therefore omitted to

insert any works.

  There is another difficulty in the formalist position, and that is as regards

existence. Hilbert assumes that if a set of axioms does not lead to a

contradiction, there must be some set of objects which satisfies the axioms;

accordingly, in place of seeking to establish existence theorems by producing

an instance, he devotes himself to methods of proving the self-consistency of

his axioms. For him, “existence”, as usually understood, is an unnecessarily

metaphysical concept, which should be replaced by the precise concept of

non-contradiction. Here, again, he has forgotten that arithmetic has practical

uses. There is no limit to the systems of non-contradictory axioms that might

be invented. Our reasons for being specially interested in the axioms that lead

to ordinary arithmetic lie outside arithmetic, and have to do with the

application of number to empirical material. This application itself forms no

part of either logic or arithmetic; but a theory which makes it a priori

impossible cannot be right. The logical definition of numbers makes their

connection with the actual world of countable objects intelligible; the

formalist theory does not.

The intuitionist theory, represented first by Brouwer and later by Weyl, is amore serious matter. There is a philosophy associated with the theory, which,

for our purposes, we may ignore; it is only its bearing on logic and

mathematics that concerns us. The essential point here is the refusal to regard

a proposition as either true or false unless some method exists of deciding the

alternative. Brouwer denies the law of excluded middle where no such

method exists. This destroys, for example, the proof that there are more real

numbers than rational numbers, and that, in the series of real numbers, every

progression has a limit. Consequently large parts of analysis, which for

centuries have been thought well established, are rendered doubtful.

  Associated with this theory is the doctrine called finitism, which calls in

question propositions involving infinite collections or infinite series, on the

ground that such propositions are unverifiable. This doctrine is an aspect of

thorough-going empiricism, and must, if taken seriously, have consequences

even more destructive than those that are recognized by its advocates. Men,

for example, though they form a finite class, are, practically and empirically,

just as impossible to enumerate as if their number were infinite. If the

finitist’s principle is admitted, we must not make any general statement—

such as “All men are mortal”—about a collection defined for its properties,

not by actual mention of all its members. This would make a clean sweep of

all science and of all mathematics, not only of the parts which the

intuitionists consider questionable. Disastrous consequences, however,

cannot be regarded as proving that a doctrine is false; and the finitist doctrine,

if it is to be disproved, can only be met by a complete theory of knowledge. I

do not believe it to be true, but I think no short and easy refutation of it is

possible. An excellent and very full discussion of the question whether

mathematics and logic are identical will be found in Vol. III of Jörgensen’s

“Treatise of Formal Logic”, pp. 57–200, where the reader will find a

dispassionate examination of the arguments that have been adduced against

this thesis, with a conclusion which is, broadly speaking, the same as mine,

namely that, while quite new grounds have been given in recent years for

refusing to reduce mathematics to logic, none of these grounds is in any

degree conclusive.

This brings me to the definition of mathematics which forms the first

sentence of the “Principles”. In this definition various changes are necessary.

To begin with, the form “p implies q” is only one of many logical forms that

mathematical propositions may take. I was originally led to emphasize this

form by the consideration of Geometry. It was clear that Euclidean and non-Euclidean systems alike must be included in pure mathematics, and must not

be regarded as mutually inconsistent; we must, therefore, only assert that the

axioms imply the propositions, not that the axioms are true and therefore the

propositions are true. Such instances led me to lay undue stress on

implication, which is only one among truth-functions, and no more important

than the others. Next: when it is said that “p and q are propositions containing

one or more variables”, it would, of course, be more correct to say that they

are propositional functions; what is said, however, may be excused on the

ground that propositional functions had not yet been defined, and were not

yet familiar to logicians or mathematicians.

I come next to a more serious matter, namely the statement that “neither p

nor q contains any constants except logical constants”. I postpone, for the

moment, the discussion as to what logical constants are. Assuming this

known, my present point is that the absence of non-logical constants, though

a necessary condition for the mathematical character of a proposition, is not a

sufficient condition. Of this, perhaps, the best examples are statements

concerning the number of things in the world. Take, say: “There are at least

three things in the world”. This is equivalent to: “There exist objects x, y, z,

and properties , ψ, χ, such that x but not y has the property , x but not z has

the property ψ, and y but not z has the property χ.” This statement can be

enunciated in purely logical terms, and it can be logically proved to be true of

classes of classes of classes: of these there must, in fact, be at least 4, even if

the universe did not exist. For in that case there would be one class, the null-

class; two classes of classes, namely, the class of no classes and the class

whose only member is the null class; and four classes of classes of classes,

namely the one which is null, the one whose only member is the null class of

classes, the one whose only member is the class whose only member is the

null class, and the one which is the sum of the two last. But in the lower

types, that of individuals, that of classes, and that of classes of classes, we

cannot logically prove that there are at least three members. From the very

nature of logic, something of this sort is to be expected; for logic aims at

independence of empirical fact, and the existence of the universe is an

empirical fact. It is true that if the world did not exist, logic-books would not

exist; but the existence of logic-books is not one of the premisses of logic,

nor can it be inferred from any proposition that has a right to be in a logic-

book.

In practice, a great deal of mathematics is possible without assuming theexistence of anything. All the elementary arithmetic of finite integers and

rational fractions can be constructed; but whatever involves infinite classes of

integers becomes impossible. This excludes real numbers and the whole of

analysis. To include them, we need the “axiom of infinity”, which states that

if n is any finite number, there is at least one class having n members. At the

time when I wrote the “Principles”, I supposed that this could be proved, but

by the time that Dr. Whitehead and I published “Principia Mathematica”, we

had become convinced that the supposed proof was fallacious.

The above argument depends upon the doctrine of types, which, although it

occurs in a crude form in Appendix B of the “Principles”, had not yet reached

the stage of development at which it showed that the existence of infinite

classes cannot be demonstrated logically. What is said as to existence-

theorems in the last paragraph of the last chapter of the “Principles” (pp.

497–8) no longer appears to me to be valid: such existence-theorems, with

certain exceptions, are, I should now say, examples of propositions which can

be enunciated in logical terms, but can only be proved or disproved by

empirical evidence.

  Another example is the multiplicative axiom, or its equivalent, Zermelo’s

axiom of selection. This asserts that, given a set of mutually exclusive

classes, none of which is null, there is at least one class consisting of one

representative from each class of the set. Whether this is true or not, no one

knows. It is easy to imagine universes in which it would be true, and it is

impossible to prove that there are possible universes in which it would be

false; but it is also impossible (at least, so I believe) to prove that there are no

possible universes in which it would be false. I did not become aware of the

necessity for this axiom until a year after the “Principles” was published. This

book contains, in consequence, certain errors, for example the assertion, in

§119 (p. 124), that the two definitions of infinity are equivalent, which can

only be proved if the multiplicative axiom is assumed.

  Such examples—which might be multiplied indefinitely—show that a

proposition may satisfy the definition with which the “Principles” opens, and

yet may be incapable of logical or mathematical proof or disproof. All

mathematical propositions are included under the definition (with certain

minor emendations), but not all propositions that are included are

mathematical. In order that a proposition may belong to mathematics it must

have a further property: according to some it must be “tautological”, and

according to Carnap it must be “analytic”. It is by no means easy to get anexact definition of this characteristic; moreover, Carnap has shown that it is

necessary to distinguish between “analytic” and “demonstrable”, the latter

being a somewhat narrower concept. And the question whether a proposition

is or is not “analytic” or “demonstrable” depends upon the apparatus of

premisses with which we begin. Unless, therefore, we have some criterion as

to admissible logical premisses, the whole question as to what are logical

propositions becomes to a very considerable extent arbitrary. This is a very

unsatisfactory conclusion, and I do not accept it as final. But before anything

more can be said on this subject, it is necessary to discuss the question of

“logical constants”, which play an essential part in the definition of

mathematics in the first sentence of the “Principles”.

  There are three questions in regard to logical constants: First, are there

such things? Second, how are they defined? Third, do they occur in the

propositions of logic? Of these questions, the first and third are highly

ambiguous, but their various meanings can be made clearer by a little

discussion.

  First: Are there logical constants? There is one sense of this question in

which we can give a perfectly definite affirmative answer: in the linguistic or

symbolic expression of logical propositions, there are words or symbols

which play a constant part, i.e., make the same contribution to the

significance of propositions wherever they occur. Such are, for example,

“or”, “and”, “not”, “if-then”, “the null-class”, “0”, “1”, “2”, … The difficulty

is that, when we analyse the propositions in the written expression of which

such symbols occur, we find that they have no constituents corresponding to

the expressions in question. In some cases this is fairly obvious: not even the

most ardent Platonist would suppose that the perfect “or” is laid up in heaven,

and that the “or’s” here on earth are imperfect copies of the celestial

archetype. But in the case of numbers this is far less obvious. The doctrines

of Pythagoras, which began with arithmetical mysticism, influenced all

subsequent philosophy and mathematics more profoundly than is generally

realized. Numbers were immutable and eternal, like the heavenly bodies;

numbers were intelligible: the science of numbers was the key to the

universe. The last of these beliefs has misled mathematicians and the Board

of Education down to the present day. Consequently, to say that numbers are

symbols which mean nothing appears as a horrible form of atheism. At the

time when I wrote the “Principles”, I shared with Frege a belief in the

Platonic reality of numbers, which, in my imagination, peopled the timelessrealm of Being. It was a comforting faith, which I later abandoned with

regret. Something must now be said of the steps by which I was led to

abandon it.

In Chapter four of the “Principles” it is said that “every word occurring in

a sentence must have some meaning”; and again “Whatever may be an object

of thought, or may occur in any true or false proposition, or can be counted as

one, I call a term… . A man, a moment, a number, a class, a relation, a

chimæra, or anything else that can be mentioned, is sure to be a term; and to

deny that such and such a thing is a term must always be false”. This way of

understanding language turned out to be mistaken. That a word “must have

some meaning”—the word, of course, being not gibberish, but one which has

an intelligible use—is not always true if taken as applying to the word in

isolation. What is true is that the word contributes to the meaning of the

sentence in which it occurs: but that is a very different matter.

The first step in the process was the theory of descriptions. According to

this theory, in the proposition “Scott is the author of Waverley”, there is no

constituent corresponding to “the author of Waverley”: the analysis of the

proposition is, roughly: “Scott wrote Waverley, and whoever wrote Waverley

was Scott”; or, more accurately: “The propositional function ‘x wrote

Waverley is equivalent to x is Scott’ is true for all values of x”. This theory

swept away the contention—advanced, for instance, by Meinong—that there

must, in the realm of Being, be such objects as the golden mountain and the

round square, since we can talk about them. “The round square does not

exist” had always been a difficult proposition; for it was natural to ask “What

is it that does not exist”? and any possible answer had seemed to imply that,

in some sense, there is such an object as the round square, though this object

has the odd property of not existing. The theory of descriptions avoided this

and other difficulties.

The next step was the abolition of classes. This step was taken in

“Principia Mathematica”, where it is said: “The symbols for classes, like

those for descriptions, are, in our system, incomplete symbols; their uses are

defined, but they themselves are not assumed to mean anything at all… .

Thus classes, so far as we introduce them, are merely symbolic or linguistic

conveniences, not genuine objects” (Vol. I, pp. 71–2). Seeing that cardinal

numbers had been defined as classes of classes, they also became “merely

symbolic or linguistic conveniences”. Thus, for example, the proposition “1 +

1 = 2”, somewhat simplified, becomes the following: “Form the propositionalfunction ‘a is not b, and whatever x may be, x is a γ is always equivalent to x

is a or x is b’; form also the propositional function ‘a is a γ, and, whatever x

may be, x is a γ but is not a is always equivalent to x is b’. Then, whatever γ

may be, the assertion that one of these propositional functions is not always

false (for different values of a and b) is equivalent to the assertion that the

other is not always false.” Here the numbers 1 and 2 have entirely

disappeared, and a similar analysis can be applied to any arithmetical

proposition.

Dr. Whitehead, at this stage, persuaded me to abandon points of space,

instants of time, and particles of matter, substituting for them logical

constructions composed of events. In the end, it seemed to result that none of

the raw material of the world has smooth logical properties, but that whatever

appears to have such properties is constructed artificially in order to have

them. I do not mean that statements apparently about points or instants or

numbers, or any of the other entities which Occam’s razor abolishes, are

false, but only that they need interpretation which shows that their linguistic

form is misleading, and that, when they are rightly analysed, the pseudo-

entities in question are found to be not mentioned in them. “Time consists of

instants”, for example, may or may not be a true statement, but in either case

it mentions neither time nor instants. It may, roughly, be interpreted as

follows: Given any event x, let us define as its “contemporaries” those which

end after it begins, but begin before it ends; and among these let us define as

“initial contemporaries” of x those which are not wholly later than any other

contemporaries of x. Then the statement “time consists of instants” is true if,

given any event x, every event which is wholly later than some contemporary

of x is wholly later than some initial contemporary of x. A similar process of

interpretation is necessary in regard to most, if not all, purely logical

constants.

  Thus the question whether logical constants occur in the propositions of

logic becomes more difficult than it seemed at first sight. It is, in fact, a

question to which, as things stand, no definite answer can be given, because

there is no exact definition of “occurring in” a proposition. But something

can be said. In the first place, no proposition of logic can mention any

particular object. The statement “If Socrates is a man and all men are mortal,

then Socrates is mortal” is not a proposition of logic; the logical proposition

of which the above is a particular case is: “If x has the property of , and

whatever has the property  has the property ψ, then x has the property ψ,whatever x, , ψ may be”. The word “property”, which occurs here,

disappears from the correct symbolic statement of the proposition; but “if-

then”, or something serving the same purpose, remains. After the utmost

efforts to reduce the number of undefined elements in the logical calculus, we

shall find ourselves left with two (at least) which seem indispensable: one is

incompatibility; the other is the truth of all values of a propositional function.

(By the “incompatibility” of two propositions is meant that they are not both

true.) Neither of these looks very substantial. What was said earlier about

“or” applies equally to incompatibility; and it would seem absurd to say that

generality is a constituent of a general proposition.

  Logical constants, therefore, if we are able to be able to say anything

definite about them, must be treated as part of the language, not as part of

what the language speaks about. In this way, logic becomes much more

linguistic than I believed it to be at the time when I wrote the “Principles”. It

will still be true that no constants except logical constants occur in the verbal

or symbolic expression of logical propositions, but it will not be true that

these logical constants are names of objects, as “Socrates” is intended to be.

To define logic, or mathematics, is therefore by no means easy except in

relation to some given set of premisses. A logical premiss must have certain

characteristics which can be defined: it must have complete generality, in the

sense that it mentions no particular thing or quality; and it must be true in

virtue of its form. Given a definite set of logical premisses, we can define

logic, in relation to them, as whatever they enable us to demonstrate. But (1)

it is hard to say what makes a proposition true in virtue of its form; (2) it is

difficult to see any way of proving that the system resulting from a given set

of premisses is complete, in the sense of embracing everything that we should

wish to include among logical propositions. As regards this second point, it

has been customary to accept current logic and mathematics as a datum, and

seek the fewest premisses from which this datum can be reconstructed. But

when doubts arise—as they have arisen—concerning the validity of certain

parts of mathematics, this method leaves us in the lurch.

It seems clear that there must be some way of defining logic other than in

relation to a particular logical language. The fundamental characteristic of

logic, obviously, is that which is indicated when we say that logical

propositions are true in virtue of their form. The question of demonstrability

cannot enter in, since every proposition which, in one system, is deduced

from the premisses might, in another system, be itself taken as a premiss. Ifthe proposition is complicated, this is inconvenient, but it cannot be

impossible. All the propositions that are demonstrable in any admissible

logical system must share with the premisses the property of being true in

virtue of their form; and all propositions which are true in virtue of their form

ought to be included in any adequate logic. Some writers, for example

Carnap in his “Logical Syntax of Language”, treat the whole problem as

being more a matter of linguistic choice than I can believe it to be. In the

above-mentioned work, Carnap has two logical languages, one of which

admits the multiplicative axiom and the axiom of infinity, while the other

does not. I cannot myself regard such a matter as one to be decided by our

arbitrary choice. It seems to me that these axioms either do, or do not, have

the characteristic of formal truth which characterizes logic, and that in the

former event every logic must include them, while in the latter every logic

must exclude them. I confess, however, that I am unable to give any clear

account of what is meant by saying that a proposition is “true in virtue of its

form”. But this phrase, inadequate as it is, points, I think, to the problem

which must be solved if an adequate definition of logic is to be found.

I come finally to the question of the contradictions and the doctrine of

types. Henri Poincaré, who considered mathematical logic to be no help in

discovery, and therefore sterile, rejoiced in the contradictions: “La logistique

n’est plus stérile; elle engendre la contradiction!” All that mathematical logic

did, however, was to make it evident that contradictions follow from

premisses previously accepted by all logicians, however innocent of

mathematics. Nor were the contradictions all new; some dated from Greek

times.

In the “Principles”, only three contradictions are mentioned: Burali Forti’s

concerning the greatest ordinal, the contradiction concerning the greatest

cardinal and mine concerning the classes that are not members of themselves

(pp. 323, 366 and 101). What is said as to possible solutions may be ignored,

except Appendix B, on the theory of types; and this itself is only a rough

sketch. The literature on the contradictions is vast, and the subject still

controversial. The most complete treatment of the subject known to me is to

be found in Carnap’s “Logical Syntax of Language” (Kegan Paul, 1937).

What he says on the subject seems to me either right or so difficult to refute

that a refutation could not possibly be attempted in a short space. I shall,

therefore, confine myself to a few general remarks.

At first sight, the contradictions seem to be of three sorts: those that aremathematical, those that are logical and those that may be suspected of being

due to some more or less trivial linguistic trick. Of the definitely

mathematical contradictions, those concerning the greatest ordinal and the

greatest cardinal may be taken as typical. The first of these, Burali Forti’s, is

as follows: Let us arrange all ordinal numbers in order of magnitude; then the

last of these, which we will call N, is the greatest of ordinals. But the number

of all ordinals from 0 up to N is N + 1, which is greater than N. We cannot

escape by suggesting that the series of ordinal numbers has no last term; for

in that case equally this series itself has an ordinal number greater than any

term of the series, i.e., greater than any ordinal number.

The second contradiction, that concerning the greatest cardinal, has the

merit of making peculiarly evident the need for some doctrine of types. We

know from elementary arithmetic that the number of combinations of n things
                            nn
any number at a time is 2, i.e., that a class of n terms has 2 sub-classes. We

can prove that this proposition remains true when n is infinite. And Cantor
              n
proved that 2 is always greater than n. Hence there can be no greatest

cardinal. Yet one would have supposed that the class containing everything

would have the greatest possible number of terms. Since, however, the

number of classes of things exceeds the number of things, clearly classes of

things are not things. (I will explain shortly what this statement can mean.)

Of the obviously logical contradictions, one is discussed in Chapter X: in

the linguistic group, the most famous, that of the liar, was invented by the

Greeks. It is as follows: Suppose a man says “I am lying”. If he is lying, his

statement is true, and therefore he is not lying; if he is not lying, then, when

he says he is lying, he is lying. Thus either hypothesis implies that it is

contradictory.

The logical and mathematical contradictions, as might be expected, are not

really distinguishable: but the linguistic group, according to Ramsey,* can be

solved by what may be called, in a broad sense, linguistic considerations.

They are distinguished from the logical group by the fact that they introduce

empirical notions, such as what somebody asserts or means; and since these

notions are not logical, it is possible to find solutions which depend upon

other than logical considerations. This renders possible a great simplification

of the theory of types, which, as it emerges from Ramsey’s discussion, ceases

wholly to appear unplausible or artificial or a mere ad hoc hypothesis

designed to avoid the contradictions.

The technical essence of the theory of types is merely this: Given apropositional function “x” of which all values are true, there are expressions

for which it is not legitimate to substitute for “x”. For example: All values of

“if x is a man x is a mortal” are true, and we can infer “if Socrates is a man,

Socrates is a mortal”; but we cannot infer “if the law of contradiction is a

man, the law of contradiction is a mortal”. The theory of types declares this

latter set of words to be nonsense, and gives rules as to permissible values of

“x” in “x”. In the detail there are difficulties and complications, but the

general principle is merely a more precise form of one that has always been

recognized. In the older conventional logic, it was customary to point out that

such a form of words as “virtue is triangular” is neither true nor false, but no

attempt was made to arrive at a definite set of rules for deciding whether a

given series of words was or was not significant. This the theory of types

achieves. Thus, for example I state above that “classes of things are not

things”. This will mean: “If ‘x is a member of the class α’ is a proposition,

and ‘x’ is a proposition, then ‘α’ is not a proposition, but a meaningless

collection of symbols.”

  There are still many controversial questions in mathematical logic, which,

in the above pages, I have made no attempt to solve. I have mentioned only

those matters as to which, in my opinion, there has been some fairly definite

advance since the time when the “Principles” was written. Broadly speaking,

I still think this book is in the right where it disagrees with what had been

previously held, but where it agrees with older theories it is apt to be wrong.

The changes in philosophy which seem to me to be called for are partly due

to the technical advances of mathematical logic in the intervening thirty-four

years, which had simplified the apparatus of primitive ideas and propositions,

and have swept away many apparent entities, such as classes, points and

instants. Broadly, the result is an outlook which is less Platonic, or less realist

in the mediæval sense of the word. How far it is possible to go in the

direction of nominalism remains, to my mind, an unsolved question, but one

which, whether completely soluble or not, can only be adequately

investigated by means of mathematical logic.


* Foundations of Mathematics, Kegan Paul, 1931, p. 20 ff.PREFACE




The present work has two main objects. One of these, the proof that all

pure mathematics deals exclusively with concepts definable in terms of a

very small number of fundamental logical concepts, and that all its

propositions are deducible from a very small number of fundamental logical

principles, is undertaken in Parts II.—VII. of this Volume, and will be

established by strict symbolic reasoning in Volume ii. The demonstration of

this thesis has, if I am not mistaken, all the certainty and precision of which

mathematical demonstrations are capable. As the thesis is very recent among

mathematicians, and is almost universally denied by philosophers, I have

undertaken, in this volume, to defend its various parts, as occasion arose,

against such adverse theories as appeared most widely held or most difficult

to disprove. I have also endeavoured to present, in language as untechnical as

possible, the more important stages in the deductions by which the thesis is

established.

The other object of this work, which occupies Part I., is the explanation of

the fundamental concepts which mathematics accepts as indefinable. This is a

purely philosophical task, and I cannot flatter myself that I have done more

than indicate a vast field of inquiry, and give a sample of the methods by

which the inquiry may be conducted. The discussion of indefinables—which

forms the chief part of philosophical logic—is the endeavour to see clearly,

and to make others see clearly, the entities concerned, in order that the mind

may have that kind of acquaintance with them which it has with redness or

the taste of a pineapple. Where, as in the present case, the indefinables are

obtained primarily as the necessary residue in a process of analysis, it is often

easier to know that there must be such entities than actually to perceive them;

there is a process analogous to that which resulted in the discovery of

Neptune, with the difference that the final stage—the search with a mental

telescope for the entity which has been inferred—is often the most difficult

part of the undertaking. In the case of classes, I must confess, I have failed to

perceive any concept fulfilling the conditions requisite for the notion of class.And the contradiction discussed in Chapter x. proves that something is amiss,

but what this is I have hitherto failed to discover.

The second volume, in which I have had the great good fortune to secure

the collaboration of Mr A. N. Whitehead, will be addressed exclusively to

mathematicians; it will contain chains of deductions, from the premisses of

symbolic logic through Arithmetic, finite and infinite, to Geometry, in an

order similar to that adopted in the present volume; it will also contain

various original developments, in which the method of Professor Peano, as

supplemented by the Logic of Relations, has shown itself a powerful

instrument of mathematical investigation.

The present volume, which may be regarded either as a commentary upon,

or as an introduction to, the second volume, is addressed in equal measure to

the philosopher and to the mathematician; but some parts will be more

interesting to the one, others to the other. I should advise mathematicians,

unless they are specially interested in Symbolic Logic, to begin with Part IV.,

and only refer to earlier parts as occasion arises. The following portions are

more specially philosophical: Part I. (omitting Chapter 2.); Part II., Chapters

11., 15., 16.; 17.; Part III.; Part IV., § 207, Chapters 26., 27., 31; Part V.,

Chapters 41., 42., 43.; Part VI., Chapters 50., 51., 52.; Part VII., Chapters 53.,

54., 55., 57., 58.; and the two Appendices, which belong to Part I., and should

be read in connection with it. Profesor Frege’s work, which largely

anticipates my own, was for the most part unknown to me when the printing

of the present work began; I had seen his Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, but,

owing to the great difficulty of his symbolism, I had failed to grasp its

importance or to understand its contents. The only method, at so late a stage,

of doing justice to his work was to devote an Appendix to it; and in some

points the views contained in the Appendix differ from those in Chapter 6.,

especially in §§71, 73, 74. On questions discussed in these sections, I

discovered errors after passing the sheets for the press; these errors, of which

the chief are the denial of the null-class, and the identification of a term with

the class whose only member it is, are rectified in the Appendices. The

subjects treated are so difficult that I feel little confidence in my present

opinions, and regard any conclusions which may be advocated as essentially

hypotheses.

A few words as to the origin of the present work may serve to show the

importance of the questions discussed. About six years ago, I began an

investigation into the philosophy of Dynamics. I was met by the difficultythat, when a particle is subject to several forces, no one of the component

accelerations actually occurs, but only the resultant acceleration, of which

they are not parts; this fact rendered illusory such causation of particulars by

particulars as is affirmed, at first sight, by the law of gravitation. It appeared

also that the difficulty in regard to absolute motion is insoluble on a relational

theory of space. From these two questions I was led to a re-examination of

the principles of Geometry, thence to the philosophy of continuity and

infinity, and thence, with a view to discovering the meaning of the word any,

to Symbolic Logic. The final outcome, as regards the philosophy of

Dynamics, is perhaps rather slender; the reason for this is that almost all the

problems of Dynamics appear to me empirical, and therefore outside the

scope of such a work as the present. Many very interesting questions have

had to be omitted, especially in Parts VI. and VII., as not relevant to my

purpose, which, for fear of misunderstandings, it may be well to explain at

this stage.

  When actual objects are counted, or when Geometry and Dynamics are

applied to actual space or actual matter, or when, in any other way,

mathematical reasoning is applied to what exists, the reasoning employed has

a form not dependent upon the objects to which it is applied being just those

objects that they are, but only upon their having certain general properties. In

pure mathematics, actual objects in the world of existence will never be in

question, but only hypothetical objects having those general properties upon

which depends whatever deduction is being considered; and these general

properties will always be expressible in terms of the fundamental concepts

which I have called logical constants. Thus when space or motion is spoken

of in pure mathematics, it is not actual space or actual motion, as we know

them in experience, that are spoken of, but any entity possessing those

abstract general properties of space or motion that are employed in the

reasonings of geometry or dynamics. The question whether these properties

belong, as a matter of fact, to actual space or actual motion, is irrelevant to

pure mathematics, and therefore to the present work, being, in my opinion, a

purely empirical question, to be investigated in the laboratory or the

observatory. Indirectly, it is true, the discussions connected with pure

mathematics have a very important bearing upon such empirical questions,

since mathematical space and motion are held by many, perhaps most,

philosophers to be self-contradictory, and therefore necessarily different from

actual space and motion, whereas, if the views advocated in the followingpages be valid, no such self-contradictions are to be found in mathematical

space and motion. But extra-mathematical considerations of this kind have

been almost wholly excluded from the present work.

On fundamental questions of philosophy, my position, in all its chief

features, is derived from Mr G. E. Moore. I have accepted from him the non-

existential nature of propositions (except such as happen to assert existence)

and their independence of any knowing mind; also the pluralism which

regards the world, both that of existents and that of entities, as composed of

an infinite number of mutually independent entities, with relations which are

ultimate, and not reducible to adjectives of their terms or of the whole which

these compose. Before learning these views from him, I found myself

completely unable to construct any philosophy of arithmetic, whereas their

acceptance brought about an immediate liberation from a large number of

difficulties which I believe to be otherwise insuperable. The doctrines just

mentioned are, in my opinion, quite indispensable to any even tolerably

satisfactory philosophy of mathematics, as I hope the following pages will

show. But I must leave it to my readers to judge how far the reasoning

assumes these doctrines, and how far it supports them. Formally, my

premisses are simply assumed; but the fact that they allow mathematics to be

true, which most current philosophies do not, is surely a powerful argument

in their favour.

In Mathematics, my chief obligations, as is indeed evident, are to Georg

Cantor and Professor Peano. If I had become acquainted sooner with the

work of Professor Frege, I should have owed a great deal to him, but as it is I

arrived independently at many results which he had already established. At

every stage of my work, I have been assisted more than I can express by the

suggestions, the criticisms and the generous encouragement of Mr A. N.

White-head; he also has kindly read my proofs, and greatly improved the

final expression of a very large number of passages. Many useful hints I owe

also to Mr W. E. Johnson; and in the more philosophical parts of the book I

owe much to Mr G. E. Moore besides the general position which underlies

the whole.

In the endeavour to cover so wide a field, it has been impossible to acquire

an exhaustive knowledge of the literature. There are doubtless many

important works with which I am unacquainted; but where the labour of

thinking and writing necessarily absorbs so much time, such ignorance,

however regrettable, seems not wholly avoidable.  Many words will be found, in the course of discussion, to be defined in

senses apparently departing widely from common usage. Such departures, I

must ask the reader to believe, are never wanton, but have been made with

great reluctance. In philosophical matters, they have been necessitated mainly

by two causes. First, it often happens that two cognate notions are both to be

considered, and that language has two names for the one, but none for the

other. It is then highly convenient to distinguish between the two names

commonly used as synonyms, keeping one for the usual, the other for the

hitherto nameless sense. The other cause arises from philosophical

disagreement with received views. Where two qualities are commonly

supposed inseparably conjoined, but are here regarded as separable, the name

which has applied to their combination will usually have to be restricted to

one or other. For example, propositions are commonly regarded as (1) true or

false, (2) mental. Holding, as I do, that what is true or false is not in general

mental, I require a name for the true or false as such, and this name can

scarcely be other than propositions. In such a case, the departure from usage

is in no degree arbitrary. As regards mathematical terms, the necessity for

establishing the existence-theorem in each case—i.e. the proof that there are

entities of the kind in question—has led to many definitions which appear

widely different from the notions usually attached to the terms in question.

Instances of this are the definitions of cardinal, ordinal and complex numbers.

In the two former of these, and in many other cases, the definition as a class,

derived from the principle of abstraction, is mainly recommended by the fact

that it leaves no doubt as to the existence-theorem. But in many instances of

such apparent departure from usage, it may be doubted whether more has

been done than to give precision to a notion which had hitherto been more or

less vague.

For publishing a work containing so many unsolved difficulties, my

apology is that investigation revealed no near prospect of adequately

resolving the contradiction discussed in Chapter x., or of acquiring a better

insight into the nature of classes. The repeated discovery of errors in

solutions which for a time had satisfied me caused these problems to appear

such as would have been only concealed by any seemingly satisfactory

theories which a slightly longer reflection might have produced; it seemed

better, therefore, merely to state the difficulties, than to wait until I had

become persuaded of the truth of some almost certainly erroneous doctrine.

My thanks are due to the Syndics of the University Press, and to theirSecretary, Mr R. T. Wright, for their kindness and courtesy in regard to the

present volume.

  London, 

December, 1902.                                    Part I


The Indefinables of Mathematics1


DEFINITION OF PURE


MATHEMATICS




1. Pure Mathematics is the class of all propositions of the form “p implies

q”, where p and q are propositions containing one or more variables, the

  same in the two propositions, and neither p nor q contains any constants

  except logical constants. And logical constants are all notions definable

in terms of the following: implication, the relation of a term to a class of

  which it is a member, the notion of such that, the notion of relation and

such further notions as may be involved in the general notion of

  propositions of the above form. In addition to these, mathematics uses a

  notion which is not a constituent of the propositions which it considers,

  namely the notion of truth.

2. The above definition of pure mathematics is, no doubt, somewhat

  unusual. Its various parts, nevertheless, appear to be capable of exact

  justification—a justification which it will be the object of the present

  work to provide. It will be shown that whatever has, in the past, been

  regarded as pure mathematics, is included in our definition, and that

  whatever else is included possesses those marks by which mathematics is

  commonly though vaguely distinguished from other studies. The

  definition professes to be, not an arbitrary decision to use a common

  word in an uncommon signification, but rather a precise analysis of the

  ideas which, more or less unconsciously, are implied in the ordinary

  employment of the term. Our method will therefore be one of analysis,

and our problem may be called philosophical—in the sense, that is to say,

that we seek to pass from the complex to the simple, from the

  demonstrable to its indemonstrable premisses. But in one respect not a

few of our discussions will differ from those that are usually called

  philosophical. We shall be able, thanks to the labours of the  mathematicians themselves, to arrive at certainty in regard to most of the

  questions with which we shall be concerned; and among those capable of

an exact solution we shall find many of the problems which, in the past,

  have been involved in all the traditional uncertainty of philosophical

strife. The nature of number, of infinity, of space, time and motion, and

of mathematical inference itself, are all questions to which, in the present

work, an answer professing itself demonstrable with mathematical

  certainty will be given—an answer which, however, consists in reducing

the above problems to problems in pure logic, which last will not be

  found satisfactorily solved in what follows.

3. The Philosophy of Mathematics has been hitherto as controversial,

  obscure and unprogressive as the other branches of philosophy. Although

it was generally agreed that mathematics is in some sense true,

  philosophers disputed as to what mathematical propositions really meant:

  although something was true, no two people were agreed as to what it

was that was true, and if something was known, no one knew what it was

that was known. So long, however, as this was doubtful, it could hardly

be said that any certain and exact knowledge was to be obtained in

  mathematics. We find, accordingly, that idealists have tended more and

  more to regard all mathematics as dealing with mere appearance, while

  empiricists have held everything mathematical to be approximation to

  some exact truth about which they had nothing to tell us. This state of

  things, it must be confessed, was thoroughly unsatisfactory. Philosophy

asks of Mathematics: What does it mean? Mathematics in the past was

  unable to answer, and Philosophy answered by introducing the totally

  irrelevant notion of mind. But now Mathematics is able to answer, so far

at least as to reduce the whole of its propositions to certain fundamental

  notions of logic. At this point, the discussion must be resumed by

  Philosophy. I shall endeavour to indicate what are the fundamental

  notions involved, to prove at length that no others occur in mathematics

and to point out briefly the philosophical difficulties involved in the

  analysis of these notions. A complete treatment of these difficulties

  would involve a treatise on Logic, which will not be found in the

  following pages.

4. There was, until very lately, a special difficulty in the principles of

  mathematics. It seemed plain that mathematics consists of deductions,

and yet the orthodox accounts of deduction were largely or wholly  inapplicable to existing mathematics. Not only the Aristotelian syllogistic

  theory, but also the modern doctrines of Symbolic Logic, were either

  theoretically inadequate to mathematical reasoning, or at any rate

  required such artificial forms of statement that they could not be

  practically applied. In this fact lay the strength of the Kantian view,

  which asserted that mathematical reasoning is not strictly formal, but

  always uses intuitions, i.e. the à priori knowledge of space and time.

  Thanks to the progress of Symbolic Logic, especially as treated by

  Professor Peano, this part of the Kantian philosophy is now capable of a

final and irrevocable refutation. By the help of ten principles of deduction

and ten other premisses of a general logical nature (e.g. “implication is a

  relation”), all mathematics can be strictly and formally deduced; and all

the entities that occur in mathematics can be defined in terms of those

that occur in the above twenty premisses. In this statement, Mathematics

  includes not only Arithmetic and Analysis, but also Geometry, Euclidean

and non-Euclidean, rational Dynamics and an indefinite number of other

  studies still unborn or in their infancy. The fact that all Mathematics is

  Symbolic Logic is one of the greatest discoveries of our age; and when

this fact has been established, the remainder of the principles of

  mathematics consists in the analysis of Symbolic Logic itself.

5. The general doctrine that all mathematics is deduction by logical

  principles from logical principles was strongly advocated by Leibniz,

who urged constantly that axioms ought to be proved and that all except a

few fundamental notions ought to be defined. But owing partly to a faulty

  logic, partly to belief in the logical necessity of Euclidean Geometry, he

was led into hopeless errors in the endeavour to carry out in detail a view

  which, in its general outline, is now known to be correct.* The actual

  propositions of Euclid, for example, do not follow from the principles of

  logic alone; and the perception of this fact led Kant to his innovations in

the theory of knowledge. But since the growth of non-Euclidean

  Geometry, it has appeared that pure mathematics has no concern with the

  question whether the axioms and propositions of Euclid hold of actual

  space or not: this is a question for applied mathematics, to be decided, so

far as any decision is possible, by experiment and observation. What pure

  mathematics asserts is merely that the Euclidean propositions follow

from the Euclidean axioms—i.e. it asserts an implication: any space

  which has such and such properties has also such and such other  properties. Thus, as dealt with in pure mathematics, the Euclidean and

  non-Euclidean Geometries are equally true: in each nothing is affirmed

  except implications. All propositions as to what actually exists, like the

  space we live in, belong to experimental or empirical science, not to

  mathematics; when they belong to applied mathematics, they arise from

  giving to one or more of the variables in a proposition of pure

  mathematics some constant value satisfying the hypothesis, and thus

  enabling us, for that value of the variable, actually to assert both

  hypothesis and consequent instead of asserting merely the implication.

We assert always in mathematics that if a certain assertion p is true of

any entity x, or of any set of entities x, y, z, …, then some other assertion

q is true of those entities; but we do not assert either p or q separately of

our entities. We assert a relation between the assertions p and q, which I

  shall call formal implication.

6. Mathematical propositions are not only characterized by the fact that they

  assert implications, but also by the fact that they contain variables. The

  notion of the variable is one of the most difficult with which Logic has to

  deal, and in the present work a satisfactory theory as to its nature, in spite

of much discussion, will hardly be found. For the present, I only wish to

  make it plain that there are variables in all mathematical propositions,

  even where at first sight they might seem to be absent. Elementary

  Arithmetic might be thought to form an exception: 1 + 1 = 2 appears

  neither to contain variables nor to assert an implication. But as a matter

of fact, as will be shown in Part II, the true meaning of this proposition

is: “If x is one and y is one, and x differs from y, then x and y are two.”

And this proposition both contains variables and asserts an implication.

We shall find always, in all mathematical propositions, that the words

any or some occur; and these words are the marks of a variable and a

  formal implication. Thus the above proposition may be expressed in the

  form: “Any unit and any other unit are two units.” The typical proposition

of mathematics is of the form “ (x, y, z, …) implies ψ (x, y, z, …),

  whatever values x, y, z, … may have”; where  (x, y, z, …) and ψ (x, y, z,

…), for every set of values of x, y, z, …, are propositions. It is not asserted

that  is always true, nor yet that ψ is always true, but merely that, in all

cases, when  is false as much as when  is true, ψ follows from it.

The distinction between a variable and a constant is somewhat obscured by

mathematical usage. It is customary, for example, to speak of parameters asin some sense constants, but this is a usage which we shall have to reject. A

constant is to be something absolutely definite, concerning which there is no

ambiguity whatever. Thus 1, 2, 3, e, π, Socrates, are constants; and so are

man, and the human race, past, present and future, considered collectively.

Proposition, implication, class, etc. are constants; but a proposition, any

proposition, some proposition, are not constants, for these phrases do not

denote one definite object. And thus what are called parameters are simply

variables. Take, for example, the equation ax + by + c = 0, considered as the

equation to a straight line in a plane. Here we say that x and y are variables,

while a, b, c are constants. But unless we are dealing with one absolutely

particular line, say the line from a particular point in London to a particular

point in Cambridge, our a, b, c are not definite numbers, but stand for any

numbers, and are thus also variables. And in Geometry nobody does deal

with actual particular lines; we always discuss any line. The point is that we

collect the various couples x, y into classes of classes, each class being

defined as those couples that have a certain fixed relation to one triad (a, b,

c). But from class to class, a, b, c also vary, and are therefore properly

variables.

7. It is customary in mathematics to regard our variables as restricted to

certain classes: in Arithmetic, for instance, they are supposed to stand for

  numbers. But this only means that if they stand for numbers, they satisfy

  some formula, i.e. the hypothesis that they are numbers implies the

  formula. This, then, is what is really asserted, and in this proposition it is

no longer necessary that our variables should be numbers: the implication

  holds equally when they are not so. Thus, for example, the proposition “x
                                        222
and y are numbers implies (x + y) = x + 2xy + y” holds equally if for x

and y we substitute Socrates and Plato:* both hypothesis and consequent,

in this case, will be false, but the implication will still be true. Thus in

  every proposition of pure mathematics, when fully stated, the variables

  have an absolutely unrestricted field: any conceivable entity may be

  substituted for any one of our variables without impairing the truth of our

  proposition.

8. We can now understand why the constants in mathematics are to be

  restricted to logical constants in the sense defined above. The process of

  transforming constants in a proposition into variables leads to what is

  called generalization, and gives us, as it were, the formal essence of a

  proposition. Mathematics is interested exclusively in types of  propositions; if a proposition p containing only constants be proposed,

and for a certain one of its terms we imagine others to be successively

  substituted, the result will in general be sometimes true and sometimes

false. Thus, for example, we have “Socrates is a man”; here we turn

  Socrates into a variable, and consider “x is a man”. Some hypotheses as

to x, for example, “x is a Greek”, insure the truth of “x is a man”; thus “x

is a Greek” implies “x is a man”, and this holds for all values of x. But

the statement is not one of pure mathematics, because it depends upon

the particular nature of Greek and man. We may, however, vary these

too, and obtain: If a and b are classes, and a is contained in b, then “x is

an a” implies “x is a b”. Here at last we have a proposition of pure

  mathematics, containing three variables and the constants class,

  contained in and those involved in the notion of formal implications with

  variables. So long as any term in our proposition can be turned into a

  variable, our proposition can be generalized; and so long as this is

  possible, it is the business of mathematics to do it. If there are several

  chains of deduction which differ only as to the meaning of the symbols,

so that propositions symbolically identical become capable of several

  interpretations, the proper course, mathematically, is to form the class of

  meanings which may attach to the symbols, and to assert that the formula

in question follows from the hypothesis that the symbols belong to the

class in question. In this way, symbols which stood for constants become

  transformed into variables, and new constants are substituted, consisting

of classes to which the old constants belong. Cases of such generalization

are so frequent that many will occur at once to every mathematician, and

  innumerable instances will be given in the present work. Whenever two

  sets of terms have mutual relations of the same type, the same form of

  deduction will apply to both. For example, the mutual relations of points

in a Euclidean plane are of the same type as those of the complex

  numbers; hence plane geometry, considered as a branch of pure

  mathematics, ought not to decide whether its variables are points or

  complex numbers or some other set of entities having the same type of

  mutual relations. Speaking generally, we ought to deal, in every branch

of mathematics, with any class of entities whose mutual relations are of a

  specified type; thus the class, as well as the particular term considered,

  becomes a variable, and the only true constants are the types of relations

and what they involve. Now a type of relation is to mean, in this  discussion, a class of relations characterized by the above formal identity

of the deductions possible in regard to the various members of the class;

and hence a type of relations, as will appear more fully hereafter, if not

  already evident, is always a class definable in terms of logical constants.*

We may therefore define a type of relation as a class of relations defined

by some property definable in terms of logical constants alone.

9. Thus pure mathematics must contain no indefinables except logical

  constants, and consequently no premisses, or indemonstrable

  propositions, but such as are concerned exclusively with logical constants

and with variables. It is precisely this that distinguishes pure from

  applied mathematics. In applied mathematics, results which have been

  shown by pure mathematics to follow from some hypothesis as to the

  variable are actually asserted of some constant satisfying the hypothesis

in question. Thus terms which were variables become constant, and a

new premiss is always required, namely: this particular entity satisfies the

  hypothesis in question. Thus for example Euclidean Geometry, as a

branch of pure mathematics, consists wholly of propositions having the

  hypothesis “S is a Euclidean space”. If we go on to: “The space that

  exists is Euclidean”, this enables us to assert of the space that exists the

  consequents of all the hypotheticals constituting Euclidean Geometry,

  where now the variable S is replaced by the constant actual space. But by

this step we pass from pure to applied mathematics.

10. The connection of mathematics with logic, according to the above

  account, is exceedingly close. The fact that all mathematical constants are

logical constants, and that all the premisses of mathematics are concerned

with these, gives, I believe, the precise statement of what philosophers

  have meant in asserting that mathematics is à priori. The fact is that,

  when once the apparatus of logic has been accepted, all mathematics

  necessarily follows. The logical constants themselves are to be defined

only by enumeration, for they are so fundamental that all the properties

by which the class of them might be defined presuppose some terms of

the class. But practically, the method of discovering the logical constants

is the analysis of symbolic logic, which will be the business of the

  following chapters. The distinction of mathematics from logic is very

  arbitrary, but if a distinction is desired, it may be made as follows. Logic

  consists of the premisses of mathematics, together with all other

  propositions which are concerned exclusively with logical constants andwith variables but do not fulfil the above definition of mathematics (§ 1).

  Mathematics consists of all the consequences of the above premisses

  which assert formal implications containing variables, together with such

of the premisses themselves as have these marks. Thus some of the

  premisses of mathematics, e.g. the principle of the syllogism, “if p

  implies q and q implies r, then p implies r”, will belong to mathematics,

  while others, such as “implication is a relation”, will belong to logic but

not to mathematics. But for the desire to adhere to usage, we might

  identify mathematics and logic, and define either as the class of

  propositions containing only variables and logical constants; but respect

for tradition leads me rather to adhere to the above distinction, while

  recognizing that certain propositions belong to both sciences.

  From what has now been said, the reader will perceive that the present

work has to fulfil two objects, first, to show that all mathematics follows

from symbolic logic, and secondly to discover, as far as possible, what are

the principles of symbolic logic itself. The first of these objects will be

pursued in the following Parts, while the second belongs to Part I. And first

of all, as a preliminary to a critical analysis, it will be necessary to give an

outline of Symbolic Logic considered simply as a branch of mathematics.

This will occupy the following chapter


* On this subject, cf. Couturat, La Logique de Leibniz, Paris, 1901.

* It is necessary to suppose arithmetical addition and multiplication

defined (as may be easily done) so that the above formula remains significant

when x and y are not numbers.

* One-one, many-one, transitive, symmetrical, are instances of types of

relations with which we shall be often concerned.2


SYMBOLIC LOGIC




11. Symbolic or Formal Logic—I shall use these terms as synonyms—is the

  study of the various general types of deduction. The word symbolic

  designates the subject by an accidental characteristic, for the employment

of mathematical symbols, here as elsewhere, is merely a theoretically

  irrelevant convenience. The syllogism in all its figures belongs to

  Symbolic Logic, and would be the whole subject if all deduction were

  syllogistic, as the scholastic tradition supposed. It is from the recognition

of asyllogistic inferences that modern Symbolic Logic, from Leibniz

  onward, has derived the motive to progress. Since the publication of

  Boole’s Laws of Thought (1854), the subject has been pursued with a

certain vigour, and has attained a very considerable technical

  development.* Nevertheless, the subject achieved almost nothing of

  utility either to philosophy or to other branches of mathematics, until it

was transformed by the new methods of Professor Peano.† Symbolic

  Logic has now become not only absolutely essential to every

  philosophical logician, but also necessary for the comprehension of

  mathematics generally, and even for the successful practice of certain

  branches of mathematics. How useful it is in practice can only be judged

by those who have experienced the increase of power derived from

  acquiring it; its theoretical functions must be briefly set forth in the

  present chapter.*

12. Symbolic Logic is essentially concerned with inference in general,† and

is distinguished from various special branches of mathematics mainly by

its generality. Neither mathematics nor symbolic logic will study such

  special relations as (say) temporal priority, but mathematics will deal

  explicitly with the class of relations possessing the formal properties of

  temporal priority—properties which are summed up in the notion of

  continuity.‡ And the formal properties of a relation may be defined as  those that can be expressed in terms of logical constants, or again as

  those which, while they are preserved, permit our relation to be varied

  without invalidating any inference in which the said relation is regarded

in the light of a variable. But symbolic logic, in the narrower sense which

is convenient, will not investigate what inferences are possible in respect

of continuous relations (i.e. relations generating continuous series); this

  investigation belongs to mathematics, but is still too special for symbolic

  logic. What symbolic logic does investigate is the general rules by which

  inferences are made, and it requires a classification of relations or

  propositions only in so far as these general rules introduce particular

  notions. The particular notions which appear in the propositions of

  symbolic logic, and all others definable in terms of these notions, are the

logical constants. The number of indefinable logical constants is not

  great: it appears, in fact, to be eight or nine. These notions alone form the

  subject-matter of the whole of mathematics: no others, except such as are

  definable in terms of the original eight or nine, occur anywhere in

  Arithmatic, Geometry or rational Dynamics. For the technical study of

  Symbolic Logic, it is convenient to take as a single indefinable the notion

of a formal implication, i.e. of such propositions as “x is a man implies x is

a mortal, for all values of x”—propositions whose general type is: “ (x)

  implies ψ (x) for all values of x”, where  (x), ψ (x), for all values of x, are

  propositions. The analysis of this notion of formal implication belongs to

the principles of the subject, but is not required for its formal development.

In addition to this notion, we require as indefinables the following:

  implication between propositions not containing variables, the relation of a

term to a class of which it is a member, the notion of such that, the notion

of relation and truth. By means of these notions, all the propositions of

  symbolic logic can be stated.

13. The subject of Symbolic Logic consists of three parts, the calculus of

  propositions, the calculus of classes and the calculus of relations.

  Between the first two, there is, within limits, a certain parallelism, which

  arises as follows: In any symbolic expression, the letters may be

  interpreted as classes or as propositions, and the relation of inclusion in

the one case may be replaced by that of formal implication in the other.

  Thus, for example, in the principle of the syllogism, if a, b, c be classes,

and a is contained in b, b in c, then a is contained in c; but if a, b, c be

  propositions, and a implies b, b implies c, then a implies c. A great dealhas been made of this duality, and in the later editions of the Formulaire,

  Peano appears to have sacrificed logical precision to its preservation.*

But, as a matter of fact, there are many ways in which the calculus of

  propositions differs from that of classes. Consider, for example, the

  following: “If p, q, r are propositions, and p implies q or r, then p implies

q or p implies r.” This proposition is true; but its correlative is false,

  namely: “If a, b, c are classes, and a is contained in b or c, then a is

  contained in b or a is contained in c.” For example, English people are all

  either men or women, but are not all men nor yet all women. The fact is

that the duality holds for propositions asserting of a variable term that it

  belongs to a class, i.e. such propositions as “x is a man”, provided that

the implication involved be formal, i.e. one which holds for all values of

x. But “x is a man” is itself not a proposition at all, being neither true nor

  false; and it is not with such entities that we are concerned in the

  propositional calculus, but with genuine propositions. To continue the

  above illustration: It is true that, for all values of x, “x is a man or a

  woman” either implies “x is a man” or implies “x is a woman”. But it is

  false that “x is a man or woman” either implies “x is a man” for all values

of x, or implies “x is a woman” for all values of x. Thus the implication

  involved, which is always one of the two, is not formal, since it does not

hold for all values of x, being not always the same one of the two. The

  symbolic affinity of the propositional and the class logic is, in fact,

  something of a snare, and we have to decide which of the two we are to

  make fundamental. Mr McColl, in an important series of papers,† has

  contended for the view that implication and propositions are more

  fundamental than inclusion and classes; and in this opinion I agree with

  him. But he does not appear to me to realize adequately the distinction

  between genuine propositions and such as contain a real variable: thus he

is led to speak of propositions as sometimes true and sometimes false,

  which of course is impossible with a genuine proposition. As the

  distinction involved is of very great importance, I shall dwell on it before

  proceeding further. A proposition, we may say, is anything that is true or

that is false. An expression such as “x is a man” is therefore not a

  proposition, for it is neither true nor false. If we give to x any constant

  value whatever, the expression becomes a proposition: it is thus as it

were a schematic form standing for any one of a whole class of

  propositions. And when we say “x is a man implies x is a mortal for all  values of x”, we are not asserting a single implication, but a class of

  implications; we have now a genuine proposition, in which, though the

  letter x appears, there is no real variable: the variable is absorbed in the

  same kind of way as the x under the integral sign in a definite integral, so

that the result is no longer a function of x. Peano distinguishes a variable

  which appears in this way as apparent, since the proposition does not

  depend upon the variable; whereas in “x is a man” there are different

  propositions for different values of the variable, and the variable is what

  Peano calls real.* I shall speak of propositions exclusively where there is

no real variable: where there are one or more real variables, and for all

  values of the variables the expression involved is a proposition, I shall

call the expression a propositional function. The study of genuine

  propositions is, in my opinion, more fundamental than that of classes; but

the study of propositional functions appears to be strictly on a par with

that of classes, and indeed scarcely distinguishable therefrom. Peano, like

  McColl, at first regarded propositions as more fundamental than classes,

but he, even more definitely, considered propositional functions rather

than propositions. From this criticism, Schröder is exempt: his second

  volume deals with genuine propositions, and points out their formal

  differences from classes.A. THE PROPOSITIONAL CALCULUS



14. The propositional calculus is characterized by the fact that all its

  propositions have as hypothesis and as consequent the assertion of a

  material implication. Usually, the hypothesis is of the form “p implies p”,

etc., which (§ 16) is equivalent to the assertion that the letters which

  occur in the consequent are propositions. Thus the consequents consist of

  propositional functions which are true of all propositions. It is important

to observe that, though the letters employed are symbols for variables,

and the consequents are true when the variables are given values which

are propositions, these values must be genuine propositions, not

  propositional functions. The hypothesis “p is a proposition” is not

  satisfied if for p we put “x is a man”, but it is satisfied if we put “Socrates

is a man” or if we put “x is a man implies x is a mortal for all values of

x”. Shortly, we may say that the propositions represented by single letters

in this calculus are variables, but do not contain variables—in the case,

that is to say, where the hypotheses of the propositions which the

  calculus asserts are satisfied.

15. Our calculus studies the relation of implication between propositions.

This relation must be distinguished from the relation of formal

  implication, which holds between propositional functions when the one

  implies the other for all values of the variable. Formal implication is also

  involved in this calculus, but is not explicitly studied: we do not consider

  propositional functions in general, but only certain definite propositional

  functions which occur in the propositions of our calculus. How far formal

  implication is definable in terms of implication simply, or material

  implication as it may be called, is a difficult question, which will be

  discussed in Chapter 3. What the difference is between the two, an

  illustration will explain. The fifth proposition of Euclid follows from the

fourth: if the fourth is true, so is the fifth, while if the fifth is false, so is

the fourth. This is a case of material implication, for both propositions

are absolute constants, not dependent for their meaning upon the

  assigning of a value to a variable. But each of them states a formal

  implication. The fourth states that if x and y be triangles fulfilling certain

  conditions, then x and y are triangles fulfilling certain other conditions,

and that this implication holds for all values of x and y; and the fifth  states that if x is an isosceles triangle, x has the angles at the base equal.

The formal implication involved in each of these two propositions is

  quite a different thing from the material implication holding between the

  propositions as wholes; both notions are required in the propositional

  calculus, but it is the study of material implication which specially

  distinguishes this subject, for formal implication occurs throughout the

  whole of mathematics.

It has been customary, in treatises on logic, to confound the two kinds of

implication, and often to be really considering the formal kind where the

material kind only was apparently involved. For example, when it is said that

“Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is a mortal”, Socrates is felt as a

variable: he is a type of humanity, and one feels that any other man would

have done as well. If, instead of therefore, which implies the truth of

hypothesis and consequent, we put “Socrates is a man implies Socrates is a

mortal”, it appears at once that we may substitute not only another man, but

any other entity whatever, in the place of Socrates. Thus although what is

explicitly stated, in such a case, is a material implication, what is meant is a

formal implication; and some effort is needed to confine our imagination to

material implication.

16. A definition of implication is quite impossible. If p implies q, then if p

is true q is true, i.e. p’s truth implies q’s truth; also if q is false p is false,

i.e. q’s falsehood implies p’s falsehood.* Thus truth and falsehood give

us merely new implications, not a definition of implication. If p implies

q, then both are false or both true, or p is false and q true; it is impossible

to have q false and p true, and it is necessary to have q true or p false.† In

fact, the assertion that q is true or p false turns out to be strictly

  equivalent to “p implies q”; but as equivalence means mutual

  implication, this still leaves implication fundamental, and not definable in

  terms of disjunction. Disjunction, on the other hand, is definable in terms

of implication, as we shall shortly see. It follows from the above

  equivalence that of any two propositions there must be one which implies

the other, that false propositions imply all propositions, and true

  propositions are implied by all propositions. But these are results to be

  demonstrated; the premisses of our subject deal exclusively with rules of

  inference.

It may be observed that, although implication is indefinable, proposition

can be defined. Every proposition implies itself, and whatever is not aproposition implies nothing. Hence to say “p is a proposition” is equivalent to

saying “p implies p”; and this equivalence may be used to define

propositions. As the mathematical sense of definition is widely different from

that current among philosophers, it may be well to observe that, in the

mathematical sense, a new propositional function is said to be defined when

it is stated to be equivalent to (i.e. to imply and be implied by) a propositional

function which has either been accepted as indefinable or has been defined in

terms of indefinables. The definition of entities which are not propositional

functions is derived from such as are in ways which will be explained in

connection with classes and relations.

17. We require, then, in the propositional calculus, no indefinables except

the two kinds of implication—remembering, however, that formal

  implication is a complex notion, whose analysis remains to be

  undertaken. As regards our two indefinables, we require certain

  indemonstrable propositions, which hitherto I have not succeeded in

  reducing to less than ten. Some indemonstrables there must be; and some

  propositions, such as the syllogism, must be of the number, since no

  demonstration is possible without them. But concerning others, it may be

  doubted whether they are indemon-strable or merely undemonstrated;

and it should be observed that the method of supposing an axiom false,

and deducing the consequences of this assumption, which has been found

  admirable in such cases as the axiom of parallels, is here not universally

  available. For all our axioms are principles of deduction; and if they are

  true, the consequences which appear to follow from the employment of

an opposite principle will not really follow, so that arguments from the

  supposition of the falsity of an axiom are here subject to special fallacies.

  Thus the number of indemonstrable propositions may be capable of

further reduction, and in regard to some of them I know of no grounds for

  regarding them as indemonstrable except that they have hitherto

  remained undemonstrated.

18. The ten axioms are the following. (1) If p implies q, then p implies q;*

in other words, whatever p and q may be, “p implies q” is a proposition.

(2) If p implies q, then p implies p; in other words, whatever implies

  anything is a proposition. (3) If p implies q, then q implies q; in other

  words, whatever is implied by anything is a proposition. (4) A true

  hypothesis in an implication may be dropped, and the consequent

  asserted. This is a principle incapable of formal symbolic statement, and  illustrating the essential limitations of formalism—a point to which I

  shall return at a later stage. Before proceeding further, it is desirable to

define the joint assertion of two propositions, or what is called their

logical product. This definition is highly artificial, and illustrates the

great distinction between mathematical and philosophical definitions. It

is as follows: If p implies p, then, if q implies q, pq (the logical product

of p and q) means that if p implies that q implies r, then r is true. In other

  words, if p and q are propositions, their joint assertion is equivalent to

  saying that every proposition is true which is such that the first implies

that the second implies it. We cannot, with formal correctness, state our

  definition in this shorter form, for the hypothesis “p and q are

  propositions” is already the logical product of “p is a proposition” and “q

is a proposition”. We can now state the six main principles of inference,

to each of which, owing to its importance, a name is to be given; of these

all except the last will be found in Peano’s accounts of the subject. (5) If

p implies p and q implies q, then pq implies p. This is called

  simplification, and asserts merely that the joint assertion of two

  propositions implies the assertion of the first of the two. (6) If p implies q

and q implies r, then p implies r. This will be called the syllogism. (7) If

q implies q and r implies r, and if p implies that q implies r, then pq

  implies r. This is the principle of importation. In the hypothesis, we have

a product of three propositions; but this can of course be defined by

  means of the product of two. The principle states that if p implies that q

  implies r, then r follows from the joint assertion of p and q. For example:

“If I call on so-and-so, then if she is at home I shall be admitted” implies

“If I call on so-and-so and she is at home, I shall be admitted”. (8) If p

  implies p and q implies q, then, if pq implies r, then p implies that q

  implies r. This is the converse of the preceding principle, and is called

  exportation.* The previous illustration reversed will illustrate this

  principle. (9) If p implies q and p implies r, then p implies qr: in other

  words, a proposition which implies each of two propositions implies

  them both. This is called the principle of composition. (10) If p implies p

and q implies q, then “‘p implies q’ implies p” implies p. This is called

the principle of reduction; it has less self-evidence than the previous

  principles, but is equivalent to many propositions that are self-evident. I

  prefer it to these, because it is explicitly concerned, like its predecessors,

with implication, and has the same kind of logical character as they have.If we remember that “p implies q” is equivalent to “q or not-p”, we can

  easily convince ourselves that the above principle is true; for “‘p implies

q’ implies p” is equivalent to “p or the denial of ‘q or not-p’”, i.e. to “p or

‘p and not q’”, i.e. to p. But this way of persuading ourselves that the

  principle of reduction is true involves many logical principles which have

not yet been demonstrated, and cannot be demonstrated except by

  reduction or some equivalent. The principle is especially useful in

  connection with negation. Without its help, by means of the first nine

  principles, we can prove the law of contradiction; we can prove, if p and

q be propositions, that p implies not-not-p; that “p implies not-q” is

  equivalent to “q implies not-p” and to not-pq; that “p implies q” implies

  “not-q implies not-p”; that p implies that not-p implies p; that not-p is

  equivalent to “p implies not-p”; and that “p implies not-q” is equivalent

to “not-not-p implies not-q”. But we cannot prove without reduction or

  some equivalent (so far at least as I have been able to discover) that p or

  not-p must be true (the law of excluded middle); that every proposition is

  equivalent to the negation of some other proposition; that not-not-p

  implies p; that “not-q implies not-p” implies “p implies q”; that “not-p

  implies p” implies p, or that “p implies q” implies “q or not-p”. Each of

  these assumptions is equivalent to the principle of reduction, and may, if

we choose, be substituted for it. Some of them—especially excluded

  middle and double negation—appear to have far more self-evidence. But

  when we have seen how to define disjunction and negation in terms of

  implication, we shall see that the supposed simplicity vanishes, and that,

for formal purposes at any rate, reduction is simpler than any of the

  possible alternatives. For this reason I retain it among my premisses in

  preference to more usual and more superficially obvious propositions.

19. Disjunction or logical addition is defined as follows: “p or q” is

  equivalent to “‘p implies q’ implies q”. It is easy to persuade ourselves of

this equivalence, by remembering that a false proposition implies every

  other; for if p is false, p does imply q, and therefore, if “p implies q”

  implies q, it follows that q is true. But this argument again uses principles

  which have not yet been demonstrated, and is merely designed to

  elucidate the definition by anticipation. From this definition, by the help

of reduction, we can prove that “p or q” is equivalent to “q or p”. An

  alternative definition, deducible from the above, is: “Any proposition

  implied by p and implied by q is true”, or, in other words, “‘p implies s’and ‘q implies s’ together imply s, whatever s may be”. Hence we

  proceed to the definition of negation: not-p is equivalent to the assertion

that p implies all propositions, i.e. that “r implies r” implies “p implies r”

  whatever r may be.* From this point we can prove the laws of

  contradiction and excluded middle and double negation, and establish all

the formal properties of logical multiplication and addition—the

  associative, commutative and distributive laws. Thus the logic of

  propositions is now complete.

  Philosophers will object to the above definitions of disjunction and

negation on the ground that what we mean by these notions is something

quite distinct from what the definitions assign as their meanings, and that the

equivalences stated in the definitions are, as a matter of fact, significant

propositions, not mere indications as to the way in which symbols are going

to be used. Such an objection is, I think, well-founded, if the above account is

advocated as giving the true philosophic analysis of the matter. But where a

purely formal purpose is to be served, any equivalence in which a certain

notion appears on one side but not on the other will do for a definition. And

the advantage of having before our minds a strictly formal development is

that it provides the data for philosophical analysis in a more definite shape

than would be otherwise possible. Criticism of the procedure of formal logic,

therefore, will be best postponed until the present brief account has been

brought to an end.B. THE CALCULUS OF CLASSES



20. In this calculus there are very much fewer new primitive propositions—

in fact, two seem sufficient—but there are much greater difficulties in the

way of non-symbolic exposition of the ideas embedded in our

  symbolism. These difficulties, as far as possible, will be postponed to

later chapters. For the present, I shall try to make an exposition which is

to be as straightforward and simple as possible.

The calculus of classes may be developed by regarding as fundamental the

notion of class, and also the relation of a member of a class to its class. This

method is adopted by Professor Peano, and is perhaps more philosophically

correct than a different method which, for formal purposes, I have found

more convenient. In this method we still take as fundamental the relation

(which, following Peano, I shall denote by ε) of an individual to a class to

which it belongs, i.e. the relation of Socrates to the human race which is

expressed by saying that Socrates is a man. In addition to this, we take as

indefinables the notion of a propositional function and the notion of such

that. It is these three notions that characterize the class-calculus. Something

must be said in explanation of each of them.

21. The insistence on the distinction between ε and the relation of whole

and part between classes is due to Peano, and is of very great importance

to the whole technical development and the whole of the applications to

  mathematics. In the scholastic doctrine of the syllogism, and in all

  previous symbolic logic, the two relations are confounded, except in the

  work of Frege.* The distinction is the same as that between the relation

of individual to species and that of species to genus, between the relation

of Socrates to the class of Greeks and the relation of Greeks to men. On

the philosophical nature of this distinction I shall enlarge when I come to

deal critically with the nature of classes; for the present it is enough to

  observe that the relation of whole and part is transitive, while ε is not so:

we have Socrates is a man, and men are a class, but not Socrates is a

class. It is to be observed that the class must be distinguished from the

  class-concept or predicate by which it is to be defined: thus men are a

class, while man is a class-concept. The relation ε must be regarded as

  holding between Socrates and men considered collectively, not between

  Socrates and man. I shall return to this point in Chapter 6. Peano holdsthat all propositional functions containing only a single variable are

  capable of expression in the form “x is an a”, where a is a constant class;

but this view we shall find reason to doubt.

22. The next fundamental notion is that of a propositional function.

  Although propositional functions occur in the calculus of propositions,

they are there each defined as it occurs, so that the general notion is not

  required. But in the class-calculus it is necessary to introduce the general

  notion explicitly. Peano does not require it, owing to his assumption that

the form “x is an a” is general for one variable, and that extensions of the

  same form are available for any number of variables. But we must avoid

this assumption, and must therefore introduce the notion of a

  propositional function. We may explain (but not define) this notion as

  follows: x is a propositional function if, for every value of x, x is a

  proposition, determinate when x is given. Thus “x is a man” is a

  propositional function. In any proposition, however complicated, which

  contains no real variables, we may imagine one of the terms, not a verb

or adjective, to be replaced by other terms: instead of “Socrates is a man”

we may put “Plato is a man”, “the number 2 is a man”, and so on.* Thus

we get successive propositions all agreeing except as to the one variable

term. Putting x for the variable term, “x is a man” expresses the type of

all such propositions. A propositional function in general will be true for

  some values of the variable and false for others. The instances where it is

true for all values of the variable, so far as they are known to me, all

  express implications, such as “x is a man implies x is a mortal”; but I

  know of no à priori reason for asserting that no other propositional

  functions are true for all values of the variable.

23. This brings me to the notion of such that. The values of x which render a

  propositional function x true are like the roots of an equation—indeed the

  latter are a particular case of the former—and we may consider all the

  values of x which are such that x is true. In general, these values form a

  class, and in fact a class may be defined as all the terms satisfying some

  propositional function. There is, however, some limitation required in

this statement, though I have not been able to discover precisely what the

  limitation is. This results from a certain contradiction which I shall

  discuss at length at a later stage (Chap. 10). The reasons for defining

  class in this way are, that we require to provide for the null-class, which

  prevents our defining a class as a term to which some other has the  relation ε, and that we wish to be able to define classes by relations, i.e.

all the terms which have to other terms the relation R are to form a class,

and such cases require somewhat complicated propositional functions.

24. With regard to these three fundamental notions, we require two

  primitive propositions. The first asserts that if x belongs to the class of

  terms satisfying a propositional function x, then x is true. The second

  asserts that if x and ψx are equivalent propositions for all values of x, then

the class of x’s such that x is true is identical with the class of x’s such

that ψx is true. Identity, which occurs here, is defined as follows: x is

  identical with y if y belongs to every class to which x belongs, in other

  words, if “x is a u” implies “y is a u” for all values of u. With regard to

the primitive proposition itself, it is to be observed that it decides in

  favour of an extensional view of classes.

Two class concepts need not be identical when their extensions are so: man

and featherless biped are by no means identical, and no more are even prime

and integer between 1 and 3. These are class-concepts, and if our axiom is to

hold, it must not be of these that we are to speak in dealing with classes. We

must be concerned with the actual assemblage of terms, not with any concept

denoting that assemblage. For mathematical purposes, this is quite essential.

Consider, for example, the problem as to how many combinations can be

formed of a given set of terms taken any number at a time, i.e. as to how

many classes are contained in a given class. If distinct classes may have the

same extension, this problem becomes utterly indeterminate. And certainly

common usage would regard a class as determined when all its terms are

given. The extensional view of classes, in some form, is thus essential to

Symbolic Logic and to mathematics, and its necessity is expressed in the

above axiom. But the axiom itself is not employed until we come to

Arithmetic; at least it need not be employed, if we choose to distinguish the

equality of classes, which is defined as mutual inclusion, from the identity of

individuals. Formally, the two are totally distinct: identity is defined as

above, equality of a and b is defined by the equivalence of “x is an a” and “x

is a b” for all values of x.

25. Most of the propositions of the class-calculus are easily deduced from

  those of the propositional calculus. The logical product or common part

of two classes a and b is the class of x’s such that the logical product of

“x is an a” and “x is a b” is true. Similarly we define the logical sum of

  two classes (a or b), and the negation of a class (not-a). A new idea is  introduced by the logical product and sum of a class of classes. If k is a

class of classes, its logical product is the class of terms belonging to each

of the classes of k, i.e. the class of terms x such that “u is a k” implies “x

is a u” for all values of u. The logical sum is the class which is contained

in every class in which every class of the class k is contained, i.e. the

class of terms x such that, if “u is a k” implies “u is contained in c” for all

  values of u, then, for all values of c, x is a c. And we say that a class a is

  contained in a class b when “x is an a” implies “x is a b” for all values of

x. In like manner with the above we may define the product and sum of a

class of propositions. Another very important notion is what is called the

  existence of a class—a word which must not be supposed to mean what

  existence means in philosophy. A class is said to exist when it has at least

one term. A formal definition is as follows: a is an existent class when

and only when any proposition is true provided “x is an a” always

  implies it whatever value we may give to x. It must be understood that

the proposition implied must be a genuine proposition, not a

  propositional function of x. A class a exists when the logical sum of all

  propositions of the form “x is an a” is true, i.e. when not all such

  propositions are false.

It is important to understand clearly the manner in which propositions in

the class-calculus are obtained from those in the propositional calculus.

Consider, for example, the syllogism. We have “p implies q” and “q implies

r” imply “p implies r”. Now put “x is an a”, “x is a b”, “x is a c” for p, q, r,

where x must have some definite value, but it is not necessary to decide what

value. We then find that if, for the value of x in question, x is an a implies x is

a b, and x is a b implies x is a c, then x is an a implies x is a c. Since the value

of x is irrelevant, we may vary x, and thus we find that if a is contained in b,

and b in c, then a is contained in c. This is the class-syllogism. But in

applying this process it is necessary to employ the utmost caution, if fallacies

are to be successfully avoided. In this connection it will be instructive to

examine a point upon which a dispute has arisen between Schröder and Mr

McColl.* Schröder asserts that if p, q, r are propositions, “pq implies r” is

equivalent to the disjunction “p implies r or q implies r”. Mr McColl admits

that the disjunction implies the other, but denies the converse implication.

The reason for the divergence is that Schröder is thinking of propositions and

material implication, while Mr McColl is thinking of propositional functions

and formal implication. As regards propositions, the truth of the principlemay be easily made plain by the following considerations. If pq implies r,

then, if either p or q be false, the one of them which is false implies r,

because false propositions imply all propositions. But if both be true, pq is

true, and therefore r is true, and therefore p implies r and q implies r, because

true propositions are implied by every proposition. Thus in any case, one at

least of the propositions p and q must imply r. (This is not a proof, but an

elucidation.) But Mr McColl objects: Suppose p and q to be mutually

contradictory, and r to be the null proposition, then pq implies r but neither p

nor q implies r. Here we are dealing with propositional functions and formal

implication. A propositional function is said to be null when it is false for all

values of x; and the class of x’s satisfying the function is called the null-class,

being in fact a class of no terms. Either the function or the class, following

Peano, I shall denote by Λ. Now let our r be replaced by Λ, our p by x, and

our q by not-x, where x is any propositional function. Then pq is false for

all values of x, and therefore implies Λ. But it is not in general the case that 

x is always false, nor yet that not-x is always false; hence neither always

implies Λ. Thus the above formula can only be truly interpreted in the

propositional calculus: in the class-calculus it is false. This may be easily

rendered obvious by the following considerations: Let x, ψx, χx be three

propositional functions. Then “x . ψx implies χx” implies, for all values of x,

that either x implies χx or ψx implies χx. But it does not imply that either x

implies χx for all values of x, or ψx implies χx for all values of x. The

disjunction is what I shall call a variable

  disjunction, as opposed to a constant one: that is, in some cases one

alternative is true, in others the other, whereas in a constant disjunction there

is one of the alternatives (though it is not stated which) that is always true.

Wherever disjunctions occur in regard to propositional functions, they will

only be transformable into statements in the class-calculus in cases where the

disjunction is constant. This is a point which is both important in itself and

instructive in its bearings. Another way of stating the matter is this: In the

proposition: If x . ψx implies χx, then either x implies χx or ψx implies χx,

the implication indicated by if and then is formal, while the subordinate

implications are material; hence the subordinate implications do not lead to

the inclusion of one class in another, which results only from formal

implication.

The formal laws of addition, multiplication, tautology and negation are the

same as regards classes and propositions. The law of tautology states that nochange is made when a class or proposition is added to or multiplied by itself.

A new feature of the class-calculus is the null-class, or class having no terms.

This may be defined as the class of terms that belong to every class, as the

class which does not exist (in the sense defined above), as the class which is

contained in every class, as the class Λ which is such that the propositional

function “x is a Λ” is false for all values of x, or as the class of x’s satisfying

any propositional function x which is false for all values of x. All these

definitions are easily shown to be equivalent.

26. Some important points arise in connection with the theory of identity.

We have already defined two terms as identical when the second belongs

to every class to which the first belongs. It is easy to show that this

  definition is symmetrical, and that identity is transitive and reflexive (i.e.

if x and y, y and z are identical, so are x and z; and whatever x may be, x

is identical with x). Diversity is defined as the negation of identity. If x be

any term, it is necessary to distinguish from x the class whose only

  member is x: this may be defined as the class of terms which are identical

with x. The necessity for this distinction, which results primarily from

  purely formal considerations, was discovered by Peano; I shall return to

it at a later stage. Thus the class of even primes is not to be identified

with the number 2, and the class of numbers which are the sum of 1 and 2

is not to be identified with 3. In what, philosophically speaking, the

  difference consists, is a point to be considered in Chapter 6.C. THE CALCULUS OF RELATIONS



27. The calculus of relations is a more modern subject than the calculus of

  classes. Although a few hints for it are to be found in De Morgan,*

  subject was first developed by C. S. Peirce.* A careful analysis of

  mathematical reasoning shows (as we shall find in the course of the

  present work) that types of relations are the true subject-matter discussed,

  however a bad phraseology may disguise this fact; hence the logic of

  relations has a more immediate bearing on mathematics than that of

  classes or propositions, and any theoretically correct and adequate

  expression of mathematical truths is only possible by its means. Peirce

and Schröder have realized the great importance of the subject, but

  unfortunately their methods, being based, not on Peano, but on the older

  Symbolic Logic derived (with modifications) from Boole, are so

  cumbrous and difficult that most of the applications which ought to be

  made are practically not feasible. In addition to the defects of the old

  Symbolic Logic, their method suffers technically (whether

  philosophically or not I do not at present discuss) from the fact that they

  regard a relation essentially as a class of couples, thus requiring elaborate

  formulae of summation for dealing with single relations. This view is

  derived, I think, probably unconsciously, from a philosophical error: it

has always been customary to suppose relational propositions less

  ultimate than class-propositions (or subject-predicate propositions, with

  which class-propositions are habitually confounded), and this has led to a

  desire to treat relations as a kind of class. However this may be, it was

  certainly from the opposite philosophical belief, which I derived from my

  friend Mr G. E. Moore,† that I was led to a different formal treatment of

  relations. This treatment, whether more philosophically correct or not, is

  certainly far more convenient and far more powerful as an engine of

  discovery in actual mathematics.‡

28. If R be a relation, we express by xRy the propositional function “x has

the relation R to y”. We require a primitive (i.e. indemonstrable)

  proposition to the effect that xRy is a proposition for all values of x and y.

We then have to consider the following classes: the class of terms which

  have the relation R to some term or other, which I call the class of

  referents with respect to R; and the class of terms to which some termshas the relation R, which I call the class of relata. Thus if R be paternity,

the referents will be fathers and the relata will be children. We have also

to consider the corresponding classes with respect to particular terms or

  classes of terms: so-and-so’s children, or the children of Londoners,

  afford illustrations.

The intensional view of relations here advocated leads to the result that two

relations may have the same extension without being identical. Two relations

R, R' are said to be equal or equivalent, or to have the same extension, when

xRy implies and is implied by xR' y for all values of x and y. But there is no

need here of a primitive proposition, as there was in the case of classes, in

order to obtain a relation which is determinate when the extension is

determinate. We may replace a relation R by the logical sum or product of the

class of relations equivalent to R, i.e. by the assertion of some or of all such

relations; and this is identical with the logical sum or product of the class of

relations equivalent to R' , if R' be equivalent to R. Here we use the identity of

two classes, which results from the primitive proposition as to identity of

classes, to establish the identity of two relations—a procedure which could

not have been applied to classes themselves without a vicious circle.

A primitive proposition in regard to relations is that every relation has a

converse, i.e. that, if R be any relation, there is a relation R' such that xRy is

equivalent to yR' x for all values of x and y. Following Schröder, I shall

denote the converse of R by R. Greater and less, before and after, implying

and implied by, are mutually converse relations. With some relations, such as

identity, diversity, equality, inequality, the converse is the same as the

original relation: such relations are called symmetrical. When the converse is

incompatible with the original relations, as in such cases as greater and less, I

call the relation asymmetrical; in intermediate cases, not-symmetrical.

The most important of the primitive propositions in this subject is that

between any two terms there is a relation not holding between any two other

terms. This is analogous to the principle that any term is the only member of

some class; but whereas that could be proved, owing to the extensional view

of classes, this principle, so far as I can discover, is incapable of proof. In this

point, the extensional view of relations has an advantage; but the advantage

appears to me to be outweighed by other considerations. When relations are

considered intensionally, it may seem possible to doubt whether the above

principle is true at all. It will, however, be generally admitted that, of any two

terms, some propositional function is true which is not true of a certain givendifferent pair of terms. If this be admitted, the above principle follows by

considering the logical product of all the relations that hold between our first

pair of terms. Thus the above principle may be replaced by the following,

which is equivalent to it: If xRy implies x' Ry' , whatever R may be, so long as

R is a relation, then x and x' , y and y' are respectively identical. But this

principle introduces a logical difficulty from which we have been hitherto

exempt, namely a variable with a restricted field; for unless R is a relation,

xRy is not a proposition at all, true or false, and thus R, it would seem, cannot

take all values, but only such as are relations. I shall return to the discussion

of this point at a later stage.

29. Other assumptions required are that the negation of a relation is a

  relation, and that the logical product of a class of relations (i.e. the

  assertion of all of them simultaneously) is a relation. Also the relative

  product of two relations must be a relation. The relative product of two

  relations R, S is the relation which holds between x and z whenever there

is a term y to which x has the relation R and which has to z the relation S.

  Thus the relation of a maternal grandfather to his grandson is the relative

  product of father and mother; that of a paternal grandmother to her

  grandson is the relative product of mother and father; that of grandparent

to grandchild is the relative product of parent and parent. The relative

  product, as these instances show, is not in general commutative, and does

not in general obey the law of tautology. The relative product is a notion

of very great importance. Since it does not obey the law of tautology, it

  leads to powers of relations: the square of the relation of parent and child

is the relation of grandparent and grandchild, and so on. Peirce and

  Schröder consider also what they call the relative sum of two relations R

and S, which holds between x and z, when, if y be any other term

  whatever, either x has to y the relation R, or y has to z the relation S. This

is a complicated notion, which I have found no occasion to employ, and

  which is introduced only in order to preserve the duality of addition and

  multiplication. This duality has a certain technical charm when the

  subject is considered as an independent branch of mathematics; but when

it is considered solely in relation to the principles of mathematics, the

  duality in question appears devoid of all philosophical importance.

30. Mathematics requires, so far as I know, only two other primitive

  propositions, the one that material implication is a relation, the other that

ε (the relation of a term to a class to which it belongs) is a relation.* Wecan now develop the whole of mathematics without further assumptions

or indefinables. Certain propositions in the logic of relations deserve to

be mentioned, since they are important, and it might be doubted whether

they were capable of formal proof. If u, v be any two classes, there is a

  relation R the assertion of which between any two terms x and y is

  equivalent to the assertion that x belongs to u and y to v. If u be any class

  which is not null, there is a relation which all its terms have to it, and

  which holds for no other pairs of terms. If R be any relation, and u any

class contained in the class of referents with respect to R, there is a

  relation which has u for the class of its referents, and is equivalent to R

  throughout that class; this relation is the same as R where it holds, but has

a more restricted domain. (I use domain as synonymous with class of

  referents.) From this point onwards, the development of the subject is

  technical: special types of relations are considered, and special branches

of mathematics result. D. PEANO’S SYMBOLIC LOGIC



31. So much of the above brief outline of Symbolic Logic is inspired by

  Peano, that it seems desirable to discuss his work explicitly, justifying by

  criticism the points in which I have departed from him.

The question as to which of the notions of symbolic logic are to be taken as

indefinable, and which of the propositions as indemonstrable, is, as Professor

Peano has insisted,* to some extent arbitrary. But it is important to establish

all the mutual relations of the simpler notions of logic, and to examine the

consequence of taking various notions as indefinable. It is necessary to

realize that definition, in mathematics, does not mean, as in philosophy, an

analysis of the idea to be defined into constituent ideas. This notion, in any

case, is only applicable to concepts, whereas in mathematics it is possible to

define terms which are not concepts.† Thus also many notions are defined by

symbolic logic which are not capable of philosophical definition, since they

are simple and unanalysable. Mathematical definition consists in pointing out

a fixed relation to a fixed term, of which one term only is capable: this term is

then defined by means of the fixed relation and the fixed term. The point in

which this differs from philosophical definition may be elucidated by the

remark that the mathematical definition does not point out the term in

question, and that only what may be called philosophical insight reveals

which it is among all the terms there are. This is due to the fact that the term

is defined by a concept which denotes it unambiguously, not by actually

mentioning the term denoted. What is meant by denoting, as well as the

different ways of denoting, must be accepted as primitive ideas in any

symbolic logic:‡ in this respect, the order adopted seems not in any degree

arbitrary.

32. For the sake of definiteness, let us now examine one of Professor

  Peano’s expositions of the subject. In his later expositions§ he has

  abandoned the attempt to distinguish clearly certain ideas and

  propositions as primitive, probably because of the realization that any

such distinction is largely arbitrary. But the distinction appears useful, as

  introducing greater definiteness, and as showing that a certain set of

  primitive ideas and propositions are sufficient; so, far from being

  abandoned, it ought rather to be made in every possible way. I shall,

  therefore, in what follows, expound one of his earlier expositions, that of  1897.¶

The primitive notions with which Peano starts are the following: class, the

relation of an individual to a class of which it is a member, the notion of a

term, implication where both propositions contain the same variables, i.e.

formal implication the simultaneous affirmation of two propositions, the

notion of definition and the negation of a proposition. From these notions,

together with the division of a complex proposition into parts, Peano

professes to deduce all symbolic logic by means of certain primitive

propositions. Let us examine the deduction in outline.

We may observe, to begin with, that the simultaneous affirmation of two

propositions might seem, at first sight, not enough to take as a primitive idea.

For although this can be extended, by successive steps, to the simultaneous

affirmation of any finite number of propositions, yet this is not all that is

wanted; we require to be able to affirm simultaneously all the propositions of

any class, finite or infinite. But the simultaneous assertion of a class of

propositions, oddly enough, is much easier to define than that of two

propositions (see § 34, (3)). If k be a class of propositions, their simultaneous

affirmation is the assertion that “p is a k” implies p. If this holds, all

propositions of the class are true; if it fails, one at least must be false. We

have seen that the logical product of two propositions can be defined in a

highly artificial manner; but it might almost as well be taken as indefinable,

since no further property can be proved by means of the definition. We may

observe, also, that formal and material implication are combined by Peano

into one primitive idea, whereas they ought to be kept separate.

33. Before giving any primitive propositions, Peano proceeds to some

  definitions. (1) If a is a class, “x and y are a’s” is to mean “x is an a and y

is an a”. (2) If a and b are classes, “every a is a b” means “x is an a

  implies that x is a b”. If we accept formal implication as a primitive

  notion, this definition seems unobjectionable; but it may well be held that

the relation of inclusion between classes is simpler than formal

  implication, and should not be defined by its means. This is a difficult

  question, which I reserve for subsequent discussion. A formal implication

  appears to be the assertion of a whole class of material implications. The

  complication introduced at this point arises from the nature of the

  variable, a point which Peano, though he has done very much to show its

  importance, appears not to have himself sufficiently considered. The

  notion of one proposition containing a variable implying another such  proposition, which he takes as primitive, is complex, and should

  therefore be separated into its constituents; from this separation arises the

  necessity of considering the simultaneous affirmation of a whole class of

  propositions before interpreting such a proposition as “x is an a implies

that x is a b”. (3) We come next to a perfectly worthless definition, which

has been since abandoned.* This is the definition of such that. The x’s

such that x is an a, we are told, are to mean the class a. But this only

  gives the meaning of such that when placed before a proposition of the

type “x is an a”. Now it is often necessary to consider an x such that some

  proposition is true of it, where this proposition is not of the form “x is an

a”. Peano holds (though he does not lay it down as an axiom) that every

  proposition containing only one variable is reducible to the form “x is an

a”.* But we shall see (Chap. 10) that at least one such proposition is not

  reducible to this form. And in any case, the only utility of such that is to

  effect the reduction, which cannot therefore be assumed to be already

  effected without it. The fact is that such that contains a primitive idea,

but one which it is not easy clearly to disengage from other ideas.

In order to grasp the meaning of such that, it is necessary to observe, first

of all, that what Peano and mathematicians generally call one proposition

containing a variable is really, if the variable is apparent, the conjunction of a

certain class of propositions defined by some constancy of form; while if the

variable is real, so that we have a propositional function, there is not a

proposition at all, but merely a kind of schematic representation of any

proposition of a certain type. “The sum of the angles of a triangle is two right

angles”, for example, when stated by means of a variable, becomes: Let x be

a triangle; then the sum of the angles of x is two right angles. This expresses

the conjunction of all the propositions in which it is said of particular definite

entities that if they are triangles, the sum of their angles is two right angles.

But a propositional function, where the variable is real, represents any

proposition of a certain form, not all such propositions (see §§ 59–62). There

is, for each propositional function, an indefinable relation between

propositions and entities, which may be expressed by saying that all the

propositions have the same form, but different entities enter into them. It is

this that gives rise to propositional functions. Given, for example, a constant

relation and a constant term, there is a one-one correspondence between the

propositions asserting that various terms have the said relation to the said

term, and the various terms which occur in these propositions. It is this notionwhich is requisite for the comprehension of such that. Let x be a variable

whose values form the class a, and let f (x) be a one-valued function of x

which is a true proposition for all values of x within the class a, and which is

false for all other values of x. Then the terms of a are the class of terms such

that f (x) is a true proposition. This gives an explanation of such that. But it

must always be remembered that the appearance of having one proposition f

(x) satisfied by a number of values of x is fallacious: f (x) is not a proposition

at all, but a propositional function. What is fundamental is the relation of

various propositions of given form to the various terms entering severally

into them as arguments or values of the variable; this relation is equally

required for interpreting the propositional function f (x) and the notion such

that, but is itself ultimate and inexplicable. (4) We come next to the definition

of the logical product, or common part, of two classes. If a and b be two

classes, their common part consists of the class of terms x such that x is an a

and x is a b. Here already, as Padoa points out (loc. cit.), it is necessary to

extend the meaning of such that beyond the case where our proposition

asserts membership of a class, since it is only by means of the definition that

the common part is shown to be a class.

34. The remainder of the definitions preceding the primitive propositions

are less important, and may be passed over. Of the primitive

  propositions, some appear to be merely concerned with the symbolism,

and not to express any real properties of what is symbolized; others, on

the contrary, are of high logical importance.

(1) The first of Peano’s axioms is “every class is contained in itself”. This

is equivalent to “every proposition implies itself”. There seems no way of

evading this axiom, which is equivalent to the law of identity, except the

method adopted above, of using self-implication to define propositions. (2)

Next we have the axiom that the product of two classes is a class. This ought

to have been stated, as ought also the definition of the logical product, for a

class of classes; for when stated for only two classes, it cannot be extended to

the logical product of an infinite class of classes. If class is taken as

indefinable, it is a genuine axiom, which is very necessary to reasoning. But

it might perhaps be somewhat generalized by an axiom concerning the terms

satisfying propositions of a given form: e.g. “the terms having one or more

given relations to one or more given terms form a class”. In Section B, above,

the axiom was wholly evaded by using a generalized form of the axiom as the

definition of class. (3) We have next two axioms which are really only one,and appear distinct only because Peano defines the common part of two

classes instead of the common part of a class of classes. These two axioms

state that, if a, b be classes, their logical product, ab, is contained in a and is

contained in b. These appear as different axioms, because, as far as the

symbolism shows, ab might be different from ba. It is one of the defects of

most symbolisms that they give an order to terms which intrinsically have

none, or at least none that is relevant. So in this case: if K be a class of

classes, the logical product of K consists of all terms belonging to every class

that belongs to K. With this definition, it becomes at once evident that no

order of the terms of K is involved. Hence if K has only two terms, a and b, it

is indifferent whether we represent the logical product of K by ab or by ba,

since the order exists only in the symbols, not in what is symbolized. It is to

be observed that the corresponding axiom with regard to propositions is, that

the simultaneous assertion of a class of propositions implies any proposition

of the class; and this is perhaps the best form of the axiom. Nevertheless,

though an axiom is not required, it is necessary, here as elsewhere, to have a

means of connecting the case where we start from a class of classes or of

propositions or of relations with the case where the class results from

enumeration of its terms. Thus although no order is involved in the product of

a class of propositions, there is an order in the product of two definite

propositions p, q, and it is significant to assert that the products pq and qp are

equivalent. But this can be proved by means of the axioms with which we

began the calculus of propositions (§ 18). It is to be observed that this proof

is prior to the proof that the class whose terms are p and q is identical with

the class whose terms are q and p. (4) We have next two forms of syllogism,

both primitive propositions. The first asserts that, if a, b, c be classes, and a is

contained in b, and x is an a, then x is a b; the second asserts that if a, b, c be

classes, and a is contained in b, b in c, then a is contained in c. It is one of the

greatest of Peano’s merits to have clearly distinguished the relation of the

individual to its class from the relation of inclusion between classes. The

difference is exceedingly fundamental: the former relation is the simplest and

most essential of all relations, the latter a complicated relation derived from

logical implication. It results from the distinction that the syllogism in

Barbara has two forms, usually confounded: the one the time-honoured

assertion that Socrates is a man, and therefore mortal, the other the assertion

that Greeks are men, and therefore mortal. These two forms are stated by

Peano’s axioms. It is to be observed that, in virtue of the definition of what ismeant by one class being contained in another, the first form results from the

axiom that, if p, q, r be propositions, and p implies that q implies r, then the

product of p and q implies r. This axiom is now substituted by Peano for the

first form of the syllogism:* it is more general and cannot be deduced from

the said form. The second form of the syllogism, when applied to

propositions instead of classes, asserts that implication is transitive. This

principle is, of course, the very life of all chains of reasoning. (5) We have

next a principle of reasoning which Peano calls composition: this asserts that

if a is contained in b and also in c, then it is contained in the common part of

both. Stating this principle with regard to propositions, it asserts that if a

proposition implies each of two others, then it implies their joint assertion or

logical product; and this is the principle which was called composition above.

35. From this point, we advance successfully until we require the idea of

  negation. This is taken, in the edition of the Formulaire we are

  considering, as a new primitive idea, and disjunction is defined by its

  means. By means of the negation of a proposition, it is of course easy to

define the negation of a class: for “x is a not-a” is equivalent to “x is not

an a”. But we require an axiom to the effect that not-a is a class, and

  another to the effect that not-not-a is a.

  Peano gives also a third axiom, namely: If a, b, c be classes, and ab is

contained in c, and x is an a but not a c, then x is not a b. This is simpler in

the form: If p, q, r be propositions, and p, q together imply r, and q is true

while r is false, then q is false. This would be still further improved by being

put in the form: If q, r are propositions, and q implies r, then not-r implies

not-q; a form which Peano obtains as a deduction. By dealing with

propositions before classes or propositional functions, it is possible, as we

saw, to avoid treating negation as a primitive idea, and to replace all axioms

respecting negation by the principle of reduction.

We come next to the definition of the disjunction or logical sum of two

classes. On this subject Peano has many times changed his procedure. In the

edition we are considering, “a or b” is defined as the negation of the logical

product of not-a and not-b, i.e. as the class of terms which are not both not-a

and not-b. In later editions (e.g. F. 1901, p. 19), we find a somewhat less

artificial definition, namely: “a or b” consists of all terms which belong to

any class which contains a and contains b. Either definition seems logically

unobjectionable. It is to be observed that a and b are classes, and that it

remains a question for philosophical logic whether there is not a quitedifferent notion of the disjunction of individuals, as e.g. “Brown or Jones”. I

shall consider this question in Chapter 5. It will be remembered that, when

we begin by the calculus of propositions, disjunction is defined before

negation; with the above definition (that of 1897), it is plainly necessary to

take negation first.

36. The connected notions of the null-class and the existence of a class are

next dealt with. In the edition of 1897, a class is defined as null when it is

  contained in every class. When we remember the definition of one class a

  being contained in another b (“x is an a” implies “x is a b” for all values

of x), we see that we are to regard the implication as holding for all

  values, and not only for those values for which x really is an a. This is a

  point upon which Peano is not explicit, and I doubt whether he has made

up his mind on it. If the implication were only to hold when x really is an

a, it would not give a definition of the null-class, for which this

  hypothesis is false for all values of x. I do not know whether it is for this

  reason or for some other that Peano has since abandoned the definition of

the inclusion of classes by means of formal implication between

  propositional functions: the inclusion of classes appears to be now

  regarded as indefinable. Another definition which Peano has sometimes

  favoured (e.g. F. 1895, Errata, p. 116) is, that the null-class is the product

of any class into its negation—a definition to which similar remarks

  apply. In R. d. M. vii, No. 1 (§ 3, Prop. 1. 0), the null-class is defined as

the class of those terms that belong to every class, i.e. the class of terms x

such that “a is a class” implies “x is an a” for all values of a. There are of

  course no such terms x; and there is a grave logical difficulty in trying to

  interpret extensionally a class which has no extension. This point is one

to which I shall return in Chapter 6.

  From this point onward, Peano’s logic proceeds by a smooth development.

But in one respect it is still defective: it does not recognize as ultimate

relational propositions not asserting membership of a class. For this reason,

the definitions of a function* and of other essentially relational notions are

defective. But this defect is easily remedied by applying, in the manner

explained above, the principles of the Formulaire to the logic of relations.†


* E.g. F. 1901, Part I, § 10, Props. 1. 0. 01 (p. 33).

† See my article “Sur la logique des relations”, R. d. M. Vol. vii, 2 (1901).

* By far the most complete account of the non-Peanesque methods will befound in the three volumes of Schröder, Vorlesungen über die Algebra der

Logik, Leipzig, 1890, 1891, 1895.

† See Formulaire de Mathématiques, Turin, 1895, with subsequent

editions in later years; also Revue de Mathématiques, Vol. vii, No. 1 (1900).

The editions of the Formulaire will be quoted as F. 1895 and so on. The

Revue de Mathématiques, which was originally the Rivista di Matematica,

will be referred to as R. d. M.

* In what follows the main outlines are due to Professor Peano, except as

regards relations; even in those cases where I depart from his views, the

problems considered have been suggested to me by his works.

† I may as well say at once that I do not distinguish between inference and

deduction. What is called induction appears to me to be either disguised

deduction or a mere method of making plausible guesses

† Cf. “The Calculus of Equivalent Statements”, Proceedings of the London

Mathematical Society, Vol. ix and subsequent volumes; “Symbolic

Reasoning”, Mind, Jan. 1880, Oct. 1897 and Jan. 1900; “La Logique

Symbolique et ses Applications”, Bibliothèque du Congrès International de

Philosophie, Vol. iii (Paris, 1901). I shall in future quote the proceedings of

the above Congress by the title Congrès.

† I may as well state once for all that the alternatives of a disjunction will

never be considered as mutually exclusive unless expressly said to be so.

‡ See below, Part V, Chap. 36.

* On the points where the duality breaks down, cf. Schröder, op. cit., Vol.

ii, Lecture 21.

* F. 1901, p. 2.

* The reader is recommended to observe that the main implications in

these statements are formal, i.e. “p implies q” formally implies “p’s truth

implies q’s truth”, while the subordinate implications are material.

* Note that the implications denoted by if and then, in these axioms, are

formal, while those denoted by implies are material.

* (7) and (8) cannot (I think) be deduced from the definition of the logical

product, because they are required for passing from “If p is a proposition,

then ‘q is a proposition’ implies etc”. to “If p and q are propositions, then

etc”.

* The principle that false propositions imply all propositions solves Lewis

Carroll’s logical paradox in Mind, N. S. No. 11 (1894). The assertion made in

that paradox is that, if p, q, r be propositions, and q implies r, while p impliesthat q implies not-r, then p must be false, on the supposed ground that “q

implies r” and “q implies not-r” are incompatible. But in virtue of our

definition of negation, if q be false both these implications will hold: the two

together, in fact, whatever proposition r may be, are equivalent to not-q. Thus

the only inference warranted by Lewis Carroll’s premisses is that if p be true,

q must be false, i.e. that p implies not-q; and this is the conclusion, oddly

enough, which common sense would have drawn in the particular case which

he discusses.

* See his B. egriffsschrift, Halle, 1879, and Grundgesetze der Arithmetik,

Jena, 1893, p. 2.

* Verbs and adjectives occurring as such are distinguished by the fact that,

if they be taken as variable, the resulting function is only a proposition for

some values of the variable, i.e. for such as are verbs or adjectives

respectively. See Chap. 4.

* Schröder, Algebra der Logik, Vol. ii, pp. 258–9; McColl, “Calculus of

Equivalent Statements”, fifth paper, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc., Vol. xxviii, p.

182.

* Camb. Phil. Trans., Vol. x, “On the Syllogism, No. iv, and on the Logic

of Relations”. Cf. ib. Vol. ix, p. 104; also his Formal Logic (London, 1847),

p. 50.

* See especially his articles on the Algebra of Logic, American Journal of

Mathematics, Vols. iii and vii. The subject is treated at length by C. S.

Peirce’s methods in Schröder, op. cit., Vol. iii.

† See his article “On the Nature of Judgment”, Mind, N. S. No. 30.

‡ See my articles in R. d. M. Vol. vii, No. 2 and subsequent numbers.

* There is a difficulty in regard to this primitive proposition, discussed in

§§ 53, 94 below.

* E.g. F. 1901, p. 6; F. 1897, Part I, pp. 62–3.

* In consequence of the criticisms of Padoa, R. d. M. Vol. vi, p. 112.

* R. d. M. Vol. vii, No. 1, p. 25; F. 1901, p. 21, § 2, Prop. 4. 0, Note.

* See e.g. F. 1901, Part I, § 1, Prop. 3. 3 (p. 10).

† See Chap. 4.

‡ See Chap. 5.

§ F. 1901 and R. d. M. Vol. vii, No. 1 (1900).

¶ F. 1897, Part 1.3


IMPLICATION AND FORMAL


IMPLICATION




37. In the preceding chapter I endeavoured to present, briefly and

  uncritically, all the data, in the shape of formally fundamental ideas and

  propositions, that pure mathematics requires. In subsequent Parts I shall

  show that these are all the data by giving definitions of the various

  mathematical concepts—number, infinity, continuity, the various spaces

of geometry and motion. In the remainder of Part I, I shall give

  indications, as best I can, of the philosophical problems arising in the

  analysis of the data, and of the directions in which I imagine these

  problems to be probably soluble. Some logical notions will be elicited

  which, though they seem quite fundamental to logic, are not commonly

  discussed in works on the subject; and thus problems no longer clothed in

  mathematical symbolism will be presented for the consideration of

  philosophical logicians.

Two kinds of implication, the material and the formal, were found to be

essential to every kind of deduction. In the present chapter I wish to examine

and distinguish these two kinds, and to discuss some methods of attempting

to analyse the second of them.

In the discussion of inference, it is common to permit the intrusion of a

psychological element, and to consider our acquisition of new knowledge by

its means. But it is plain that where we validly infer one proposition from

another, we do so in virtue of a relation which holds between the two

propositions whether we perceive it or not: the mind, in fact, is as purely

receptive in inference as common sense supposes it to be in perception of

sensible objects. The relation in virtue of which it is possible for us validly to

infer is what I call material implication. We have already seen that it would

be a vicious circle to define this relation as meaning that if one proposition istrue, then another is true, for if and then already involve implication. The

relation holds, in fact, when it does hold, without any reference to the truth or

falsehood of the propositions involved.

But in developing the consequences of our assumptions as to implication,

we were led to conclusions which do not by any means agree with what is

commonly held concerning implication, for we found that any false

proposition implies every proposition and any true proposition is implied by

every proposition. Thus propositions are formally like a set of lengths each of

which is one inch or two, and implication is like the relation “equal to or less

than” among such lengths. It would certainly not be commonly maintained

that “2 + 2 = 4” can be deduced from “Socrates is a man”, or that both are

implied by “Socrates is a triangle”. But the reluctance to admit such

implications is chiefly due, I think, to preoccupation with formal implication,

which is a much more familiar notion, and is really before the mind, as a rule,

even where material implication is what is explicitly mentioned. In inferences

from “Socrates is a man”, it is customary not to consider the philosopher who

vexed the Athenians, but to regard Socrates merely as a symbol, capable of

being replaced by any other man; and only a vulgar prejudice in favour of

true propositions stands in the way of replacing Socrates by a number, a table

or a plum-pudding. Nevertheless, wherever, as in Euclid, one particular

proposition is deduced from another, material implication is involved, though

as a rule the material implication may be regarded as a particular instance of

some formal implication, obtained by giving some constant value to the

variable or variables involved in the said formal implication. And although,

while relations are still regarded with the awe caused by unfamiliarity, it is

natural to doubt whether any such relation as implication is to be found, yet,

in virtue of the general principles laid down in Section C of the preceding

chapter, there must be a relation holding between nothing except

propositions, and holding between any two propositions of which either the

first is false or the second true. Of the various equivalent relations satisfying

these conditions, one is to be called implication, and if such a notion seems

unfamiliar, that does not suffice to prove that it is illusory.

38. At this point, it is necessary to consider a very difficult logical problem,

  namely, the distinction between a proposition actually asserted, and a

  proposition considered merely as a complex concept. One of our

  indemonstrable principles was, it will be remembered, that if the

  hypothesis in an implication is true, it may be dropped, and the  consequent asserted. This principle, it was observed, eludes formal

  statement, and points to a certain failure of formalism in general. The

  principle is employed whenever a proposition is said to be proved; for

what happens is, in all such cases, that the proposition is shown to be

  implied by some true proposition. Another form in which the principle is

  constantly employed is the substitution of a constant, satisfying the

  hypothesis, in the consequent of a formal implication. If x implies ψx for

all values of x, and if a is a constant satisfying x, we can assert ψa,

  dropping the true hypothesis a. This occurs, for example, whenever any

of those rules of inference which employ the hypothesis that the variables

  involved are propositions, are applied to particular propositions. The

  principle in question is, therefore, quite vital to any kind of

  demonstration.

The independence of this principle is brought out by a consideration of

Lewis Carroll’s puzzle, “What the Tortoise said to Achilles”.* The principles

of inference which we accepted lead to the proposition that, if p and q be

propositions, then p together with “p implies q” implies q. At first sight, it

might be thought that this would enable us to assert q provided p is true and

implies q. But the puzzle in question shows that this is not the case, and that,

until we have some new principle, we shall only be led into an endless

regress of more and more complicated implications, without ever arriving at

the assertion of q. We need, in fact, the notion of therefore, which is quite

different from the notion of implies, and holds between different entities. In

grammar, the distinction is that between a verb and a verbal noun, between,

say, “A is greater than B” and “A’s being greater than B”. In the first of these,

a proposition is actually asserted, whereas in the second it is merely

considered. But these are psychological terms, whereas the difference which I

desire to express is genuinely logical. It is plain that, if I may be allowed to

use the word assertion in a non-psychological sense, the proposition “p

implies q” asserts an implication, though it does not assert p or q. The p and

the q which enter into this proposition are not strictly the same as the p or the

q which are separate propositions, at least, if they are true. The question is:

How does a proposition differ by being actually true from what it would be as

an entity if it were not true? It is plain that true and false propositions alike

are entities of a kind, but that true propositions have a quality not belonging

to false ones, a quality which, in a non-psychological sense, may be called

being asserted. Yet there are grave difficulties in forming a consistent theoryon this point, for if assertion in any way changed a proposition, no

proposition which can possibly in any context be unasserted could be true,

since when asserted it would become a different proposition. But this is

plainly false; for in “p implies q”, p and q are not asserted, and yet they may

be true. Leaving this puzzle to logic, however, we must insist that there is a

difference of some kind between an asserted and an unasserted proposition.†

When we say therefore, we state a relation which can only hold between

asserted propositions, and which thus differs from implication. Wherever

therefore occurs, the hypothesis may be dropped, and the conclusion asserted

by itself. This seems to be the first step in answering Lewis Carroll’s puzzle.

39. It is commonly said that an inference must have premisses and a

  conclusion, and it is held, apparently, that two or more premisses are

  necessary, if not to all inferences, yet to most. This view is borne out, at

  first sight, by obvious facts: every syllogism, for example, is held to have

  two premisses. Now such a theory greatly complicates the relation of

  implication, since it renders it a relation which may have any number of

  terms, and is symmetrical with respect to all but one of them, but not

  symmetrical with respect to that one (the conclusion). This complication

is, however, unnecessary, first, because every simultaneous assertion of a

  number of propositions is itself a single proposition, and secondly,

  because, by the rule which we called exportation, it is always possible to

  exhibit an implication explicitly as holding between single propositions.

To take the first point first: if k be a class of propositions, all the

  propositions of the class k are asserted by the single proposition “for all

  values of x, if x implies x, then ‘x is a k’ implies x”, or, in more ordinary

  language, “every k is true”. And as regards the second point, which

  assumes the number of premisses to be finite, “pq implies r” is

  equivalent, if q be a proposition, to “p implies that q implies r”, in which

  latter form the implications hold explicitly between single propositions.

  Hence we may safely hold implication to be a relation between two

  propositions, not a relation of an arbitrary number of premisses to a

  single conclusion.

40. I come now to formal implication, which is a far more difficult notion

than material implication. In order to avoid the general notion of

  propositional function, let us begin by the discussion of a particular

  instance, say “x is a man implies x is a mortal for all values of x”. This

  proposition is equivalent to “all men are mortal”, “every man is mortal”and “any man is mortal”. But it seems highly doubtful whether it is the

  same proposition. It is also connected with a purely intensional

  proposition in which man is asserted to be a complex notion of which

  mortal is a constituent, but this proposition is quite distinct from the one

we are discussing. Indeed, such intensional propositions are not always

  present where one class is included in another: in general, either class

may be defined by various different predicates, and it is by no means

  necessary that every predicate of the smaller class should contain every

  predicate of the larger class as a factor. Indeed, it may very well happen

that both predicates are philosophically simple: thus colour and existent

  appear to be both simple, yet the class of colours is part of the class of

  existents. The intensional view, derived from predicates, is in the main

  irrelevant to Symbolic Logic and to Mathematics, and I shall not consider

it further at present.

41. It may be doubted, to begin with, whether “x is a man implies x is a

  mortal” is to be regarded as asserted strictly of all possible terms, or only

of such terms as are men. Peano, though he is not explicit, appears to

hold the latter view. But in this case, the hypothesis ceases to be

  significant, and becomes a mere definition of x: x is to mean any man.

The hypothesis then becomes a mere assertion concerning the meaning of

the symbol x, and the whole of what is asserted concerning the matter

dealt with by our symbol is put into the conclusion. The premiss says: x

is to mean any man. The conclusion says: x is mortal. But the implication

is merely concerning the symbolism: since any man is mortal, if x

  denotes any man, x is mortal. Thus formal implication, on this view, has

  wholly disappeared, leaving us the proposition “any man is mortal” as

  expressing the whole of what is relevant in the proposition with a

  variable. It would now only remain to examine the proposition “any man

is mortal”, and if possible to explain this proposition without

  reintroducing the variable and formal implication. It must be confessed

that some grave difficulties are avoided by this view. Consider, for

  example, the simultaneous assertion of all the propositions of some class

k: this is not expressed by “‘x is a k’ implies x for all values of x”. For as

it stands, this proposition does not express what is meant, since, if x be

not a proposition, “x is a k” cannot imply x; hence the range of variability

of x must be confined to propositions, unless we prefix (as above, § 39)

the hypothesis “x implies x”. This remark applies generally, throughoutthe propositional calculus, to all cases where the conclusion is

  represented by a single letter: unless the letter does actually represent a

  proposition, the implication asserted will be false, since only propositions

can be implied. The point is that, if x be our variable, x itself is a

  proposition for all values of x which are propositions, but not for other

  values. This makes it plain what the limitations are to which our variable

is subject: it must vary only within the range of values for which the two

  sides of the principal implication are propositions, in other words, the

  two sides, when the variable is not replaced by a constant, must be

  genuine propositional functions. If this restriction is not observed,

  fallacies quickly begin to appear. It should be noticed that there may be

any number of subordinate implications which do not require that their

  terms should be propositions: it is only of the principal implication that

this is required. Take, for example, the first principle of inference: If p

  implies q, then p implies q. This holds equally whether p and q be

  propositions or not; for if either is not a proposition, “p implies q”

  becomes false, but does not cease to be a proposition. In fact, in virtue of

the definition of a proposition, our principle states that “p implies q” is a

  propositional function, i.e. that it is a proposition for all values of p and

q. But if we apply the principle of importation to this proposition, so as to

  obtain “‘p implies q’, together with p, implies q”, we have a formula

  which is only true when p and q are propositions: in order to make it true

  universally, we must preface it by the hypothesis “p implies p and q

  implies q”. In this way, in many cases, if not in all, the restriction on the

  variability of the variable can be removed; thus, in the assertion of the

logical product of a class of propositions, the formula “if x implies x, then

‘x is a k’ implies x” appears unobjectionable, and allows x to vary

  without restriction. Here the subordinate implications in the premiss and

the conclusion are material: only the principal implication is formal.

  Returning now to “x is a man implies x is a mortal”, it is plain that no

restriction is required in order to insure our having a genuine proposition.

And it is plain that, although we might restrict the values of x to men, and

although this seems to be done in the proposition “all men are mortal”, yet

there is no reason, so far as the truth of our proposition is concerned, why we

should so restrict our x. Whether x be a man or not, “x is a man” is always,

when a constant is substituted for x, a proposition implying, for that value of

x, the proposition “x is a mortal”. And unless we admit the hypothesis equallyin the cases where it is false, we shall find it impossible to deal satisfactorily

with the null-class or with null propositional functions. We must, therefore,

allow our x, wherever the truth of our formal implication is thereby

unimpaired, to take all values without exception; and where any restriction

on variability is required, the implication is not to be regarded as formal until

the said restriction has been removed by being prefixed as hypothesis. (If ψx

be a proposition whenever x satisfies x, where x is a propositional function,

and if ψx, whenever it is a proposition, implies χx, then “ψx implies χx” is not

a formal implication, but “x implies that ψx implies χx” is a formal

implication.)

42. It is to be observed that “x is a man implies x is a mortal” is not a

  relation of two propositional functions, but is itself a single propositional

  function having the elegant property of being always true. For “x is a

  man” is, as it stands, not a proposition at all, and does not imply

  anything; and we must not first vary our x in “x is a man”, and then

  independently vary it in “x is a mortal”, for this would lead to the

  proposition that “everything is a man” implies “everything is a mortal”,

  which, though true, is not what was meant. This proposition would have

to be expressed, if the language of variables were retained, by two

  variables, as “x is a man implies y is a mortal”. But this formula too is

  unsatisfactory, for its natural meaning would be: “If anything is a man,

then everything is a mortal.” The point to be emphasized is, of course,

that our x, though variable, must be the same on both sides of the

  implication, and this requires that we should not obtain our formal

  implication by first varying (say) Socrates in “Socrates is a man”, and

then in “Socrates is a mortal”, but that we should start from the whole

  proposition “Socrates is a man implies Socrates is a mortal”, and vary

  Socrates in this proposition as a whole. Thus our formal implication

  asserts a class of implications, not a single implication at all. We do not,

in a word, have one implication containing a variable, but rather a

  variable implication. We have a class of implications, no one of which

  contains a variable, and we assert that every member of this class is true.

This is a first step towards the analysis of the mathematical notion of the

  variable.

But, it may be asked, how comes it that Socrates may be varied in the

proposition “Socrates is a man implies Socrates is mortal”? In virtue of the

fact that true propositions are implied by all others, we have “Socrates is aman implies Socrates is a philosopher”; but in this proposition, alas, the

variability of Socrates is sadly restricted. This seems to show that formal

implication involves something over and above the relation of implication,

and that some additional relation must hold where a term can be varied. In the

case in question, it is natural to say that what is involved is the relation of

inclusion between the classes men and mortals—the very relation which was

to be defined and explained by our formal implication. But this view is too

simple to meet all cases, and is therefore not required in any case. A larger

number of cases, though still not all cases, can be dealt with by the notion of

what I shall call assertions. This notion must now be briefly explained,

leaving its critical discussion to Chapter 7.

43. It has always been customary to divide propositions into subject and

  predicate; but this division has the defect of omitting the verb. It is true

that a graceful concession is sometimes made by loose talk about the

  copula, but the verb deserves far more respect than is thus paid to it. We

may say, broadly, that every proposition may be divided, some in only

one way, some in several ways, into a term (the subject) and something

  which is said about the subject, which something I shall call the

  assertion. Thus “Socrates is a man” may be divided into Socrates and is

a man. The verb, which is the distinguishing mark of propositions,

  remains with the assertion; but the assertion itself, being robbed of its

  subject, is neither true nor false. In logical discussions, the notion of

  assertion often occurs, but as the word proposition is used for it, it does

not obtain separate consideration. Consider, for example, the best

  statement of the identity of indiscernibles: “If x and y be any two diverse

  entities, some assertion holds of x which does not hold of y.” But for the

  word assertion, which would ordinarily be replaced by proposition, this

  statement is one which would commonly pass unchallenged. Again, it

  might be said: “Socrates was a philosopher, and the same is true of

  Plato.” Such statements require the analysis of a proposition into an

  assertion and a subject, in order that there may be something identical

  which can be said to be affirmed of two subjects.

44. We can now see how, where the analysis into subject and assertion is

  legitimate, to distinguish implications in which there is a term which can

be varied from others in which this is not the case. Two ways of making

the distinction may be suggested, and we shall have to decide between

  them. It may be said that there is a relation between the two assertions “isa man” and “is a mortal”, in virtue of which, when the one holds, so does

the other. Or again, we may analyse the whole proposition “Socrates is a

man implies Socrates is a mortal” into Socrates and an assertion about

  him, and say that the assertion in question holds of all terms. Neither of

  these theories replaces the above analysis of “x is a man implies x is a

  mortal” into a class of material implications; but whichever of the two is

true carries the analysis one step further. The first theory suffers from the

  difficulty that it is essential to the relation of assertions involved that both

  assertions should be made of the same subject, though it is otherwise

  irrelevant what subject we choose. The second theory appears

  objectionable on the ground that the suggested analysis of “Socrates is a

man implies Socrates is a mortal” seems scarcely possible. The

  proposition in question consists of two terms and a relation, the terms

  being “Socrates is a man” and “Socrates is a mortal”; and it would seem

that when a relational proposition is analysed into a subject and an

  assertion, the subject must be one of the terms of the relation which is

  asserted. This objection seems graver than that against the former view; I

  shall therefore, at any rate for the present, adopt the former view, and

  regard formal implication as derived from a relation between assertions.

We remarked above that the relation of inclusion between classes is

insufficient. This results from the irreducible nature of relational

propositions. Take e.g. “Socrates is married implies Socrates had a father”.

Here it is affirmed that because Socrates has one relation, he must have

another. Or better still, take “A is before B implies B is after A”. This is a

formal implication, in which the assertions are (superficially at least)

concerning different subjects; the only way to avoid this is to say that both

propositions have both A and B as subjects, which, by the way, is quite

different from saying that they have the one subject “A and B”. Such

instances make it plain that the notion of a propositional function, and the

notion of an assertion, are more fundamental than the notion of class, and that

the latter is not adequate to explain all cases of formal implication. I shall not

enlarge upon this point now, as it will be abundantly illustrated in subsequent

portions of the present work.

It is important to realize that, according to the above analysis of formal

implication, the notion of every term is indefinable and ultimate. A formal

implication is one which holds of every term, and therefore every cannot be

explained by means of formal implication. If a and b be classes, we canexplain “every a is a b” by means of “x is an a implies x is a b”; but the every

which occurs here is a derivative and subsequent notion, presupposing the

notion of every term. It seems to be the very essence of what may be called a

formal truth, and of formal reasoning generally, that some assertion is

affirmed to hold of every term; and unless the notion of every term is

admitted, formal truths are impossible.

45. The fundamental importance of formal implication is brought out by the

  consideration that it is involved in all the rules of inference. This shows

that we cannot hope wholly to define it in terms of material implication,

but that some further element or elements must be involved. We may

  observe, however, that, in a particular inference, the rule according to

  which the inference proceeds is not required as a premiss. This point has

  been emphasized by Mr Bradley;* it is closely connected with the

  principle of dropping a true premiss, being again a respect in which

  formalism breaks down. In order to apply a rule of inference, it is

  formally necessary to have a premiss asserting that the present case is an

  instance of the rule; we shall then need to affirm the rule by which we

can go from the rule to an instance, and also to affirm that here we have

an instance of this rule, and so on into an endless process. The fact is, of

  course, that any implication warranted by a rule of inference does

  actually hold, and is not merely implied by the rule. This is simply an

  instance of the non-formal principle of dropping a true premiss: if our

rule implies a certain implication, the rule may be dropped and the

  implication asserted. But it remains the case that the fact that our rule

does imply the said implication, if introduced at all, must be simply

  perceived, and is not guaranteed by any formal deduction; and often it is

just as easy, and consequently just as legitimate, to perceive immediately

the implication in question as to perceive that it is implied by one or

  more of the rules of inference.

To sum up our discussion of formal implication: a formal implication, we

said, is the affirmation of every material implication of a certain class; and the

class of material implications involved is, in simple cases, the class of all

propositions in which a given fixed assertion, made concerning a certain

subject or subjects, is affirmed to imply another given fixed assertion

concerning the same subject or subjects. Where a formal implication holds,

we agreed to regard it, wherever possible, as due to some relation between

the assertions concerned. This theory raises many formidable logicalproblems, and requires, for its defence, a thorough analysis of the

constituents of propositions. To this task we must now address ourselves.


* Mind, N. S. Vol. iv, p. 278.

† Frege (loc. cit.) has a special symbol to denote assertion.

* Logic, Book II, Part I, Chap. ii (p. 227).4


PROPER NAMES, ADJECTIVES


AND VERBS




46. In the present chapter, certain questions are to be discussed belonging to

what may be called philosophical grammar. The study of grammar, in my

  opinion, is capable of throwing far more light on philosophical questions

than is commonly supposed by philosophers. Although a grammatical

  distinction cannot be uncritically assumed to correspond to a genuine

  philosophical difference, yet the one is primâ facie evidence of the other,

and may often be most usefully employed as a source of discovery.

  Moreover, it must be admitted, I think, that every word occurring in a

  sentence must have some meaning: a perfectly meaningless sound could

not be employed in the more or less fixed way in which language

  employs words. The correctness of our philosophical analysis of a

  proposition may therefore be usefully checked by the exercise of

  assigning the meaning of each word in the sentence expressing the

  proposition. On the whole, grammar seems to me to bring us much nearer

to a correct logic than the current opinions of philosophers; and in what

  follows, grammar, though not our master, will yet be taken as our guide.*

Of the parts of speech, three are specially important: substantives,

adjectives and verbs. Among substantives, some are derived from adjectives

or verbs, as humanity from human, or sequence from follows. (I am not

speaking of an etymological derivation, but of a logical one.) Others, such as

proper names, or space, time and matter, are not derivative, but appear

primarily as substantives. What we wish to obtain is a classification, not of

words, but of ideas; I shall therefore call adjectives or predicates all notions

which are capable of being such, even in a form in which grammar would call

them substantives. The fact is, as we shall see, that human and humanity

denote precisely the same concept, these words being employed respectivelyaccording to the kind of relation in which this concept stands to the other

constituents of a proposition in which it occurs. The distinction which we

require is not identical with the grammatical distinction between substantive

and adjective, since one single concept may, according to circumstances, be

either substantive or adjective: it is the distinction between proper and

general names that we require, or rather between the objects indicated by

such names. In every proposition, as we saw in Chapter 3, we may make an

analysis into something asserted and something about which the assertion is

made. A proper name, when it occurs in a proposition, is always, at least

according to one of the possible ways of analysis (where there are several),

the subject that the proposition or some subordinate constituent proposition is

about, and not what is said about the subject. Adjectives and verbs, on the

other hand, are capable of occurring in propositions in which they cannot be

regarded as subject, but only as parts of the assertion. Adjectives are

distinguished by capacity for denoting—a term which I intend to use in a

technical sense to be discussed in Chapter 5. Verbs are distinguished by a

special kind of connection, exceedingly hard to define, with truth and

falsehood, in virtue of which they distinguish an asserted proposition from an

unasserted one, e.g. “Caesar died” from “the death of Caesar”. These

distinctions must now be amplified, and I shall begin with the distinction

between general and proper names.

47. Philosophy is familiar with a certain set of distinctions, all more or less

  equivalent: I mean, the distinctions of subject and predicate, substance

and attribute, substantive and adjective, this and what.* I wish now to

  point out briefly what appears to me to be the truth concerning these

  cognate distinctions. The subject is important, since the issues between

  monism and monadism, between idealism and empiricism, and between

  those who maintain and those who deny that all truth is concerned with

what exists, all depend, in whole or in part, upon the theory we adopt in

  regard to the present question. But the subject is treated here only

  because it is essential to any doctrine of number or of the nature of the

  variable. Its bearings on general philosophy, important as they are, will

be left wholly out of account.

  Whatever may be an object of thought, or may occur in any true or false

proposition, or can be counted as one, I call a term. This, then, is the widest

word in the philosophical vocabulary. I shall use as synonymous with it the

words unit, individual and entity. The first two emphasize the fact that everyterm is one, while the third is derived from the fact that every term has being,

i.e. is in some sense. A man, a moment, a number, a class, a relation, a

chimaera, or anything else that can be mentioned, is sure to be a term; and to

deny that such and such a thing is a term must always be false.

It might perhaps be thought that a word of such extreme generality could

not be of any great use. Such a view, however, owing to certain wide-spread

philosophical doctrines, would be erroneous. A term is, in fact, possessed of

all the properties commonly assigned to substances or substantives. Every

term, to begin with, is a logical subject: it is, for example, the subject of the

proposition that itself is one. Again every term is immutable and

indestructible. What a term is, it is, and no change can be conceived in it

which would not destroy its identity and make it another term.* Another

mark which belongs to terms is numerical identity with themselves and

numerical diversity from all other terms.† Numerical identity and diversity

are the source of unity and plurality; and thus the admission of many terms

destroys monism. And it seems undeniable that every constituent of every

proposition can be counted as one, and that no proposition contains less than

two constituents. Term is, therefore, a useful word, since it marks dissent

from various philosophies, as well as because, in many statements, we wish

to speak of any term or some term.

48. Among terms, it is possible to distinguish two kinds, which I shall call

  respectively things and concepts. The former are the terms indicated by

  proper names, the latter those indicated by all other words. Here proper

  names are to be understood in a somewhat wider sense than is usual, and

  things also are to be understood as embracing all particular points and

  instants, and many other entities not commonly called things. Among

  concepts, again, two kinds at least must be distinguished, namely those

  indicated by adjectives and those indicated by verbs. The former kind

will often be called predicates or class-concepts; the latter are always or

  almost always relations. (In intransitive verbs, the notion expressed by

the verb is complex, and usually asserts a definite relation to an indefinite

  relatum, as in “Smith breathes”.)

In a large class of propositions, we agreed, it is possible, in one or more

ways, to distinguish a subject and an assertion about the subject. The

assertion must always contain a verb, but except in this respect, assertions

appear to have no universal properties. In a relational proposition, say “A is

greater than B”, we may regard A as the subject, and “is greater than B” as theassertion, or B as the subject and “A is greater than” as the assertion. There

are thus, in the case proposed, two ways of analysing the proposition into

subject and assertion. Where a relation has more than two terms, as in “A is

here now”,* there will be more than two ways of making the analysis. But in

some propositions, there is only a single way: these are the subject-predicate

propositions, such as “Socrates is human”. The proposition “humanity

belongs to Socrates”, which is equivalent to “Socrates is human”, is an

assertion about humanity: but it is a distinct proposition. In “Socrates is

human”, the notion expressed by human occurs in a different way from that

in which it occurs when it is called humanity, the difference being that in the

latter case, but not in the former, the proposition is about this notion. This

indicates that humanity is a concept, not a thing. I shall speak of the terms of

a proposition as those terms, however numerous, which occur in a

proposition and may be regarded as subjects about which the proposition is. It

is a characteristic of the terms of a proposition that any one of them may be

replaced by any other entity without our ceasing to have a proposition. Thus

we shall say that “Socrates is human” is a proposition having only one term;

of the remaining components of the proposition, one is the verb, the other is a

predicate. With the sense which is has in this proposition, we no longer have

a proposition at all if we replace human by something other than a predicate.

Predicates, then, are concepts, other than verbs, which occur in propositions

having only one term or subject. Socrates is a thing, because Socrates can

never occur otherwise than as a term in a proposition: Socrates is not capable

of that curious twofold use which is involved in human and humanity. Points,

instants, bits of matter, particular states of mind, and particular existents

generally, are things in the above sense, and so are many terms which do not

exist, for example, the points in a non-Euclidean space and the pseudo-

existents of a novel. All classes, it would seem, as numbers, men, spaces, etc.,

when taken as single terms, are things; but this is a point for Chapter 6

  Predicates are distinguished from other terms by a number of very

interesting properties, chief among which is their connection with what I

shall call denoting. One predicate always gives rise to a host of cognate

notions: thus in addition to human and humanity, which only differ

grammatically, we have man, a man, some man, any man, every man, all

men,† all of which appear to be genuinely distinct one from another. The

study of these various notions is absolutely vital to any philosophy of

mathematics; and it is on account of them that the theory of predicates isimportant.

49. It might be thought that a distinction ought to be made between a

  concept as such and a concept used as a term, between, e.g., such pairs as

is and being, human and humanity, one in such a proposition as “this is

  one” and 1 in “1 is a number”. But inextricable difficulties will envelop

us if we allow such a view. There is, of course, a grammatical difference,

and this corresponds to a difference as regards relations. In the first case,

the concept in question is used as a concept, that is, it is actually

  predicated of a term or asserted to relate two or more terms; while in the

  second case, the concept is itself said to have a predicate or a relation.

  There is, therefore, no difficulty in accounting for the grammatical

  difference. But what I wish to urge is, that the difference lies solely in

  external relations, and not in the intrinsic nature of the terms. For

  suppose that one as adjective differed from 1 as term. In this statement,

one as adjective has been made into a term; hence either it has become 1,

in which case the supposition is self-contradictory; or there is some other

  difference between one and 1 in addition to the fact that the first denotes

a concept not a term while the second denotes a concept which is a term.

But in this latter hypothesis, there must be propositions concerning one

as term, and we shall still have to maintain propositions concerning one

as adjective as opposed to one as term; yet all such propositions must be

false, since a proposition about one as adjective makes one the subject,

and is therefore really about one as term. In short, if there were any

  adjectives which could not be made into substantives without change of

  meaning, all propositions concerning such adjectives (since they would

  necessarily turn them into substantives) would be false, and so would the

  proposition that all such propositions are false, since this itself turns the

  adjectives into substantives. But this state of things is self-contradictory.

The above argument proves that we were right in saying that terms

embrace everything that can occur in a proposition, with the possible

exception of complexes of terms of the kind denoted by any and cognate

words.* For if A occurs in a proposition, then, in this statement, A is the

subject; and we have just seen that, if A is ever not the subject, it is exactly

and numerically the same A which is not subject in one proposition and is

subject in another. Thus the theory that there are adjectives or attributes or

ideal things, or whatever they may be called, which are in some way less

substantial, less self-subsistent, less self-identical, than true substantives,appears to be wholly erroneous, and to be easily reduced to a contradiction.

Terms which are concepts differ from those which are not, not in respect of

self-subsistence, but in virtue of the fact that, in certain true or false

propositions, they occur in a manner which is different in an indefinable way

from the manner in which subjects or terms of relations occur.

50. Two concepts have, in addition to the numerical diversity which

  belongs to them as terms, another special kind of diversity which may be

  called conceptual. This may be characterized by the fact that two

  propositions in which the concepts occur otherwise than as terms, even if,

in all other respects, the two propositions are identical, yet differ in virtue

of the fact that the concepts which occur in them are conceptually

  diverse. Conceptual diversity implies numerical diversity, but the

  converse implication does not hold, since not all terms are concepts.

  Numerical diversity, as its name implies, is the source of plurality, and

  conceptual diversity is less important to mathematics. But the whole

  possibility of making different assertions about a given term or set of

  terms depends upon conceptual diversity, which is therefore fundamental

in general logic.

51. It is interesting and not unimportant to examine very briefly the

  connection of the above doctrine of adjectives with certain traditional

  views on the nature of propositions. It is customary to regard all

  propositions as having a subject and a predicate, i.e. as having an

  immediate this, and a general concept attached to it by way of

  description. This is, of course, an account of the theory in question which

will strike its adherents as extremely crude; but it will serve for a general

  indication of the view to be discussed. This doctrine develops by internal

logical necessity into the theory of Mr Bradley’s Logic, that all words

  stand for ideas having what he calls meaning, and that in every judgment

there is a something, the true subject of the judgment, which is not an

idea and does not have meaning. To have meaning, it seems to me, is a

  notion confusedly compounded of logical and psychological elements.

  Words all have meaning, in the simple sense that they are symbols which

  stand for something other than themselves. But a proposition, unless it

  happens to be linguistic, does not itself contain words: it contains the

  entities indicated by words. Thus meaning, in the sense in which words

  have meaning, is irrelevant to logic. But such concepts as a man have

  meaning in another sense: they are, so to speak, symbolic in their ownlogical nature, because they have the property which I call denoting. That

is to say, when a man occurs in a proposition (e.g. “I met a man in the

  street”), the proposition is not about the concept a man, but about

  something quite different, some actual biped denoted by the concept.

  Thus concepts of this kind have meaning in a non-psychological sense.

And in this sense, when we say “this is a man”, we are making a

  proposition in which a concept is in some sense attached to what is not a

  concept. But when meaning is thus understood, the entity indicated by

John does not have meaning, as Mr Bradley contends;* and even among

  concepts, it is only those that denote that have meaning. The confusion is

  largely due, I believe, to the notion that words occur in propositions,

  which in turn is due to the notion that propositions are essentially mental

and are to be identified with cognitions. But these topics of general

  philosophy must be pursued no further in this work.

52. It remains to discuss the verb, and to find marks by which it is

  distinguished from the adjective. In regard to verbs also, there is a

  twofold grammatical form corresponding to a difference in merely

  external relations. There is the verb in the form which it has as verb (the

  various inflexions of this form may be left out of account), and there is

the verbal noun, indicated by the infinitive or (in English) the present

  participle. The distinction is that between “Felton killed Buckingham”

and “Killing no murder”. By analysing this difference, the nature and

  function of the verb will appear.

It is plain, to begin with, that the concept which occurs in the verbal noun

is the very same as that which occurs as verb. This results from the previous

argument, that every constituent of every proposition must, on pain of self-

contradiction, be capable of being made a logical subject. If we say “kills

does not mean the same as to kill”, we have already made kills a subject, and

we cannot say that the concept expressed by the word kills cannot be made a

subject. Thus the very verb which occurs as verb can occur also as subject.

The question is: What logical difference is expressed by the difference of

grammatical form? And it is plain that the difference must be one in external

relations. But in regard to verbs, there is a further point. By transforming the

verb, as it occurs in a proposition, into a verbal noun, the whole proposition

can be turned into a single logical subject, no longer asserted, and no longer

containing in itself truth or falsehood. But here too, there seems to be no

possibility of maintaining that the logical subject which results is a differententity from the proposition. “Caesar died” and “the death of Caesar” will

illustrate this point. If we ask: What is asserted in the proposition “Caesar

died”? the answer must be “the death of Caesar is asserted”. In that case, it

would seem, it is the death of Caesar which is true or false; and yet neither

truth nor falsity belongs to a mere logical subject. The answer here seems to

be that the death of Caesar has an external relation to truth or falsehood (as

the case may be), whereas “Caesar died” in some way or other contains its

own truth or falsehood as an element. But if this is the correct analysis, it is

difficult to see how “Caesar died” differs from “the truth of Caesar’s death”

in the case where it is true, or “the falsehood of Caesar’s death” in the other

case. Yet it is quite plain that the latter, at any rate, is never equivalent to

“Caesar died”. There appears to be an ultimate notion of assertion, given by

the verb, which is lost as soon as we substitute a verbal noun, and is lost

when the proposition in question is made the subject of some other

proposition. This does not depend upon grammatical form; for if I say

“Caesar died is a proposition”, I do not assert that Caesar did die, and an

element which is present in “Caesar died” has disappeared. Thus the

contradiction which was to have been avoided, of an entity which cannot be

made a logical subject, appears to have here become inevitable. This

difficulty, which seems to be inherent in the very nature of truth and

falsehood, is one with which I do not know how to deal satisfactorily. The

most obvious course would be to say that the difference between an asserted

and an unasserted proposition is not logical, but psychological. In the sense in

which false propositions may be asserted, this is doubtless true. But there is

another sense of assertion, very difficult to bring clearly before the mind, and

yet quite undeniable, in which only true propositions are asserted. True and

false propositions alike are in some sense entities, and are in some sense

capable of being logical subjects; but when a proposition happens to be true,

it has a further quality, over and above that which it shares with false

propositions, and it is this further quality which is what I mean by assertion in

a logical as opposed to a psychological sense. The nature of truth, however,

belongs no more to the principles of mathematics than to the principles of

everything else. I therefore leave this question to the logicians with the above

brief indication of a difficulty.

53. It may be asked whether everything that, in the logical sense we are

  concerned with, is a verb, expresses a relation or not. It seems plain that,

if we were right in holding that “Socrates is human” is a propositionhaving only one term, the is in this proposition cannot express a relation

in the ordinary sense. In fact, subject-predicate propositions are

  distinguished by just this non-relational character. Nevertheless, a

  relation between Socrates and humanity is certainly implied, and it is

very difficult to conceive the proposition as expressing no relation at all.

We may perhaps say that it is a relation, although it is distinguished from

  other relations in that it does not permit itself to be regarded as an

  assertion concerning either of its terms indifferently, but only as an

  assertion concerning the referent. A similar remark may apply to the

  proposition “A is”, which holds of every term without exception. The is

here is quite different from the is in “Socrates is human”; it may be

  regarded as complex, and as really predicating Being of A. In this way,

the true logical verb in a proposition may be always regarded as asserting

a relation. But it is so hard to know exactly what is meant by relation that

the whole question is in danger of becoming purely verbal.

54. The twofold nature of the verb, as actual verb and as verbal noun, may

be expressed, if all verbs are held to be relations, as the difference

  between a relation in itself and a relation actually relating. Consider, for

  example, the proposition “A differs from B”. The constituents of this

  proposition, if we analyse it, appear to be only A, difference, B. Yet these

  constituents, thus placed side by side, do not reconstitute the proposition.

The difference which occurs in the proposition actually relates A and B,

  whereas the difference after analysis is a notion which has no connection

with A and B. It may be said that we ought, in the analysis, to mention the

  relations which difference has to A and B, relations which are expressed

by is and from when we say “A is different from B”. These relations

  consist in the fact that A is referent and B relatum with respect to

  difference. But “A, referent, difference, relatum, B” is still merely a list of

  terms, not a proposition. A proposition, in fact, is essentially a unity, and

  when analysis has destroyed the unity, no enumeration of constituents

will restore the proposition. The verb, when used as a verb, embodies the

  unity of the proposition, and is thus distinguishable from the verb

  considered as a term, though I do not know how to give a clear account

of the precise nature of the distinction.

55. It may be doubted whether the general concept difference occurs at all

in the proposition “A differs from B”, or whether there is not rather a

  specific difference of A and B, and another specific difference of C andD, which are respectively affirmed in “A differs from B” and “C differs

from D”. In this way, difference becomes a class-concept of which there

are as many instances as there are pairs of different terms; and the

  instances may be said, in Platonic phrase, to partake of the nature of

  difference. As this point is quite vital in the theory of relations, it may be

well to dwell upon it. And first of all, I must point out that in “A differs

from B” I intend to consider the bare numerical difference in virtue of

  which they are two, not difference in this or that respect.

Let us first try the hypothesis that a difference is a complex notion,

compounded of difference together with some special quality distinguishing a

particular difference from every other particular difference. So far as the

relation of difference itself is concerned, we are to suppose that no distinction

can be made between different cases; but there are to be different associated

qualities in different cases. But since cases are distinguished by their terms,

the quality must be primarily associated with the terms, not with difference. If

the quality be not a relation, it can have no special connection with the

difference of A and B, which it was to render distinguishable from bare

difference, and if it fails in this it becomes irrelevant. On the other hand, if it

be a new relation between A and B, over and above difference, we shall have

to hold that any two terms have two relations, difference and a specific

difference, the latter not holding between any other pair of terms. This view

is a combination of two others, of which the first holds that the abstract

general relation of difference itself holds between A and B, while the second

holds that when two terms differ they have, corresponding to this fact, a

specific relation of difference, unique and unanalysable and not shared by

any other pair of terms. Either of these views may be held with either the

denial or the affirmation of the other. Let us see what is to be said for and

against them.

  Against the notion of specific differences, it may be urged that, if

differences differ, their differences from each other must also differ, and thus

we are led into an endless process. Those who object to endless processes

will see in this a proof that differences do not differ. But in the present work,

it will be maintained that there are no contradictions peculiar to the notion of

infinity, and that an endless process is not to be objected to unless it arises in

the analysis of the actual meaning of a proposition. In the present case, the

process is one of implications, not one of analysis; it must therefore be

regarded as harmless.  Against the notion that the abstract relation of difference holds between A

and B, we have the argument derived from the analysis of “A differs from B”,

which gave rise to the present discussion. It is to be observed that the

hypothesis which combines the general and the specific difference must

suppose that there are two distinct propositions, the one affirming the general,

the other the specific difference. Thus if there cannot be a general difference

between A and B, this mediating hypothesis is also impossible. And we saw

that the attempt to avoid the failure of analysis by including in the meaning of

“A differs from B” the relations of difference to A and B was vain. This

attempt, in fact, leads to an endless process of the inadmissible kind; for we

shall have to include the relations of the said relations to A and B and

difference, and so on, and in this continually increasing complexity we are

supposed to be only analysing the meaning of our original proposition. This

argument establishes a point of very great importance, namely, that when a

relation holds between two terms, the relations of the relation to the terms,

and of these relations to the relation and the terms, and so on ad infinitum,

though all implied by the proposition affirming the original relation, form no

part of the meaning of this proposition.

But the above argument does not suffice to prove that the relation of A to B

cannot be abstract difference: it remains tenable that, as was suggested to

begin with, the true solution lies in regarding every proposition as having a

kind of unity which analysis cannot preserve, and which is lost even though it

be mentioned by analysis as an element in the proposition. This view has

doubtless its own difficulties, but the view that no two pairs of terms can

have the same relation both contains difficulties of its own and fails to solve

the difficulty for the sake of which it was invented. For, even if the difference

of A and B be absolutely peculiar to A and B, still the three terms A, B,

difference of A from B, do not reconstitute the proposition “A differs from B”,

any more than A and B and difference did. And it seems plain that, even if

differences did differ, they would still have to have something in common.

But the most general way in which two terms can have something in common

is by both having a given relation to a given term. Hence if no two pairs of

terms can have the same relation, it follows that no two terms can have

anything in common, and hence different differences will not be in any

definable sense instances of difference.* I conclude, then, that the relation

affirmed between A and B in the proposition “A differs from B” is the general

relation of difference, and is precisely and numerically the same as therelation affirmed between C and D in “C differs from D”. And this doctrine

must be held, for the same reasons, to be true of all other relations; relations

do not have instances, but are strictly the same in all propositions in which

they occur.

We may now sum up the main points elicited in our discussion of the verb.

The verb, we saw, is a concept which, like the adjective, may occur in a

proposition without being one of the terms of the proposition, though it may

also be made into a logical subject. One verb, and one only, must occur as

verb in every proposition; but every proposition, by turning its verb into a

verbal noun, can be changed into a single logical subject, of a kind which I

shall call in future a propositional concept. Every verb, in the logical sense of

the word, may be regarded as a relation; when it occurs as verb, it actually

relates, but when it occurs as verbal noun it is the bare relation considered

independently of the terms which it relates. Verbs do not, like adjectives,

have instances, but are identical in all the cases of their occurrence. Owing to

the way in which the verb actually relates the terms of a proposition, every

proposition has a unity which renders it distinct from the sum of its

constituents. All these points lead to logical problems, which, in a treatise on

logic, would deserve to be fully and thoroughly discussed.

  Having now given a general sketch of the nature of verbs and adjectives, I

shall proceed, in the next two chapters, to discussions arising out of the

consideration of adjectives, and in Chapter 7 to topics connected with verbs.

Broadly speaking, classes are connected with adjectives, while propositional

functions involve verbs. It is for this reason that it has been necessary to deal

at such length with a subject which might seem, at first sight, to be somewhat

remote from the principles of mathematics.


* The excellence of grammar as a guide is proportional to the paucity of

inflexions, i.e. to the degree of analysis effected by the language considered.

* This last pair of terms is due to Mr Bradley.

* The notion of a term here set forth is a modification of Mr G. E. Moore’s

notion of a concept in his article “On the Nature of Judgment”, Mind, N. S.

No. 30, from which notion, however, it differs in some important respects.

† On identity, see Mr G. E. Moore’s article in the Proceedings of the

Aristotelian Society, 1900–1901.

† I use all men as collective, i.e. as nearly synonymous with the human

race, but differing therefrom by being many and not one. I shall always useall collectively, confining myself to every for the distributive sense. Thus I

shall say “every man is mortal”, not “all men are mortal”.

* This proposition means “A is in this place at this time”. It will be shown

in Part VII that the relation expressed is not reducible to a two-term relation.

* See the next chapter.

* Logic, Book I, Chap. i, §§ 17, 18 (pp. 58–60).

* The above argument appears to prove that Mr Moore’s theory of

universals with numerically diverse instances in his paper on Identity

(Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1900–1901) must not be applied to

all concepts. The relation of an instance to its universal, at any rate, must be

actually and numerically the same in all cases where it occurs.5


DENOTING




56. The notion of denoting, like most of the notions of logic, has been

  obscured hitherto by an undue admixture of psychology. There is a sense

in which we denote, when we point or describe, or employ words as

  symbols for concepts; this, however, is not the sense that I wish to

  discuss. But the fact that description is possible—that we are able, by the

  employment of concepts, to designate a thing which is not a concept—is

due to a logical relation between some concepts and some terms, in virtue

of which such concepts inherently and logically denote such terms. It is

this sense of denoting which is here in question. This notion lies at the

  bottom (I think) of all theories of substance, of the subject-predicate

  logic, and of the opposition between things and ideas, discursive thought

and immediate perception. These various developments, in the main,

  appear to me mistaken, while the fundamental fact itself, out of which

they have grown, is hardly ever discussed in its logical purity.

A concept denotes when, if it occurs in a proposition, the proposition is not

about the concept, but about a term connected in a certain peculiar way with

the concept. If I say “I met a man”, the proposition is not about a man: this is

a concept which does not walk the streets, but lives in the shadowy limbo of

the logic-books. What I met was a thing, not a concept, an actual man with a

tailor and a bank-account or a public-house and a drunken wife. Again, the

proposition “any finite number is odd or even” is plainly true; yet the concept

“any finite number” is neither odd nor even. It is only particular numbers that

are odd or even; there is not, in addition to these, another entity, any number,

which is either odd or even, and if there were, it is plain that it could not be

odd and could not be even. Of the concept “any number”, almost all the

propositions that contain the phrase “any number” are false. If we wish to

speak of the concept, we have to indicate the fact by italics or inverted

commas. People often assert that man is mortal; but what is mortal will die,and yet we should be surprised to find in the “Times” such a notice as the

following: “Died at his residence of Camelot, Gladstone Road, Upper

Tooting, on the 18th of June 19—, Man, eldest son of Death and Sin.” Man,

in fact, does not die; hence if “man is mortal” were, as it appears to be, a

proposition about man, it would be simply false. The fact is, the proposition

is about men; and here again, it is not about the concept men, but about what

this concept denotes. The whole theory of definition, of identity, of classes,

of symbolism and of the variable is wrapped up in the theory of denoting.

The notion is a fundamental notion of logic, and, in spite of its difficulties, it

is quite essential to be as clear about it as possible.

57. The notion of denoting may be obtained by a kind of logical genesis

from subject-predicate propositions, upon which it seems more or less

  dependent. The simplest of propositions are those in which one predicate

  occurs otherwise than as a term, and there is only one term of which the

  predicate in question is asserted. Such propositions may be called

  subject-predicate propositions. Instances are: A is, A is one, A is human.

  Concepts which are predicates might also be called class-concepts,

  because they give rise to classes, but we shall find it necessary to

  distinguish between the words predicate and class-concept. Propositions

of the subject-predicate type always imply and are implied by other

  propositions of the type which asserts that an individual belongs to a

class. Thus the above instances are equivalent to: A is an entity, A is a

  unit, A is a man. These new propositions are not identical with the

  previous ones, since they have an entirely different form. To begin with,

is is now the only concept not used as a term. A man, we shall find, is

  neither a concept nor a term, but a certain kind of combination of certain

  terms, namely of those which are human. And the relation of Socrates to

a man is quite different from his relation to humanity; indeed “Socrates is

  human” must be held, if the above view is correct, to be not, in the most

  usual sense, a judgment of relation between Socrates and humanity, since

this view would make human occur as term in “Socrates is human”. It is,

of course, undeniable that a relation to humanity is implied by “Socrates

is human”, namely the relation expressed by “Socrates has humanity”;

and this relation conversely implies the subject-predicate proposition. But

the two propositions can be clearly distinguished, and it is important to

the theory of classes that this should be done. Thus we have, in the case

of every predicate, three types of propositions which imply one another,  namely, “Socrates is human”, “Socrates has humanity” and “Socrates is a

  man”. The first contains a term and a predicate, the second two terms and

a relation (the second term being identical with the predicate of the first

  proposition),* while the third contains a term, a relation, and what I shall

call a disjunction (a term which will be explained shortly).† The class-

  concept differs little, if at all, from the predicate, while the class, as

  opposed to the class-concept, is the sum or conjunction of all the terms

  which have the given predicate. The relation which occurs in the second

type (Socrates has humanity) is characterized completely by the fact that

it implies and is implied by a proposition with only one term, in which

the other term of the relation has become a predicate. A class is a certain

  combination of terms, a class-concept is closely akin to a predicate, and

the terms whose combination forms the class are determined by the class-

  concept. Predicates are, in a certain sense, the simplest type of concepts,

  since they occur in the simplest type of proposition.

58. There is, connected with every predicate, a great variety of closely

  allied concepts, which, in so far as they are distinct, it is important to

  distinguish. Starting, for example, with human, we have man, men, all

  men, every man, any man, the human race, of which all except the first

are twofold, a denoting concept and an object denoted; we have also, less

  closely analogous, the notions “a man” and “some man”, which again

  denote objects‡ other than themselves. This vast apparatus connected

with every predicate must be borne in mind, and an endeavour must be

  made to give an analysis of all the above notions. But for the present, it is

the property of denoting, rather than the various denoting concepts, that

we are concerned with.

The combination of concepts as such to form new concepts, of greater

complexity than their constituents, is a subject upon which writers on logic

have said many things. But the combination of terms as such, to form what

by analogy may be called complex terms, is a subject upon which logicians,

old and new, give us only the scantiest discussion. Nevertheless, the subject

is of vital importance to the philosophy of mathematics, since the nature both

of number and of the variable turns upon just this point. Six words, of

constant occurrence in daily life, are also characteristic of mathematics: these

are the words all, every, any, a, some and the. For correctness of reasoning, it

is essential that these words should be sharply distinguished one from

another; but the subject bristles with difficulties, and is almost whollyneglected by logicians.*

It is plain, to begin with, that a phrase containing one of the above six

words always denotes. It will be convenient, for the present discussion, to

distinguish a class-concept from a predicate: I shall call human a predicate,

and man a class-concept, though the distinction is perhaps only verbal. The

characteristic of a class-concept, as distinguished from terms in general, is

that “x is a u” is a propositional function when, and only when, u is a class-

concept. It must be held that when u is not a class-concept, we do not have a

false proposition, but simply no proposition at all, whatever value we may

give to x. This enables us to distinguish a class-concept belonging to the null-

class, for which all propositions of the above form are false, from a term

which is not a class-concept at all, for which there are no propositions of the

above form. Also it makes it plain that a class-concept is not a term in the

proposition “x is a u”, for u has a restricted variability if the formula is to

remain a proposition. A denoting phrase, we may now say, consists always of

a class-concept preceded by one of the above six words or some synonym of

one of them.

59. The question which first meets us in regard to denoting is this: Is there

one way of denoting six different kinds of objects, or are the ways of

  denoting different? And in the latter case, is the object denoted the same

in all six cases, or does the object differ as well as the way of denoting it?

In order to answer this question, it will be first necessary to explain the

  differences between the six words in question. Here it will be convenient

to omit the word the to begin with, since this word is in a different

  position from the others, and is liable to limitations from which they are

  exempt.

In cases where the class defined by a class-concept has only a finite

number of terms, it is possible to omit the class-concept wholly, and indicate

the various objects denoted by enumerating the terms and connecting them by

means of and or or as the case may be. It will help to isolate a part of our

problem if we first consider this case, although the lack of subtlety in

language renders it difficult to grasp the difference between objects indicated

by the same form of words.

Let us begin by considering two terms only, say Brown and Jones. The

objects denoted by all, every, any, a and some† are respectively involved in

the following five propositions. (1) Brown and Jones are two of Miss Smith’s

suitors; (2) Brown and Jones are paying court to Miss Smith; (3) if it wasBrown or Jones you met, it was a very ardent lover; (4) if it was one of Miss

Smith’s suitors, it must have been Brown or Jones; (5) Miss Smith will marry

Brown or Jones. Although only two forms of words, Brown and Jones and

Brown or Jones, are involved in these propositions, I maintain that five

different combinations are involved. The distinctions, some of which are

rather subtle, may be brought out by the following considerations. In the first

proposition, it is Brown and Jones who are two, and this is not true of either

separately; nevertheless it is not the whole composed of Brown and Jones

which is two, for this is only one. The two are a genuine combination of

Brown with Jones, the kind of combination which, as we shall see in the next

chapter, is characteristic of classes. In the second proposition, on the

contrary, what is asserted is true of Brown and Jones severally; the

proposition is equivalent to, though not (I think) identical with, “Brown is

paying court to Miss Smith and Jones is paying court to Miss Smith”. Thus

the combination indicated by and is not the same here as in the first case: the

first case concerned all of them collectively, while the second concerns all

distributively, i.e. each or every one of them. For the sake of distinction, we

may call the first a numerical conjunction, since it gives rise to number, the

second a propositional conjunction, since the proposition in which it occurs

is equivalent to a conjunction of propositions. (It should be observed that the

conjunction of propositions in question is of a wholly different kind from any

of the combinations we are considering, being in fact of the kind which is

called the logical product. The propositions are combined quâ propositions,

not quâ terms.)

The third proposition gives the kind of conjunction by which any is

defined. There is some difficulty about this notion, which seems half-way

between a conjunction and a disjunction. This notion may be further

explained as follows. Let a and b be two different propositions, each of which

implies a third proposition c. Then the disjunction “a or b” implies c. Now let

a and b be propositions assigning the same predicate to two different

subjects, then there is a combination of the two subjects to which the given

predicate may be assigned so that the resulting proposition is equivalent to

the disjunction “a or b”. Thus suppose we have “if you met Brown, you met a

very ardent lover”, and “if you met Jones, you met a very ardent lover”.

Hence we infer “if you met Brown or if you met Jones, you met a very ardent

lover”, and we regard this as equivalent to “if you met Brown or Jones, etc.”.

The combination of Brown and Jones here indicated is the same as thatindicated by either of them. It differs from a disjunction by the fact that it

implies and is implied by a statement concerning both; but in some more

complicated instances, this mutual implication fails. The method of

combination is, in fact, different from that indicated by both, and is also

different from both forms of disjunction. I shall call it the variable

conjunction. The first form of disjunction is given by (4): this is the form

which I shall denote by a suitor. Here, although it must have been Brown or

Jones, it is not true that it must have been Brown, nor yet that it must have

been Jones. Thus the proposition is not equivalent to the disjunction of

propositions “it must have been Brown or it must have been Jones”. The

proposition, in fact, is not capable of statement either as a disjunction or as a

conjunction of propositions, except in the very roundabout form: “if it was

not Brown, it was Jones, and if it was not Jones, it was Brown”, a form which

rapidly becomes intolerable when the number of terms is increased beyond

two, and becomes theoretically inadmissible when the number of terms is

infinite. Thus this form of disjunction denotes a variable term, that is,

whichever of the two terms we fix upon, it does not denote this term, and yet

it does denote one or other of them. This form accordingly I shall call the

variable disjunction. Finally, the second form of disjunction is given by (5).

This is what I shall call the constant disjunction, since here either Brown is

denoted, or Jones is denoted, but the alternative is undecided. That is to say,

our proposition is now equivalent to a disjunction of propositions, namely

“Miss Smith will marry Brown, or she will marry Jones”. She will marry

some one of the two, and the disjunction denotes a particular one of them,

though it may denote either particular one. Thus all the five combinations are

distinct.

It is to be observed that these five combinations yield neither terms nor

concepts, but strictly and only combinations of terms. The first yields many

terms, while the others yield something absolutely peculiar, which is neither

one nor many. The combinations are combinations of terms, effected without

the use of relations. Corresponding to each combination there is, at least if the

terms combined form a class, a perfectly definite concept, which denotes the

various terms of the combination combined in the specified manner. To

explain this, let us repeat our distinctions in a case where the terms to be

combined are not enumerated, as above, but are defined as the terms of a

certain class.

60. When a class-concept a is given, it must be held that the various terms  belonging to the class are also given. That is to say, any term being

  proposed, it can be decided whether or not it belongs to the class. In this

  way, a collection of terms can be given otherwise than by enumeration.

  Whether a collection can be given otherwise than by enumeration or by a

  class-concept, is a question which, for the present, I leave undetermined.

But the possibility of giving a collection by a class-concept is highly

  important, since it enables us to deal with infinite collections, as we shall

see in Part V. For the present, I wish to examine the meaning of such

  phrases as all a’s, every a, any a, an a and some a. All a’s, to begin with,

  denotes a numerical conjunction; it is definite as soon as a is given. The

  concept all a’s is a perfectly definite single concept, which denotes the

  terms of a taken all together. The terms so taken have a number, which

may thus be regarded, if we choose, as a property of the class-concept,

  since it is determinate for any given class-concept. Every a, on the

  contrary, though it still denotes all the a’s, denotes them in a different

  way, i.e. severally instead of collectively. Any a denotes only one a, but it

is wholly irrelevant which it denotes, and what is said will be equally true

  whichever it may be. Moreover, any a denotes a variable a, that is,

  whatever particular a we may fasten upon, it is certain that any a does not

  denote that one; and yet of that one any proposition is true which is true

of any a. An a denotes a variable disjunction: that is to say, a proposition

  which holds of an a may be false concerning each particular a, so that it

is not reducible to a disjunction of propositions. For example, a point lies

  between any point and any other point; but it would not be true of any

one particular point that it lay between any point and any other point,

  since there would be many pairs of points between which it did not lie.

This brings us finally to some a, the constant disjunction. This denotes

just one term of the class a, but the term it denotes may be any term of

the class. Thus “some moment does not follow any moment” would

  mean that there was a first moment in time, while “a moment precedes

any moment” means the exact opposite, namely, that every moment has

  predecessors.

61. In the case of a class a which has a finite number of terms—say a, a,
                                                                                  12

a, . . a, we can illustrate these various notions as follows:
  3n

    All a’s denotes a and a and … and a.1. 
                        12n

2. Every a denotes a and denotes a and … and denotes a.
                          12n3. Any a denotes a or a or … or a, where or has the meaning that it is
                      12n

    irrelevant which we take.

4. An a denotes a or a or … or a, where or has the meaning that no one
                      12n

    in particular must be taken, just as in all a’s we must not take any one in

    particular.

5. Some a denotes a or denotes a or … or denotes a, where it is not
                        12n

    irrelevant which is taken, but on the contrary some one particular a must

    be taken.


As the nature and properties of the various ways of combining terms are of

vital importance to the principles of mathematics, it may be well to illustrate

their properties by the following important examples.

    (α) Let a be a class, and b a class of classes. We then obtain in all six

    possible relations of a to b from various combinations of any, a and

    some. All and every do not, in this case, introduce anything new. The six

    cases are as follows.


1. Any a belongs to any class belonging to b, in other words, the class a is

    wholly contained in the common part or logical product of the various

    classes belonging to b.

2. Any a belongs to a b, i.e. the class a is contained in any class which

    contains all the b’s, or, is contained in the logical sum of all the b’s.

3. Any a belongs to some b, i.e. there is a class belonging to b, in which

    the class a is contained. The difference between this case and the second

    arises from the fact that here there is one b to which every a belongs,

    whereas before it was only decided that every a belonged to a b, and

    different a’s might belong to different b’s.

4. An a belongs to any b, i.e. whatever b we take, it has a part in common

    with a.

5. An a belongs to a b, i.e. there is a b which has a part in common with a.

    This is equivalent to “some (or an) a belongs to some b”.

6. Some a belongs to any b, i.e. there is an a which belongs to the common

    part of all the b’s, or a and all the b’s have a common part. These are all

    the cases that arise here.


    (β) It is instructive, as showing the generality of the type of relations

    here considered, to compare the above case with the following. Let a, b    be two series of real numbers; then six precisely analogous cases arise.


1. Any a is less than any b, or, the series a is contained among numbers

    less than every b.

2. Any a is less than a b, or, whatever a we take, there is a b which is

    greater, or, the series a is contained among numbers less than a

    (variable) term of the series b. It does not follow that some term of the

    series b is greater than all the a’s.

3. Any a is less than some b, or, there is a term of b which is greater than

    all the a’s. This case is not to be confounded with (2).

4. An a is less than any b, i.e. whatever b we take, there is an a which is

    less than it.

5. An a is less than a b, i.e. it is possible to find an a and a b such that the a

    is less than the b. This merely denies that any a is greater than any b.

6. Some a is less than any b, i.e. there is an a which is less than all the b’s.

    This was not implied in (4), where the a was variable, whereas here it is

    constant.


In this case, actual mathematics have compelled the distinction between

the variable and the constant disjunction. But in other cases, where

mathematics have not obtained sway, the distinction has been neglected; and

the mathematicians, as was natural, have not investigated the logical nature of

the disjunctive notions which they employed.

    (γ) I shall give one other instance, as it brings in the difference between

    any and every, which has not been relevant in the previous cases. Let a

    and b be two classes of classes; then twenty different relations between

    them arise from different combinations of the terms of their terms. The

    following technical terms will be useful. If a be a class of classes, its

    logical sum consists of all terms belonging to any a, i.e. all terms such

    that there is an a to which they belong, while its logical product consists

    of all terms belonging to every a, i.e. to the common part of all the a’s.

    We have then the following cases.


1. Any term of any a belongs to every b, i.e. the logical sum of a is

    contained in the logical product of b.

2. Any term of any a belongs to a b, i.e. the logical sum of a is contained in

    the logical sum of b.3. Any term of any a belongs to some b, i.e. there is a b which contains the

    logical sum of a.

4. Any term of some (or an) a belongs to every b, i.e. there is an a which is

    contained in the product of b.

5. Any term of some (or an) a belongs to a b, i.e. there is an a which is

    contained in the sum of b.

6. Any term of some (or an) a belongs to some b, i.e. there is a b which

    contains one class belonging to a.

7. A term of any a belongs to any b, i.e. any class of a and any class of b

    have a common part.

8. A term of any a belongs to a b, i.e. any class of a has a part in common

    with the logical sum of b.

9. A term of any a belongs to some b, i.e. there is a b with which any a has

    a part in common.

10. A term of an a belongs to every b, i.e. the logical sum of a and the

    logical product of b have a common part.

11. A term of an a belongs to any b, i.e. given any b, an a can be found with

    which it has a common part.

12. A term of an a belongs to a b, i.e. the logical sums of a and of b have a

    common part.

13. Any term of every a belongs to every b, i.e. the logical product of a is

    contained in the logical product of b.

14. Any term of every a belongs to a b, i.e. the logical product of a is

    contained in the logical sum of b.

15. Any term of every a belongs to some b, i.e. there is a term of b in which

    the logical product of a is contained.

16. A (or some) term of every a belongs to every b, i.e. the logical products

    of a and of b have a common part.

17. A (or some) term of every a belongs to a b, i.e. the logical product of a

    and the logical sum of b have a common part.

18. Some term of any a belongs to every b, i.e. any a has a part in common

    with the logical product of b.

19. A term of some a belongs to any b, i.e. there is some term of a with

    which any b has a common part.

20. A term of every a belongs to any b, i.e. any b has a part in common with

    the logical product of a.The above examples show that, although it may often happen that there is a

mutual implication (which has not always been stated) of corresponding

propositions concerning some and a, or concerning any and every, yet in

other cases there is no such mutual implication. Thus the five notions

discussed in the present chapter are genuinely distinct, and to confound them

may lead to perfectly definite fallacies.

62. It appears from the above discussion that, whether there are different

  ways of denoting or not, the objects denoted by all men, every man, etc.

are certainly distinct. It seems therefore legitimate to say that the whole

  difference lies in the objects, and that denoting itself is the same in all

cases. There are, however, many difficult problems connected with the

  subject, especially as regards the nature of the objects denoted. All men,

  which I shall identify with the class of men, seems to be an unambiguous

  object, although grammatically it is plural. But in the other cases the

  question is not so simple: we may doubt whether an ambiguous object is

  unambiguously denoted, or a definite object ambiguously denoted.

  Consider again the proposition “I met a man”. It is quite certain, and is

  implied by this proposition, that what I met was an unambiguous

  perfectly definite man: in the technical language which is here adopted,

the proposition is expressed by “I met some man”. But the actual man

  whom I met forms no part of the proposition in question, and is not

  specially denoted by some man. Thus the concrete event which happened

is not asserted in the proposition. What is asserted is merely that some

one of a class of concrete events took place. The whole human race is

  involved in my assertion: if any man who ever existed or will exist had

not existed or been going to exist, the purport of my proposition would

  have been different. Or, to put the same point in more intensional

  language, if I substitute for man any of the other class-concepts

  applicable to the individual whom I had the honour to meet, my

  proposition is changed, although the individual in question is just as

  much denoted as before. What this proves is, that some man must not be

  regarded as actually denoting Smith and actually denoting Brown, and so

on: the whole procession of human beings throughout the ages is always

  relevant to every proposition in which some man occurs, and what is

  denoted is essentially not each separate man, but a kind of combination

of all men. This is more evident in the case of every, any and a. There is,

  then, a definite something, different in each of the five cases, whichmust, in a sense, be an object, but is characterized as a set of terms

  combined in a certain way, which something is denoted by all men, every

  man, any man, a man or some man; and it is with this very paradoxical

  object that propositions are concerned in which the corresponding

  concept is used as denoting.

63. It remains to discuss the notion of the. This notion has been

  symbolically emphasized by Peano, with very great advantage to his

  calculus; but here it is to be discussed philosophically. The use of identity

and the theory of definition are dependent upon this notion, which has

  thus the very highest philosophical importance.

The word the, in the singular, is correctly employed only in relation to a

class-concept of which there is only one instance. We speak of the King, the

Prime Minister, and so on (understanding at the present time); and in such

cases there is a method of denoting one single definite term by means of a

concept, which is not given to us by any of our other five words. It is owing

to this notion that mathematics can give definitions of terms which are not

concepts—a possibility which illustrates the difference between mathematical

and philosophical definition. Every term is the only instance of some class-

concept, and thus every term, theoretically, is capable of definition, provided

we have not adopted a system in which the said term is one of our

indefinables. It is a curious paradox, puzzling to the symbolic mind, that

definitions, theoretically, are nothing but statements of symbolic

abbreviations, irrelevant to the reasoning and inserted only for practical

convenience, while yet, in the development of a subject, they always require

a very large amount of thought, and often embody some of the greatest

achievements of analysis. This fact seems to be explained by the theory of

denoting. An object may be present to the mind, without our knowing any

concept of which the said object is the instance; and the discovery of such a

concept is not a mere improvement in notation. The reason why this appears

to be the case is that, as soon as the definition is found, it becomes wholly

unnecessary to the reasoning to remember the actual object defined, since

only concepts are relevant to our deductions. In the moment of discovery, the

definition is seen to be true, because the object to be defined was already in

our thoughts; but as part of our reasoning it is not true, but merely symbolic,

since what the reasoning requires is not that it should deal with that object,

but merely that it should deal with the object denoted by the definition.

In most actual definitions of mathematics, what is defined is a class ofentities, and the notion of the does not then explicitly appear. But even in this

case, what is really defined is the class satisfying certain conditions; for a

class, as we shall see in the next chapter, is always a term or conjunction of

terms and never a concept. Thus the notion of the is always relevant in

definitions; and we may observe generally that the adequacy of concepts to

deal with things is wholly dependent upon the unambiguous denoting of a

single term which this notion gives.

64. The connection of denoting with the nature of identity is important, and

helps, I think, to solve some rather serious problems. The question

  whether identity is or is not a relation, and even whether there is such a

  concept at all, is not easy to answer. For, it may be said, identity cannot

be a relation, since, where it is truly asserted, we have only one term,

  whereas two terms are required for a relation. And indeed identity, an

  objector may urge, cannot be anything at all: two terms plainly are not

  identical, and one term cannot be, for what is it identical with?

  Nevertheless identity must be something. We might attempt to remove

  identity from terms to relations, and say that two terms are identical in

  some respect when they have a given relation to a given term. But then

we shall have to hold either that there is strict identity between the two

  cases of the given relation, or that the two cases have identity in the sense

of having a given relation to a given term; but the latter view leads to an

  endless process of the illegitimate kind. Thus identity must be admitted,

and the difficulty as to the two terms of a relation must be met by a sheer

  denial that two different terms are necessary. There must always be a

  referent and a relatum, but these need not be distinct; and where identity

is affirmed, they are not so.*

But the question arises: Why is it ever worth while to affirm identity? This

question is answered by the theory of denoting. If we say “Edward VII is the

King”, we assert an identity; the reason why this assertion is worth making is,

that in the one case the actual term occurs, while in the other a denoting

concept takes its place. (For purposes of discussion, I ignore the fact that

Edwards form a class, and that seventh Edwards form a class having only one

term. Edward VII is practically, though not formally, a proper name.) Often

two denoting concepts occur, and the term itself is not mentioned, as in the

proposition “the present Pope is the last survivor of his generation”. When a

term is given, the assertion of its identity with itself, though true, is perfectly

futile, and is never made outside the logic-books; but where denotingconcepts are introduced, identity is at once seen to be significant. In this case,

of course, there is involved, though not asserted, a relation of the denoting

concept to the term, or of the two denoting concepts to each other. But the is

which occurs in such propositions does not itself state this further relation,

but states pure identity.†

65. To sum up. When a class-concept, preceded by one of the six words all,

  every, any, a, some, the, occurs in a proposition, the proposition is, as a

  rule, not about the concept formed of the two words together, but about

an object quite different from this, in general not a concept at all, but a

term or complex of terms. This may be seen by the fact that propositions

in which such concepts occur are in general false concerning the concepts

  themselves. At the same time, it is possible to consider and make

  propositions about the concepts themselves, but these are not the natural

  propositions to make in employing the concepts. “Any number is odd or

  even” is a perfectly natural proposition, whereas “Any number is a

  variable conjunction” is a proposition only to be made in a logical

  discussion. In such cases, we say that the concept in question denotes.

We decided that denoting is a perfectly definite relation, the same in all

six cases, and that it is the nature of the denoted object and the denoting

  concept which distinguishes the cases. We discussed at some length the

nature and the differences of the denoted objects in the five cases in

  which these objects are combinations of terms. In a full discussion, it

  would be necessary also to discuss the denoting concepts: the actual

  meanings of these concepts, as opposed to the nature of the objects they

  denote, have not been discussed above. But I do not know that there

  would be anything further to say on this topic. Finally, we discussed the,

and showed that this notion is essential to what mathematics calls

  definition, as well as to the possibility of uniquely determining a term by

  means of concepts; the actual use of identity, though not its meaning, was

  also found to depend upon this way of denoting a single term. From this

  point we can advance to the discussion of classes, thereby continuing the

  development of the topics connected with adjectives.

* Cf. § 49.

† There are two allied propositions expressed by the same words, namely

“Socrates is a-man” and “Socrates is-a man”. The above remarks apply to the

former; but in future, unless the contrary is indicated by a hyphen orotherwise, the latter will always be in question. The former expresses the

identity of Socrates with an ambiguous individual; the latter expresses a

relation of Socrates to the class-concept man.

‡ I shall use the word object in a wider sense than term, to cover both

singular and plural, and also cases of ambiguity, such as “a man”. The fact

that a word can be framed with a wider meaning than term raises grave

logical problems. Cf. § 47.

* On the indefinite article, some good remarks are made by Meinong,

“Abstrahiren und Vergleichen”, Zeitschrift für Psychologie und Physiologie

der Sinnesorgane, Vol. xxiv, p. 63.

† I intend to distinguish between a and some in a way not warranted by

language; the distinction of all and every is also a straining of usage. Both are

necessary to avoid circumlocution.

* On relations of terms to themselves, v. inf. Chap. 9, § 95.

† The word is is terribly ambiguous, and great care is necessary in order

not to confound its various meanings. We have (1) the sense in which it

asserts Being, as in “A is”; (2) the sense of identity; (3) the sense of

predication, in “A is human”; (4) the sense of “A is a-man” (cf. p. 54, note),

which is very like identity. In addition to these there are less common uses, as

“to be good is to be happy”, where a relation of assertions is meant, that

relation, in fact, which,where it exists, gives rise to formal implication.

Doubtless there are further meanings which have not occurred to me. On the

meanings of is, cf. De Morgan, Formal Logic, pp.49, 50.6


CLASSES




66. To bring clearly before the mind what is meant by class, and to

  distinguish this notion from all the notions to which it is allied, is one of

the most difficult and important problems of mathematical philosophy.

  Apart from the fact that dass is a very fundamental concept, the utmost

care and nicety is required in this subject on account of the contradiction

to be discussed in Chapter 10. I must ask the reader, therefore, not to

  regard as idle pedantry the apparatus of somewhat subtle discriminations

to be found in what follows.

It has been customary, in works on logic, to distinguish two standpoints,

that of extension and that of intension. Philosophers have usually regarded

the latter as more fundamental, while Mathematics has been held to deal

specially with the former. M. Couturat, in his admirable work on Leibniz,

states roundly that Symbolic Logic can only be built up from the standpoint

of extension;* and if there really were only these two points of view, his

statement would be justified. But as a matter of fact, there are positions

intermediate between pure intension and pure extension, and it is in these

intermediate regions that Symbolic Logic has its lair. It is essential that the

classes with which we are concerned should be composed of terms, and

should not be predicates or concepts, for a class must be definite when its

terms are given, but in general there will be many predicates which attach to

the given terms and to no others. We cannot of course attempt an intensional

definition of a class as the class of predicates attaching to the terms in

question and to no others, for this would involve a vicious circle; hence the

point of view of extension is to some extent unavoidable. On the other hand,

if we take extension pure, our class is defined by enumeration of its terms,

and this method will not allow us to deal, as Symbolic Logic does, with

infinite classes. Thus our classes must in general be regarded as objects

denoted by concepts, and to this extent the point of view of intension isessential. It is owing to this consideration that the theory of denoting is of

such great importance. In the present chapter we have to specify the precise

degree in which extension and intension respectively enter into the definition

and employment of classes; and throughout the discussion, I must ask the

reader to remember that whatever is said has to be applicable to infinite as

well as to finite classes.

67. When an object is unambiguously denoted by a concept, I shall speak of

the concept as a concept (or sometimes, loosely, as the concept) of the

  object in question. Thus it will be necessary to distinguish the concept of

a class from a class-concept. We agreed to call man a class-concept, but

man does not, in its usual employment, denote anything. On the other

hand, men and all men (which I shall regard as synonyms) do denote, and

I shall contend that what they denote is the class composed of all men.

  Thus man is the class-concept, men (the concept) is the concept of the

class and men (the object denoted by the concept men) are the class. It is

no doubt confusing, at first, to use class-concept and concept of a class in

  different senses; but so many distinctions are required that some straining

of language seems unavoidable. In the phraseology of the preceding

  chapter, we may say that a class is a numerical conjunction of terms. This

is the thesis which is to be established.

68. In Chapter 2 we regarded classes as derived from assertions, i.e. as all

the entities satisfying some assertion, whose form was left wholly vague.

I shall discuss this view critically in the next chapter; for the present, we

may confine ourselves to classes as they are derived from predicates,

  leaving open the question whether every assertion is equivalent to a

  predication. We may, then, imagine a kind of genesis of classes, through

the successive stages indicated by the typical propositions “Socrates is

  human”, “Socrates has humanity”, “Socrates is a man”, “Socrates is one

among men”. Of these propositions, the last only, we should say,

  explicitly contains the class as a constituent; but every subject-predicate

  proposition gives rise to the other three equivalent propositions, and thus

  every predicate (provided it can be sometimes truly predicated) gives rise

to a class. This is the genesis of classes from the intensional standpoint.

On the other hand, when mathematicians deal with what they call a

manifold, aggregate, Menge, ensemble, or some equivalent name, it is

common, especially where the number of terms involved is finite, to regard

the object in question (which is in fact a class) as defined by the enumerationof its terms, and as consisting possibly of a single term, which in that case is

the class. Here it is not predicates and denoting that are relevant, but terms

connected by the word and, in the sense in which this word stands for a

numerical conjunction. Thus Brown and Jones are a class, and Brown singly

is a class. This is the extensional genesis of classes.

69. The best formal treatment of classes in existence is that of Peano.* But

in this treatment a number of distinctions of great philosophical

  importance are overlooked. Peano, not I think quite consciously,

  identifies the class with the class-concept; thus the relation of an

  individual to its class is, for him, expressed by is a. For him, “2 is a

  number” is a proposition in which a term is said to belong to the class

  number. Nevertheless, he identifies the equality of classes, which

  consists in their having the same terms, with identity—a proceeding

  which is quite illegitimate when the class is regarded as the class-

  concept. In order to perceive that man and featherless biped are not

  identical, it is quite unnecessary to take a hen and deprive the poor bird

of its feathers. Or, to take a less complex instance, it is plain that even

  prime is not identical with integer next after 1. Thus when we identify

the class with the class-concept, we must admit that two classes may be

  equal without being identical. Nevertheless, it is plain that when two

  class-concepts are equal, some identity is involved, for we say that they

  have the same terms. Thus there is some object which is positively

  identical when two class-concepts are equal; and this object, it would

seem, is more properly called the class. Neglecting the plucked hen, the

class of featherless bipeds, every one would say, is the same as the class

of men; the class of even primes is the same as the class of integers next

after 1. Thus we must not identify the class with the class-concept, or

  regard “Socrates is a man” as expressing the relation of an individual to a

class of which it is a member. This has two consequences (to be

  established presently) which prevent the philosophical acceptance of

certain points in Peano’s formalism. The first consequence is, that there

is no such thing as the null-class, though there are null class-concepts.

The second is, that a class having only one term is to be identified,

  contrary to Peano’s usage, with that one term. I should not propose,

  however, to alter his practice or his notation in consequence of either of

  these points; rather I should regard them as proofs that Symbolic Logic

  ought to concern itself, as far as notation goes, with class-concepts ratherthan with classes.

70. A class, we have seen, is neither a predicate nor a class-concept, for

  different predicates and different class-concepts may correspond to the

  same class. A class also, in one sense at least, is distinct from the whole

  composed of its terms, for the latter is only and essentially one, while the

  former, where it has many terms, is, as we shall see later, the very kind of

  object of which many is to be asserted. The distinction of a class as many

from a class as a whole is often made by language: space and points, time

and instants, the army and the soldiers, the navy and the sailors, the

  Cabinet and the Cabinet Ministers, all illustrate the distinction. The

  notion of a whole, in the sense of a pure aggregate which is here relevant,

is, we shall find, not always applicable where the notion of the class as

  many applies (see Chapter 10). In such cases, though terms may be said

to belong to the class, the class must not be treated as itself a single

logical subject.* But this case never arises where a class can be generated

by a predicate. Thus we may for the present dismiss this complication

from our minds. In a class as many, the component terms, though they

  have some kind of unity, have less than is required for a whole. They

have, in fact, just so much unity as is required to make them many, and

not enough to prevent them from remaining many. A further reason for

  distinguishing wholes from classes as many is that a class as one may be

one of the terms of itself as many, as in “classes are one among classes”

(the extensional equivalent of “class is a class-concept”), whereas a

  complex whole can never be one of its own constituents.

71. Class may be defined either extensionally or intensionally. That is to

say, we may define the kind of object which is a class, or the kind of

  concept which denotes a class: this is the precise meaning of the

  opposition of extension and intension in this connection. But although the

  general notion can be defined in this two-fold manner, particular classes,

  except when they happen to be finite, can only be defined intensionally,

i.e. as the objects denoted by such and such concepts. I believe this

  distinction to be purely psychological: logically, the extensional

  definition appears to be equally applicable to infinite classes, but

  practically, if we were to attempt it, Death would cut short our laudable

  endeavour before it had attained its goal. Logically, therefore, extension

and intension seem to be on a par. I will begin with the extensional view.

  When a class is regarded as defined by the enumeration of its terms, it ismore naturally called a collection. I shall for the moment adopt this name, as

it will not prejudge the question whether the objects denoted by it are truly

classes or not. By a collection I mean what is conveyed by “A and B” or “A

and B and C”, or any other enumeration of definite terms. The collection is

defined by the actual mention of the terms, and the terms are connected by

and. It would seem that and represents a fundamental way of combining

terms, and that just this way of combination is essential if anything is to result

of which a number other than 1 can be asserted. Collections do not

presuppose numbers, since they result simply from the terms together with

and: they could only presuppose numbers in the particular case where the

terms of the collection themselves presupposed numbers. There is a

grammatical difficulty which, since no method exists of avoiding it, must be

pointed out and allowed for. A collection, grammatically, is singular, whereas

A and B, A and B and C, etc. are essentially plural. This grammatical

difficulty arises from the logical fact (to be discussed presently) that whatever

is many in general forms a whole which is one; it is, therefore, not removable

by a better choice of technical terms.

The notion of and was brought into prominence by Bolzano.* In order to

understand what infinity is, he says, “we must go back to one of the simplest

conceptions of our understanding, in order to reach an agreement concerning

the word that we are to use to denote it. This is the conception which

underlies the conjunction and, which, however, if it is to stand out as clearly

as is required, in many cases, both by the purposes of mathematics and by

those of philosophy, I believe to be best expressed by the words: ‘A system

(Inbegriff) of certain things’, or ‘a whole consisting of certain parts’. But we

must add that every arbitrary object A can be combined in a system with any

others B, C, D, …, or (speaking still more correctly) already forms a system

by itself,† of which some more or less important truth can be enunciated,

provided only that each of the presentations A, B, C, D, … in fact represents a

different object, or in so far as none of the propositions ‘A is the same as B’,

‘A is the same as C’, ‘A is the same as D’, etc., is true. For if e.g. A is the

same as B, then it is certainly unreasonable to speak of a system of the things

A and B.”

The above passage, good as it is, neglects several distinctions which we

have found necessary. First and foremost, it does not distinguish the many

from the whole which they form. Secondly, it does not appear to observe that

the method of enumeration is not practically applicable to infinite systems.Thirdly, and this is connected with the second point, it does not make any

mention of intensional definition nor of the notion of a class. What we have

to consider is the difference, if any, of a class from a collection on the one

hand, and from the whole formed of the collection on the other. But let us

first examine further the notion of and.

  Anything of which a finite number other than 0 or 1 can be asserted would

be commonly said to be many, and many, it might be said, are always of the

form “A and B and C and … ”. Here A, B, C, … are each one and are all

different. To say that A is one seems to amount to much the same as to say

that A is not of the form “A and A and A and …”. To say that A, B, C, …
                              123

are all different seems to amount only to a condition as regards the symbols:

it should be held that “A and A” is meaningless, so that diversity is implied by

and, and need not be specially stated.

A term A which is one may be regarded as a particular case of a collection,

namely as a collection of one term. Thus every collection which is many

presupposes many collections which are each one: A and B presupposes A

and presupposes B. Conversely some collections of one term presuppose

many, namely those which are complex: thus “A differs from B” is one, but

presupposes A and difference and B. But there is not symmetry in this

respect, for the

  ultimate presuppositions of anything are always simple terms. Every pair

of terms, without exception, can be combined in the manner indicated by A

and B, and if neither A nor B be many, then A and B are two. A and B may be

any conceivable entities, any possible objects of thought, they may be points

or numbers or true or false propositions or events or people, in short anything

that can be counted. A teaspoon and the number 3, or a chimaera and a four-

dimensional space, are certainly two. Thus no restriction whatever is to be

placed on A and B, except that neither is to be many. It should be observed

that A and B need not exist, but must, like anything that can be mentioned,

have Being. The distinction of Being and existence is important, and is well

illustrated by the process of counting. What can be counted must be

something, and must certainly be, though it need by no means be possessed

of the further privilege of existence. Thus what we demand of the terms of

our collection is merely that each should be an entity.

The question may now be asked: What is meant by A and B? Does this

mean anything more than the juxtaposition of A with B? That is, does it

contain any element over and above that of A and that of B? Is and a separateconcept, which occurs besides A, B? To either answer there are objections. In

the first place, and, we might suppose, cannot be a new concept, for if it

were, it would have to be some kind of relation between A and B; A and B

would then be a proposition, or at least a propositional concept, and would be

one, not two. Moreover, if there are two concepts, there are two, and no third

mediating concept seems necessary to make them two. Thus and would seem

meaningless. But it is difficult to maintain this theory. To begin with, it

seems rash to hold that any word is meaningless. When we use the word and,

we do not seem to be uttering mere idle breath, but some idea seems to

correspond to the word. Again some kind of combination seems to be implied

by the fact that A and B are two, which is not true of either separately. When

we say “A and B are yellow”, we can replace the proposition by “A is yellow”

and “B is yellow”; but this cannot be done for “A and B are two”; on the

contrary, A is one and B is one. Thus it seems best to regard and as

expressing a definite unique kind of combination, not a relation, and not

combining A and B into a whole, which would be one. This unique kind of

combination will in future be called addition of individuals. It is important to

observe that it applies to terms, and only applies to numbers in consequence

of their being terms. Thus for the present, 1 and 2 are two, and 1 and 1 is

meaningless.

As regards what is meant by the combination indicated by and, it is

indistinguishable from what we before called a numerical conjunction. That

is, A and B is what is denoted by the concept of a class of which A and B are

the only members. If u be a class-concept of which the propositions “A is a

u”“B is a u” are true, but of which all other propositions of the same form are

false, then “all u’s” is the concept of a class whose only terms are A and B;

this concept denotes the terms A, B combined in a certain way, and “A and B”

are those terms combined in just that way. Thus “A and B” are the class, but

are distinct from the class-concept and from the concept of the class.

The notion of and, however, does not enter into the meaning of a class, for

a single term is a class, although it is not a numerical conjunction. If u be a

class-concept, and only one proposition of the form “x is a u” be true, then

“all u’s” is a concept denoting a single term, and this term is the class of

which “all u’s” is a concept. Thus what seems essential to a class is not the

notion of and, but the being denoted by some concept of a class. This brings

us to the intensional view of classes.

72. We agreed in the preceding chapter that there are not different ways of  denoting, but only different kinds of denoting concepts and

  correspondingly different kinds of denoted objects. We have discussed

the kind of denoted object which constitutes a class; we have now to

  consider the kind of denoting concept.

The consideration of classes which results from denoting concepts is more

general than the extensional consideration, and that is in two respects. In the

first place it allows, what the other practically excludes, the admission of

infinite classes; in the second place it introduces the null concept of a class.

But, before discussing these matters, there is a purely logical point of some

importance to be examined.

If u be a class-concept, is the concept “all u’s” analysable into two

constituents, all and u, or is it a new concept, defined by a certain relation to

u, and no more complex than u itself? We may observe, to begin with, that

“all u’s” is synonymous with “u’s”, at least according to a very common use

of the plural. Our question is, then, as to the meaning of the plural. The word

all has certainly some definite meaning, but it seems highly doubtful whether

it means more than the indication of a relation. “All men” and “all numbers”

have in common the fact that they both have a certain relation to a class-

concept, namely to man and number respectively. But it is very difficult to

isolate any further element of all-ness which both share, unless we take as

this element the mere fact that both are concepts of classes. It would seem,

then, that “all u’s” is not validly analysable into all and u, and that language,

in this case as in some others, is a misleading guide. The same remark will

apply to every, any, some, a and the.

It might perhaps be thought that a class ought to be considered, not merely

as a numerical conjunction of terms, but as a numerical conjunction denoted

by the concept of a class. This complication, however, would serve no useful

purpose, except to preserve Peano’s distinction between a single term and the

class whose only term it is—a distinction which is easy to grasp when the

class is identified with the class-concept, but which is inadmissible in our

view of classes. It is evident that a numerical conjunction considered as

denoted is either the same entity as when not so considered, or else is a

complex of denoting together with the object denoted; and the object denoted

is plainly what we mean by a class.

  With regard to infinite classes, say the class of numbers, it is to be

observed that the concept all numbers, though not itself infinitely complex,

yet denotes an infinitely complex object. This is the inmost secret of ourpower to deal with infinity. An infinitely complex concept, though there may

be such, can certainly not be manipulated by the human intelligence; but

infinite collections, owing to the notion of denoting, can be manipulated

without introducing any concepts of infinite complexity. Throughout the

discussions of infinity in later Parts of the present work, this remark should

be borne in mind: if it is forgotten, there is an air of magic which causes the

results obtained to seem doubtful.

73. Great difficulties are associated with the null-class, and generally with

the idea of nothing. It is plain that there is such a concept as nothing, and

that in some sense nothing is something. In fact, the proposition “nothing

is not nothing” is undoubtedly capable of an interpretation which makes

it true—a point which gives rise to the contradictions discussed in Plato’s

  Sophist. In Symbolic Logic the null-class is the class which has no terms

at all; and symbolically it is quite necessary to introduce some such

  notion. We have to consider whether the contradictions which naturally

  arise can be avoided.

It is necessary to realize, in the first place, that a concept may denote

although it does not denote anything. This occurs when there are propositions

in which the said concept occurs, and which are not about the said concept,

but all such propositions are false. Or rather, the above is a first step towards

the explanation of a denoting concept which denotes nothing. It is not,

however, an adequate explanation. Consider, for example, the proposition

“chimaeras are animals” or “even primes other than 2 are numbers”. These

propositions appear to be true, and it would seem that they are not concerned

with the denoting concepts, but with what these concepts denote; yet that is

impossible, for the concepts in question do not denote anything. Symbolic

Logic says that these concepts denote the null-class, and that the propositions

in question assert that the null-class is contained in certain other classes. But

with the strictly extensional view of classes propounded above, a class which

has no terms fails to be anything at all: what is merely and solely a collection

of terms cannot subsist when all the terms are removed. Thus we must either

find a different interpretation of classes, or else find a method of dispensing

with the null-class.

The above imperfect definition of a concept which denotes, but does not

denote anything, may be amended as follows. All denoting concepts, as we

saw, are derived from class-concepts; and a is a class-concept when “x is an

a” is a propositional function. The denoting concepts associated with a willnot denote anything when and only when “x is an a” is false for all values of

x. This is a complete definition of a denoting concept which does not denote

anything; and in this case we shall say that a is a null class-concept, and that

“all a’s” is a null concept of a class. Thus for a system such as Peano’s, in

which what are called classes are really class-concepts, technical difficulties

need not arise; but for us a genuine logical problem remains.

The proposition “chimaeras are animals” may be easily interpreted by

means of formal implication, as meaning “x is a chimaera implies x is an

animal for all values of x”. But in dealing with classes we have been

assuming that propositions containing all or any or every, though equivalent

to formal implications, were yet distinct from them, and involved ideas

requiring independent treatment. Now in the case of chimaeras, it is easy to

substitute the pure intensional view, according to which what is really stated

is a relation of predicates: in the case in question the adjective animal is part

of the definition of the adjective chimerical (if we allow ourselves to use this

word, contrary to usage, to denote the defining predicate of chimaeras). But

here again it is fairly plain that we are dealing with a proposition which

implies that chimaeras are animals, but is not the same proposition—indeed,

in the present case, the implication is not even reciprocal. By a negation we

can give a kind of extensional interpretation: nothing is denoted by a

chimaera which is not denoted by an animal. But this is a very roundabout

interpretation. On the whole, it seems most correct to reject the proposition

altogether, while retaining the various other propositions that would be

equivalent to it if there were chimaeras. By symbolic logicians, who have

experienced the utility of the null-class, this will be felt as a reactionary view.

But I am not at present discussing what should be done in the logical

calculus, where the established practice appears to me the best, but what is

the philosophical truth concerning the null-class. We shall say, then, that, of

the bundle of normally equivalent interpretations of logical symbolic

formulae, the class of interpretations considered in the present chapter, which

are dependent upon actual classes, fail where we are concerned with null

class-concepts, on the ground that there is no actual null-class.

We may now reconsider the proposition “nothing is not nothing”—a

proposition plainly true, and yet, unless carefully handled, a source of

apparently hopeless antinomies. Nothing is a denoting concept, which

denotes nothing. The concept which denotes is of course not nothing, i.e. it is

not denoted by itself. The proposition which looks so paradoxical means nomore than this: Nothing, the denoting concept, is not nothing, i.e. is not what

itself denotes. But it by no means follows from this that there is an actual

null-class: only the null class-concept and the null concept of a class are to be

admitted.

But now a new difficulty has to be met. The equality of class-concepts, like

all relations which are reflexive, symmetrical and transitive, indicates an

underlying identity, i.e. it indicates that every class-concept has to some term

a relation which all equal class-concepts also have to that term—the term in

question being different for different sets of equal class-concepts, but the

same for the various members of a single set of equal class-concepts. Now

for all class-concepts which are not null, this term is found in the

corresponding class; but where are we to find it for null class-concepts? To

this question several answers may be given, any of which may be adopted.

For we now know what a class is, and we may therefore adopt as our term the

class of all null class-concepts or of all null propositional functions. These are

not null-classes, but genuine classes, and to either of them all null class-

concepts have the same relation. If we then wish to have an entity analogous

to what is elsewhere to be called a class, but corresponding to null class-

concepts, we shall be forced, wherever it is necessary (as in counting classes)

to introduce a term which is identical for equal class-concepts, to substitute

everywhere the class of class-concepts equal to a given class-concept for the

class corresponding to that class-concept. The class corresponding to the

class-concept remains logically fundamental, but need not be actually

employed in our symbolism. The null-class, in fact, is in some ways

analogous to an irrational in Arithmetic: it cannot be interpreted on the same

principles as other classes, and if we wish to give an analogous interpretation

elsewhere, we must substitute for classes other more complicated entities—in

the present case, certain correlated classes. The object of such a procedure

will be mainly technical; but failure to understand the procedure will lead to

inextricable difficulties in the interpretation of the symbolism. A very closely

analogous procedure occurs constantly in Mathematics, for example with

every generalization of number; and so far as I know, no single case in which

it occurs has been rightly interpreted either by philosophers or by

mathematicians. So many instances will meet us in the course of the present

work that it is unnecessary to linger longer over the point at present. Only one

possible misunderstanding must be guarded against. No vicious circle is

involved in the above account of the null-class; for the general notion of classis first laid down, is found to involve what is called existence, is then

symbolically, not philosophically, replaced by the notion of a class of equal

class-concepts and is found, in this new form, to be applicable to what

corresponds to null class-concepts, since what corresponds is now a class

which is not null. Between classes simpliciter and classes of equal class-

concepts there is a one-one correlation, which breaks down in the sole case of

the class of null class-concepts, to which no null-class corresponds; and this

fact is the reason for the whole complication.

74. A question which is very fundamental in the philosophy of Arithmetic

must now be discussed in a more or less preliminary fashion. Is a class

  which has many terms to be regarded as itself one or many? Taking the

class as equivalent simply to the numerical conjunction “A and B and C

and etc.”, it seems plain that it is many; yet it is quite necessary that we

  should be able to count classes as one each, and we do habitually speak

of a class. Thus classes would seem to be one in one sense and many in

  another.

  There is a certain temptation to identify the class as many and the class as

one, e.g., all men and the human race. Nevertheless, wherever a class

consists of more than one term, it can be proved that no such identification is

permissible. A concept of a class, if it denotes a class as one, is not the same

as any concept of the class which it denotes. That is to say, classes of all

rational animals, which denotes the human race as one term, is different from

men, which denotes men, i.e. the human race as many. But if the human race

were identical with men, it would follow that whatever denotes the one must

denote the other, and the above difference would be impossible. We might be

tempted to infer that Peano’s distinction, between a term and a class of which

the said term is the only member, must be maintained, at least when the term

in question is a class.* But it is more correct, I think, to infer an ultimate

distinction between a class as many and a class as one, to hold that the many

are only many, and are not also one. The class as one may be identified with

the whole composed of the terms of the class, i.e., in the case of men, the

class as one will be the human race.

But can we now avoid the contradiction always to be feared, where there is

something that cannot be made a logical subject? I do not myself see any way

of eliciting a precise contradiction in this case. In the case of concepts, we

were dealing with what was plainly one entity; in the present case, we are

dealing with a complex essentially capable of analysis into units. In such aproposition as “A and B are two”, there is no logical subject: the assertion is

not about A, nor about B, nor about the whole composed of both, but strictly

and only about A and B. Thus it would seem that assertions are not

necessarily about single subjects, but may be about many subjects; and this

removes the contradiction which arose, in the case of concepts, from the

impossibility of making assertions about them unless they were turned into

subjects. This impossibility being here absent, the contradiction which was to

be feared does not arise.

75. We may ask, as suggested by the above discussion, what is to be said of

the objects denoted by a man, every man, some man and any man. Are

  these objects one or many or neither? Grammar treats them all as one.

But to this view, the natural objection is, which one? Certainly not

  Socrates, nor Plato, nor any other particular person. Can we conclude that

no one is denoted? As well might we conclude that every one is denoted,

  which in fact is true of the concept every man. I think one is denoted in

  every case, but in an impartial distributive manner. Any number is neither

1 nor 2 nor any other particular number, whence it is easy to conclude

that any number is not any one number, a proposition at first sight

  contradictory, but really resulting from an ambiguity in any, and more

  correctly expressed by “any number is not some one number”. There are,

  however, puzzles in this subject which I do not yet know how to solve.

A logical difficulty remains in regard to the nature of the whole composed

of all the terms of a class. Two propositions appear self-evident: (1) two

wholes composed of different terms must be different; (2) a whole composed

of one term only is that one term. It follows that the whole composed of a

class considered as one term is that class considered as one term, and is

therefore identical with the whole composed of the terms of the class; but this

result contradicts the first of our supposed self-evident principles. The answer

in this case, however, is not difficult. The first of our principles is only

universally true when all the terms composing our two wholes are simple. A

given whole is capable, if it has more than two parts, of being analysed in a

plurality of ways; and the resulting constituents, so long as analysis is not

pushed as far as possible, will be different for different ways of analysing.

This proves that different sets of constituents may constitute the same whole,

and thus disposes of our difficulty.

76. Something must be said as to the relation of a term to a class of which it

is a member, and as to the various allied relations. One of the allied  relations is to be called ε, and is to be fundamental in Symbolic Logic.

But it is to some extent optional which of them we take as symbolically

  fundamental.

  Logically, the fundamental relation is that of subject and predicate,

expressed in “Socrates is human”—a relation which, as we saw in Chapter 4,

is peculiar in that the relatum cannot be regarded as a term in the proposition.

The first relation that grows out of this is the one expressed by “Socrates has

humanity”, which is distinguished by the fact that here the relation is a term.

Next comes “Socrates is a man”. This proposition, considered as a relation

between Socrates and the concept man, is the one which Peano regards as

fundamental; and his ε expresses the relation is a between Socrates and man.

So long as we use class-concepts for classes in our symbolism, this practice is

unobjectionable; but if we give ε this meaning, we must not assume that two

symbols representing equal class-concepts both represent one and the same

entity. We may go on to the relation between Socrates and the human race,

i.e. between a term and its class considered as a whole; this is expressed by

“Socrates belongs to the human race”. This relation might equally well be

represented by ε. It is plain that, since a class, except when it has one term, is

essentially many, it cannot be as such represented by a single letter: hence in

any possible Symbolic Logic the letters which do duty for classes cannot

represent the classes as many, but must represent either class-concepts, or the

wholes composed of classes, or some other allied single entities. And thus ε

cannot represent the relation of a term to its class as many; for this would be

a relation of one term to many terms, not a two-term relation such as we

want. This relation might be expressed by “Socrates is one among men”; but

this, in any case, cannot be taken to be the meaning of ε.

77. A relation which, before Peano, was almost universally confounded

with ε, is the relation of inclusion between classes, as e.g. between men

and mortals. This is a time-honoured relation, since it occurs in the

  traditional form of the syllogism: it has been a battle-ground between

  intension and extension, and has been so much discussed that it is

  astonishing how much remains to be said about it. Empiricists hold that

such propositions mean an actual enumeration of the terms of the

  contained class, with the assertion, in each case, of membership of the

  containing class. They must, it is to be inferred, regard it as doubtful

  whether all primes are integers, since they will scarcely have the face to

say that they have examined all primes one by one. Their opponents have  usually held, on the contrary, that what is meant is a relation of whole

and part between the defining predicates, but turned in the opposite sense

from the relation between the classes: i.e. the defining predicate of the

  larger class is part of that of the smaller. This view seems far more

  defensible than the other; and wherever such a relation does hold

  between the defining predicates, the relation of inclusion follows. But

  two objections may be made, first, that in some cases of inclusion there is

no such relation between the defining predicates, and secondly, that in

any case what is meant is a relation between the classes, not a relation of

their defining predicates. The first point may be easily established by

  instances. The concept even prime does not contain as a constituent the

  concept integer between 1 and 10; the concept “English King whose head

was cut off” does not contain the concept “people who died in 1649”; and

so on through innumerable obvious cases. This might be met by saying

that, though the relation of the defining predicates is not one of whole

and part, it is one more or less analogous to implication, and is always

what is really meant by propositions of inclusion. Such a view represents,

I think, what is said by the better advocates of intension, and I am not

  concerned to deny that a relation of the kind in question does always

subsist between defining predicates of classes one of which is contained

in the other. But the second of the above points remains valid as against

any intensional interpretation. When we say that men are mortals, it is

  evident that we are saying something about men, not about the concept

man or the predicate human. The question is, then, what exactly are we

  saying?

  Peano held, in earlier editions of his Formulaire, that what is asserted is

the formal implication “x is a man implies x is a mortal”. This is certainly

implied, but I cannot persuade myself that it is the same proposition. For in

this proposition, as we saw in Chapter 3, it is essential that x should take all

values, and not only such as are men. But when we say “all men are mortals”,

it seems plain that we are only speaking of men, and not of all other

imaginable terms. We may, if we wish for a genuine relation of classes,

regard the assertion as one of whole and part between the two classes each

considered as a single term. Or we may give a still more purely extensional

form to our proposition, by making it mean: Every (or any) man is a mortal.

This proposition raises very interesting questions in the theory of denoting:

for it appears to assert an identity, yet it is plain that what is denoted by everyman is different from what is denoted by a mortal. These questions, however,

interesting as they are, cannot be pursued here. It is only necessary to realize

clearly what are the various equivalent propositions involved where one class

is included in another. The form most relevant to Mathematics is certainly the

one with formal implication, which will receive a fresh discussion in the

following chapter.

  Finally, we must remember that classes are to be derived, by means of the

notion of such that, from other sources than subject-predicate propositions

and their equivalents. Any propositional function in which a fixed assertion is

made of a variable term is to be regarded, as was explained in Chapter 2, as

giving rise to a class of values satisfying it. This topic requires a discussion of

assertions; but one strange contradiction, which necessitates the care in

discrimination aimed at in the present chapter, may be mentioned at once.

78. Among predicates, most of the ordinary instances cannot be predicated

of themselves, though, by introducing negative predicates, it will be

  found that there are just as many instances of predicates which are

  predicable of themselves. One at least of these, namely predicability, or

the property of being a predicate, is not negative: predicability, as is

  evident, is predicable, i.e. it is a predicate of itself. But the most common

  instances are negative: thus non-humanity is non-human, and so on. The

  predicates which are not predicable of themselves are, therefore, only a

  selection from among predicates, and it is natural to suppose that they

form a class having a defining predicate. But if so, let us examine

  whether this defining predicate belongs to the class or not. If it belongs to

the class, it is not predicable of itself, for that is the characteristic

  property of the class. But if it is not predicable of itself, then it does not

belong to the class whose defining predicate it is, which is contrary to the

  hypothesis. On the other hand, if it does not belong to the class whose

  defining predicate it is, then it is not predicable of itself, i.e. it is one of

  those predicates that are not predicable of themselves, and therefore it

does belong to the class whose defining predicate it is—again contrary to

the hypothesis. Hence from either hypothesis we can deduce its

  contradictory. I shall return to this contradiction in Chapter 10; for the

  present, I have introduced it merely as showing that no subtlety in

  distinguishing is likely to be excessive.

79. To sum up the above somewhat lengthy discussion. A class, we agreed,

is essentially to be interpreted in extension; it is either a single term, orthat kind of combination of terms which is indicated when terms are

  connected by the word and. But practically, though not theoretically, this

  purely extensional method can only be applied to finite classes. All

  classes, whether finite or infinite, can be obtained as the objects denoted

by the plurals of class-concepts—men, numbers, points, etc. Starting with

  predicates, we distinguished two kinds of proposition, typified by

  “Socrates is human” and “Socrates has humanity”, of which the first uses

human as predicate, the second as a term of a relation. These two classes

of propositions, though very important logically, are not so relevant to

  Mathematics as their derivatives. Starting from human, we distinguished

(1) the class-concept man, which differs slightly, if at all, from human;

(2) the various denoting concepts all men, every man, any man, a man

and some man; (3) the objects denoted by these concepts, of which the

one denoted by all men was called the class as many, so that all men (the

  concept) was called the concept of the class; (4) the class as one, i.e. the

human race. We had also a classification of propositions about Socrates,

  dependent upon the above distinctions, and approximately parallel with

  them: (1) “Socrates is-a man” is nearly, if not quite, identical with

  “Socrates has humanity”; (2) “Socrates is a-man” expresses identity

  between Socrates and one of the terms denoted by a man; (3) “Socrates is

one among men”, a proposition which raises difficulties owing to the

  plurality of men; (4) “Socrates belongs to the human race”, which alone

  expresses a relation of an individual to its class, and, as the possibility of

  relation requires, takes the class as one, not as many. We agreed that the

  null-class, which has no terms, is a fiction, though there are null class-

  concepts. It appeared throughout that, although any symbolic treatment

must work largely with class-concepts and intension, classes and

  extension are logically more fundamental for the principles of

  Mathematics; and this may be regarded as our main general conclusion in

the present chapter.

* La Logique de Leibniz, Paris, 1901, p. 387.

* Neglecting Frege, who is discussed in the Appendix.

* A plurality of terms is not the logical subject when a number is asserted

of it: such propositions have not one subject, but many subjects. See end of §

74.

* Paradoxien des Unendlichen, Leipzig, 1854 (2nd ed., Berlin, 1889), § 3.† i.e. the combination of A with B, C, D, … already forms a system.

* This conclusion is actually drawn by Frege from an analogous argument:

Archiv für syst. Phil., 1, p. 444. See Appendix.7


PROPOSITIONAL FUNCTIONS




80. In the preceding chapter an endeavour was made to indicate the kind of

  object that is to be called a class, and for purposes of discussion classes

were considered as derived from subject-predicate propositions. This did

not affect our view as to the notion of class itself; but if adhered to, it

  would greatly restrict the extension of the notion. It is often necessary to

  recognize as a class an object not defined by means of a subject-predicate

  proposition. The explanation of this necessity is to be sought in the

  theory of assertions and such that.

The general notion of an assertion has been already explained in

connection with formal implication. In the present chapter its scope and

legitimacy are to be critically examined, and its connection with classes and

such that is to be investigated. The subject is full of difficulties, and the

doctrines which I intend to advocate are put forward with a very limited

confidence in their truth.

The notion of such that might be thought, at first sight, to be capable of

definition; Peano used, in fact, to define the notion by the proposition “the x’s

such that x is an a are the class a”. Apart from further objections, to be

noticed immediately, it is to be observed that the class as obtained from such

that is the genuine class, taken in extension and as many, whereas the a in “x

is an a” is not the class, but the class-concept. Thus it is formally necessary,

if Peano’s procedure is to be permissible, that we should substitute for “x’s

such that so-and-so” the genuine class-concept “x such that so-and-so”, which

may be regarded as obtained from the predicate “such that so-and-so” or

rather, “being an x such that so-and-so”, the latter form being necessary

because so-and-so is a propositional function containing x. But when this

purely formal emendation has been made the point remains that such that

must often be put before such propositions as xRa, where R is a given relation

and a a given term. We cannot reduce this proposition to the form “x is an a'” without using such that; for if we ask what a' must be, the answer is: a'

must be such that each of its terms, and no other terms, have the relation R to

a. To take examples from daily life: the children of Israel are a class defined

by a certain relation to Israel, and the class can only be defined as the terms

such that they have this relation. Such that is roughly equivalent to who or

which, and represents the general notion of satisfying a propositional

function. But we may go further: given a class a, we cannot define, in terms

of a, the class of propositions “x is an a” for different values of x. It is plain

that there is a relation which each of these propositions has to the x which

occurs in it, and that the relation in question is determinate when a is given.

Let us call the relation R. Then any entity which is a referent with respect to

R is a proposition of the type “x is an a”. But here the notion of such that is

already employed. And the relation R itself can only be defined as the relation

which holds between “x is an a” and x for all values of x, and does not hold

between any other pairs of terms. Here such that again appears. The point

which is chiefly important in these remarks is the indefinability of

propositional functions. When these have been admitted, the general notion

of one-valued functions is easily defined. Every relation which is many-one,

i.e. every relation for which a given referent has only one relatum, defines a

function: the relatum is that function of the referent which is defined by the

relation in question. But where the function is a proposition, the notion

involved is presupposed in the symbolism, and cannot be defined by means

of it without a vicious circle: for in the above general definition of a function

propositional functions already occur. In the case of propositions of the type

“x is an a”, if we ask what propositions are of this type, we can only answer

“all propositions in which a term is said to be a”; and here the notion to be

defined reappears.

81. Can the indefinable element involved in propositional functions be

  identified with assertion together with the notion of every proposition

  containing a given assertion, or an assertion made concerning every

  term? The only alternative, so far as I can see, is to accept the general

  notion of a propositional function itself as indefinable, and for formal

  purposes this course is certainly the best; but philosophically, the notion

  appears at first sight capable of analysis, and we have to examine

  whether or not this appearance is deceptive.

We saw in discussing verbs, in Chapter 4, that when a proposition is

completely analysed into its simple constituents, these constituents takentogether do not reconstitute it. A less complete analysis of propositions into

subject and assertion has also been considered; and this analysis does much

less to destroy the proposition. A subject and an assertion, if simply

juxtaposed, do not, it is true, constitute a proposition; but as soon as the

assertion is actually asserted of the subject, the proposition reappears. The

assertion is everything that remains of the proposition when the subject is

omitted: the verb remains an asserted verb, and is not turned into a verbal

noun; or at any rate the verb retains that curious indefinable intricate relation

to the other terms of the proposition which distinguishes a relating relation

from the same relation abstractly considered. It is the scope and legitimacy of

this notion of assertion which is now to be examined. Can every proposition

be regarded as an assertion concerning any term occurring in it, or are

limitations necessary as to the form of the proposition and the way in which

the term enters into it?

In some simple cases, it is obvious that the analysis into subject and

assertion is legitimate. In “Socrates is a man”, we can plainly distinguish

Socrates and something that is asserted about him; we should admit

unhesitatingly that the same thing may be said about Plato or Aristotle. Thus

we can consider a class of propositions containing this assertion, and this will

be the class of which a typical number is represented by “x is a man”. It is to

be observed that the assertion must appear as assertion, not as term: thus “to

be a man is to suffer” contains the same assertion, but used as term, and this

proposition does not belong to the class considered. In the case of

propositions asserting a fixed relation to a fixed term, the analysis seems

equally undeniable. To be more than a yard long, for example, is a perfectly

definite assertion, and we may consider the class of propositions in which this

assertion is made, which will be represented by the propositional function “x

is more than a yard long”. In such phrases as “snakes which are more than a

yard long”, the assertion appears very plainly; for it is here explicitly referred

to a variable subject, not asserted of any one definite subject. Thus if R be a

fixed relation and a a fixed term, … Ra is a perfectly definite assertion. (I

place dots before the R, to indicate the place where the subject must be

inserted in order to make a proposition.) It may be doubted whether a

relational proposition can be regarded as an assertion concerning the relatum.

For my part, I hold that this can be done except in the case of subject-

predicate propositions; but this question is better postponed until we have

discussed relations.*82. More difficult questions must now be considered. Is such a proposition

as “Socrates is a man implies Socrates is a mortal”, or “Socrates has a

wife implies Socrates has a father”, an assertion concerning Socrates or

not? It is quite certain that, if we replace Socrates by a variable, we

  obtain a propositional function; in fact, the truth of this function for all

  values of the variable is what is asserted in the corresponding formal

  implication, which does not, as might be thought at first sight, assert a

  relation between two propositional functions. Now it was our intention, if

  possible, to explain propositional functions by means of assertions;

  hence, if our intention can be carried out, the above propositions must be

  assertions concerning Socrates. There is, however, a very great difficulty

in so regarding them. An assertion was to be obtained from a proposition

by simply omitting one of the terms occurring in the proposition. But

  when we omit Socrates, we obtain “… is a man implies … is a mortal”.

In this formula it is essential that, in restoring the proposition, the same

term should be substituted in the two places where dots indicate the

  necessity of a term. It does not matter what term we choose, but it must

be identical in both places. Of this requisite, however, no trace whatever

  appears in the would-be assertion, and no trace can appear, since all

  mention of the term to be inserted is necessarily omitted. When an x is

  inserted to stand for the variable, the identity of the term to be inserted is

  indicated by the repetition of the letter x; but in the assertional form no

such method is available. And yet, at first sight, it seems very hard to

deny that the proposition in question tells us a fact about Socrates, and

that the same fact is true about Plato or a plum-pudding or the number 2.

It is certainly undeniable that “Plato is a man implies Plato is a mortal”

is, in some sense or other, the same function of Plato as our previous

  proposition is of Socrates. The natural interpretation of this statement

  would be that the one proposition has to Plato the same relation as the

  other has to Socrates. But this requires that we should regard the

  propositional function in question as definable by means of its relation to

the variable. Such a view, however, requires a propositional function

  more complicated than the one we are considering. If we represent “x is a

man implies x is a mortal” by x, the view in question maintains that x is

the term having to x the relation R, where R is some definite relation. The

  formal statement of this view is as follows: For all values of x and y,“y is

  identical with x” is equivalent to “y has the relation R to x”. It is evidentthat this will not do as an explanation, since it has far greater complexity

than what it was to explain. It would seem to follow that propositions may

  have a certain constancy of form, expressed in the fact that they are

  instances of a given propositional function, without its being possible to

  analyse the propositions into a constant and a variable factor. Such a view

is curious and difficult: constancy of form, in all other cases, is reducible to

  constancy of relations, but the constancy involved here is presupposed in

the notion of constancy of relation, and cannot therefore be explained in

the usual way.

The same conclusion, I think, will result from the case of two variables.

The simplest instance of this case is xRy, where R is a constant relation, while

x and y are independently variable. It seems evident that this is a

propositional function of two independent variables: there is no difficulty in

the notion of the class of all propositions of the form xRy. This class is

involved—or at least all those members of the class that are true are involved

—in the notion of the classes of referents and relata with respect to R, and

these classes are unhesitatingly admitted in such words as parents and

children, masters and servants, husbands and wives, and innumerable other

instances from daily life, as also in logical notions such as premisses and

conclusions, causes and effects, and so on. All such notions depend upon the

class of propositions typified by xRy, where R is constant while x and y are

variable. Yet it is very difficult to regard xRy as analysable into the assertion

R concerning x and y, for the very sufficient reason that this view destroys the

sense of the relation, i.e. its direction from x to y, leaving us with some

assertion which is symmetrical with respect to x and y, such as “the relation R

holds between x and y”. Given a relation and its terms, in fact, two distinct

propositions are possible. Thus if we take R itself to be an assertion, it

becomes an ambiguous assertion: in supplying the terms, if we are to avoid

ambiguity, we must decide which is referent and which relatum. We may

quite legitimately regard…Ry as an assertion, as was explained before; but

here y has become constant. We may then go on to vary y, considering the

class of assertions …Ry for different values of y; but this process does not

seem to be identical with that which is indicated by the independent

variability of x and y in the propositional function xRy. Moreover, the

suggested process requires the variation of an element in an assertion, namely

of y in…Ry, and this is in itself a new and difficult notion.

A curious point arises, in this connection, from the consideration, oftenessential in actual Mathematics, of a relation of a term to itself. Consider the

propositional function xRx, where R is a constant relation. Such functions are

required in considering, e.g., the class of suicides or of self-made men; or

again, in considering the values of the variable for which it is equal to a

certain function of itself, which may often be necessary in ordinary

Mathematics. It seems exceedingly evident, in this case, that the proposition

contains an element which is lost when it is analysed into a term x and an

assertion R. Thus here again, the propositional function must be admitted as

fundamental.

83. A difficult point arises as to the variation of the concept in a

  proposition. Consider, for example, all propositions of the type aRb,

  where a and b are fixed terms, and R is a variable relation. There seems

no reason to doubt that the class-concept “relation between a and b” is

  legitimate, and that there is a corresponding class; but this requires the

  admission of such propositional functions as aRb, which, moreover, are

  frequently required in actual Mathematics, as, for example, in counting

the number of many-one relations whose referents and relata are given

  classes. But if our variable is to have, as we normally require, an

  unrestricted field, it is necessary to substitute the propositional function

“R is a relation implies aRb”. In this proposition the implication involved

is material, not formal. If the implication were formal, the proposition

  would not be a function of R, but would be equivalent to the (necessarily

  false) proposition: “All relations hold between a and b”. Generally we

  have some such proposition as “aRb implies  (R) provided R is a

  relation”, and we wish to turn this into a formal implication. If  (R) is a

  proposition for all values of R, our object is effected by substituting “If ‘R

is a relation’ implies ‘aRb’, then  (R)”. Here R can take all values,* and

the if and then is a formal implication, while the implies is a material

  implication. If  (R) is not a propositional function, but is a proposition

only when R satisfies ψ (R), where ψ (R) is a propositional function

  implied by “R is a relation” for all values of R, then our formal

  implication can be put in the form “If ‘R is a relation’ implies aRb, then,

for all values of R, ψ (R) implies  (R)”, where both the subordinate

  implications are material. As regards the material implication “‘R is a

  relation’ implies aRb”, this is always a proposition, whereas aRb is only

a proposition when R is a relation. The new propositional function will

only be true when R is a relation which does hold between a and b: whenR is not a relation, the antecedent is false and the consequent is not a

  proposition, so that the implication is false; when R is a relation which

does not hold between a and b, the antecedent is true and the consequent

false, so that again the implication is false; only when both are true is the

  implication true. Thus in defining the class of relations holding between

a and b, the formally correct course is to define them as the values

  satisfying “R is a relation implies aRb”—an implication which, though it

  contains a variable, is not formal, but material, being satisfied by some

only of the possible values of R. The variable R in it is, in Peano’s

  language, real and not apparent.

The general principle involved is: If x is only a proposition for some

values of x, then “‘x implies x’ implies x” is a proposition for all values of

x, and is true when and only when x is true. (The implications involved are

both material.) In some cases, “x implies x” will be equivalent to some

simpler propositional function ψx (such as “R is a relation” in the above

instance), which may then be substituted for it.†

  Such a propositional function as “R is a relation implies aRb” appears even

less capable than previous instances of analysis into R and an assertion about

R, since we should have to assign a meaning to “a … b”, where the blank

space may be filled by anything, not necessarily by a relation. There is here,

however, a suggestion of an entity which has not yet been considered, namely

the couple with sense. It may be doubted whether there is any such entity,

and yet such phrases as “R is a relation holding from a to b” seem to show

that its rejection would lead to paradoxes. This point, however, belongs to the

theory of relations, and will be resumed in Chapter 9 (§ 98).

  From what has been said, it appears that propositional functions must be

accepted as ultimate data. It follows that formal implication and the inclusion

of classes cannot be generally explained by means of a relation between

assertions, although, where a propositional function asserts a fixed relation to

a fixed term, the analysis into subject and assertion is legitimate and not

unimportant.

84. It only remains to say a few words concerning the derivation of classes

from propositional functions. When we consider the x’s such that x,

  where x is a propositional function, we are introducing a notion of which,

in the calculus of propositions, only a very shadowy use is made—I mean

the notion of truth. We are considering, among all the propositions of the

type x, those that are true: the corresponding values of x give the class  defined by the function x. It must be held, I think, that every propositional

  function which is not null defines a class, which is denoted by “x’s such

that x”. There is thus always a concept of the class, and the class-concept

  corresponding will be the singular, “x such that x”. But it may be doubted

  —indeed the contradiction with which I ended the preceding chapter gives

  reason for doubting—whether there is always a defining predicate of such

  classes. Apart from the contradiction in question, this point might appear to

be merely verbal: “being an x such that x”, it might be said, may always

be taken to be a predicate. But in view of our contradiction, all remarks on

this subject must be viewed with caution. This subject, however, will be

  resumed in Chapter 10.

85. It is to be observed that, according to the theory of propositional functions

here advocated, the  in x is not a separate and distinguishable entity: it

  lives in the propositions of the form x, and cannot survive analysis. I am

  highly doubtful whether such a view does not lead to a contradiction, but it

  appears to be forced upon us, and it has the merit of enabling us to avoid a

  contradiction arising from the opposite view. If  were a distinguishable

  entity, there would be a proposition asserting  of itself, which we may

  denote by  (); there would also be a proposition not- (), denying  ().

In this proposition we may regard  as variable; we thus obtain a

  propositional function. The question arises: Can the assertion in this

  propositional function be asserted of itself? The assertion is non-

  assertibility of self, hence if it can be asserted of itself, it cannot, and if it

  cannot, it can. This contradiction is avoided by the recognition that the

  functional part of a propositional function is not an independent entity. As

the contradiction in question is closely analogous to the other, concerning

  predicates not predicable of themselves, we may hope that a similar

  solution will apply there also.

* See § 96.

* It is necessary to assign some meaning (other than a proposition) to aRb

when R is not a relation.

† A propositional function, though for every value of the variable it is true

or false, is not itself true or false, being what is denoted by “any proposition

of the type in question”, which is not itself a proposition.8


THE VARIABLE




86. The discussions of the preceding chapter elicited the fundamental nature

of the variable; no apparatus of assertions enables us to dispense with the

  consideration of the varying of one or more elements in a proposition

  while the other elements remain unchanged. The variable is perhaps the

most distinctively mathematical of all notions; it is certainly also one of

the most difficult to understand. The attempt, if not the deed, belongs to

the present chapter.

The theory as to the nature of the variable, which results from our previous

discussions, is in outline the following. When a given term occurs as term in

a proposition, that term may be replaced by any other while the remaining

terms are unchanged. The class of propositions so obtained have what may be

called constancy of form, and this constancy of form must be taken as a

primitive idea. The notion of a class of propositions of constant form is more

fundamental than the general notion of class, for the latter can be defined in

terms of the former, but not the former in terms of the latter. Taking any term,

a certain member of any class of propositions of constant form will contain

that term. Thus x, the variable, is what is denoted by any term, and x, the

propositional function, is what is denoted by the proposition of the form  in

which x occurs. We may say that x is the x is any x, where x denotes the

class of propositions resulting from different values of x. Thus in addition to

propositional functions, the notions of any and of denoting are presupposed

in the notion of the variable. This theory, which, I admit, is full of difficulties,

is the least objectionable that I have been able to imagine. I shall now set it

forth more in detail.

87. Let us observe, to begin with, that the explicit mention of any, some,

etc., need not occur in Mathematics: formal implication will express all

that is required. Let us recur to an instance already discussed in

  connection with denoting, where a is a class and b a class of classes. We  have and so on for the remaining relations considered in Chapter 5. The

  question arises: How far do these equivalences constitute definitions of

any, a, some, and how far are these notions involved in the symbolism

  itself?

“Any a belongs to any b” is equivalent to “‘x is an a’ implies that ‘u is a b’

implies ‘x is a u’”;

“Any a belongs to a b” is equivalent to “‘x is an a’ implies ‘there is a b, say

u, such that x is a u’”;*

“Any a belongs to some b” is equivalent to “there is a b, say u, such that ‘x is

an a’ implies ‘x is a u’”;


The variable is, from the formal standpoint, the characteristic notion of

Mathematics. Moreover it is the method of stating general theorems, which

always mean something different from the intensional propositions to which

such logicians as Mr Bradley endeavour to reduce them. That the meaning of

an assertion about all men or any man is different from the meaning of an

equivalent assertion about the concept man, appears to me, I must confess, to

be a self-evident truth—as evident as the fact that propositions about John are

not about the name John. This point, therefore, I shall not argue further. That

the variable characterizes Mathematics will be generally admitted, though it

is not generally perceived to be present in elementary Arithmetic. Elementary

Arithmetic, as taught to children, is characterized by the fact that the numbers

occurring in it are constants; the answer to any schoolboy’s sum is obtainable

without propositions concerning any number. But the fact that this is the case

can only be proved by the help of propositions about any number, and thus

we are led from schoolboy’s Arithmetic to the Arithmetic which uses letters

for numbers and proves general theorems. How very different this subject is

from childhood’s enemy may be seen at once in such works as those of

Dedekind† and Stolz.‡ Now the difference consists simply in this, that our

numbers have now become variables instead of being constants. We now

prove theorems concerning n, not concerning 3 or 4 or any other particular

number. Thus it is absolutely essential to any theory of Mathematics to

understand the nature of the variable.

  Originally, no doubt, the variable was conceived dynamically, as

something which changed with the lapse of time, or, as is said, as something

which successively assumed all values of a certain class. This view cannot be

too soon dismissed. If a theorem is proved concerning n, it must not besupposed that n is a kind of arithmetical Proteus, which is 1 on Sundays and 2

on Mondays, and so on. Nor must it be supposed that n simultaneously

assumes all its values. If n stands for any integer, we cannot say that n is 1,

nor yet that it is 2, nor yet that it is any other particular number. In fact, n just

denotes any number, and this is something quite distinct from each and all of

the numbers. It is not true that 1 is any number, though it is true that whatever

holds of any number holds of 1. The variable, in short, requires the

indefinable notion of any which was explained in Chapter 5.

88. We may distinguish what may be called the true or formal variable from

the restricted variable. Any term is a concept denoting the true variable; if

u be a class not containing all terms, any u denotes a restricted variable.

The terms included in the object denoted by the defining concept of a

  variable are called the values of the variable: thus every value of a

  variable is a constant. There is a certain difficulty about such

  propositions as “any number is a number”. Interpreted by formal

  implication, they offer no difficulty, for they assert merely that the

  propositional function “x is a number implies x is a number” holds for all

  values of x. But if “any number” be taken to be a definite object, it is

  plain that it is not identical with 1 or 2 or 3 or any number that may be

  mentioned. Yet these are all the numbers there are, so that “any number”

  cannot be a number at all. The fact is that the concept “any number” does

  denote one number, but not a particular one. This is just the distinctive

  point about any, that it denotes a term of a class, but in an impartial

  distributive manner, with no preference for one term over another. Thus

  although x is a number, and no one number is x, yet there is here no

  contradiction, so soon as it is recognized that x is not one definite term.

The notion of the restricted variable can be avoided, except in regard to

propositional functions, by the introduction of a suitable hypothesis, namely

the hypothesis expressing the restriction itself. But in respect of propositional

functions this is not possible. The x in x, where x is a propositional

function, is an unrestricted variable; but the x itself is restricted to the class

which we may call . (It is to be remembered that the class is here

fundamental, for we found it impossible, without a vicious circle, to discover

any common characteristic by which the class could be defined, since the

statement of any common characteristic is itself a propositional function.) By

making our x always an unrestricted variable, we can speak of the variable,

which is conceptually identical in Logic, Arithmetic, Geometry, and all otherformal subjects. The terms dealt with are always all terms; only the complex

concepts that occur distinguish the various branches of Mathematics.

89. We may now return to the apparent definability of any, some and a, in

  terms of formal implication. Let a and b be class-concepts, and consider

the proposition “any a is a b”. This is to be interpreted as meaning “x is an

a implies x is a b”. It is plain that, to begin with, the two propositions do

not mean the same thing: for any a is a concept denoting only a’s, whereas

in the formal implication x need not be an a. But we might, in

  Mathematics, dispense altogether with “any a is a b”, and content

  ourselves with the formal implication: this is, in fact, symbolically the

  best course. The question to be examined, therefore, is: How far, if at all,

do any and some and a enter into the formal implication? (The fact that

the indefinite article appears in “x is an a” and “x is a b” is irrelevant, for

  these are merely taken as typical propositional functions.) We have, to

  begin with, a class of true propositions, each asserting of some constant

term that if it is an a it is a b. We then consider the restricted variable,

  “any proposition of this class”. We assert the truth of any term included

among the values of this restricted variable. But in order to obtain the

  suggested formula, it is necessary to transfer the variability from the

  proposition as a whole to its variable term. In this way we obtain “x is an

a implies x is b”. But the genesis remains essential, for we are not here

  expressing a relation of two propositional functions “x is an a” and “x is a

b”. If this were expressed, we should not require the same x both times.

  Only one propositional function is involved, namely the whole formula.

Each proposition of the class expresses a relation of one term of the

  propositional function “x is an a” to one of “x is a b”; and we may say, if

we choose, that the whole formula expresses a relation of any term of “x

is an a” to some term of “x is a b”. We do not so much have an

  implication containing a variable as a variable implication. Or again, we

may say that the first x is any term, but the second is some term, namely

the first x. We have a class of implications not containing variables, and

we consider any member of this class. If any member is true, the fact is

  indicated by introducing a typical implication containing a variable. This

typical implication is what is called a formal implication: it is any

  member of a class of material implications. Thus it would seem that any

is presupposed in mathematical formalism, but that some and a may be

  legitimately replaced by their equivalents in terms of formal implications.90. Although some may be replaced by its equivalent in terms of any, it is

  plain that this does not give the meaning of some. There is, in fact, a kind

of duality of any and some: given a certain propositional function, if all

  terms belonging to the propositional function are asserted, we have any,

  while if one at least is asserted (which gives what is called an existence-

  theorem), we get some. The proposition x asserted without comment, as

in “x is a man implies x is a mortal”, is to be taken to mean that x is true

for all values of x (or for any value), but it might equally well have been

  taken to mean that x is true for some value of x. In this way we might

  construct a calculus with two kinds of variable, the conjunctive and the

  disjunctive, in which the latter would occur wherever an existence-

  theorem was to be stated. But this method does not appear to possess any

  practical advantages.

91. It is to be observed that what is fundamental is not particular

  propositional functions, but the class-concept propositional function. A

  propositional function is the class of all propositions which arise from the

  variation of a single term, but this is not to be considered as a definition,

for reasons explained in the preceding chapter.

92. From propositional functions all other classes can be derived by

  definition, with the help of the notion of such that. Given a propositional

  function x, the terms such that, when x is identified with any one of them, 

  x is true, are the class defined by x. This is the class as many, the class in

  extension. It is not to be assumed that every class so obtained has a

  defining predicate: this subject will be discussed afresh in Chapter 10. But

it must be assumed, I think, that a class in extension is defined by any

  propositional function, and in particular that all terms form a class, since

  many propositional functions (e.g. all formal implications) are true of all

  terms. Here, as with formal implications, it is necessary that the whole

  propositional function whose truth defines the class should be kept intact,

and not, even where this is possible for every value of x, divided into

  separate propositional functions. For example, if a and b be two classes,

  defined by x and ψx respectively, their common part is defined by the

  product x. ψx, where the product has to be made for every value of x, and

then x varied afterwards. If this is not done, we do not necessarily have the

  same x in x and ψx. Thus we do not multiply propositional functions, but

  propositions: the new propositional function is the class of products of

  corresponding propositions belonging to the previous functions, and is byno means the product of x and ψx. It is only in virtue of a definition that

the logical product of the classes defined by x and ψx is the class defined

by x. ψx. And wherever a proposition containing an apparent variable is

  asserted, what is asserted is the truth, for all values of the variable or

  variables, of the propositional function corresponding to the whole

  proposition, and is never a relation of propositional functions.

93. It appears from the above discussion that the variable is a very

  complicated logical entity, by no means easy to analyse correctly. The

  following appears to be as nearly correct as any analysis I can make.

  Given any proposition (not a propositional function), let a be one of its

  terms, and let us call the proposition  (a). Then in virtue of the primitive

idea of a propositional function, if x be any term, we can consider the

  proposition  (x), which arises from the substitution of x in place of a. We

  thus arrive at the class of all propositions  (x). If all are true,  (x) is

  asserted simply:  (x) may then be called a formal truth. In a formal

  implication,  (x), for every value of x, states an implication, and the

  assertion of  (x) is the assertion of a class of implications, not of a single

  implication. If  (x) is sometimes true, the values of x which make it true

form a class, which is the class defined by  (x): the class is said to exist in

this case. If  (x) is false for all values of x, the class defined by  (x) is

  said not to exist, and as a matter of fact, as we saw in Chapter 6, there is

no such class, if classes are taken in extension. Thus x is, in some sense,

the object denoted by any term; yet this can hardly be strictly maintained,

for different variables may occur in a proposition, yet the object denoted

by any term, one would suppose, is unique. This, however, elicits a new

  point in the theory of denoting, namely that any term does not denote,

  properly speaking, an assemblage of terms, but denotes one term, only

not one particular definite term. Thus any term may denote different

  terms in different places. We may say: any term has some relation to any

  term; and this is quite a different proposition from: any term has some

  relation to itself. Thus variables have a kind of individuality. This arises,

as I have tried to show, from propositional functions. When a

  propositional function has two variables, it must be regarded as obtained

by successive steps. If the propositional function  (x, y) is to be asserted

for all values of x and y, we must consider the assertion, for all values of y,

of the propositional function  (a, y), where a is a constant. This does not

  involve y, and may be represented by ψ (a). We then vary a, and assert ψ(x) for all values of x. The process is analogous to double integration; and

it is necessary to prove formally that the order in which the variations are

  made makes no difference to the result. The individuality of variables

  appears to be thus explained. A variable is not any term simply, but any

term as entering into a propositional function. We may say, if x be a

  propositional function, that x is the term in any proposition of the class of

  propositions whose type is x. It thus appears that, as regards propositional

  functions, the notions of class, of denoting, and of any, are fundamental,

  being presupposed in the symbolism employed. With this conclusion, the

  analysis of formal implication, which has been one of the principal

  problems of Part I, is carried as far as I am able to carry it. May some

reader succeed in rendering it more complete, and in answering the many

  questions which I have had to leave unanswered.

* Here “there is a c”, where c is any class, is defined as equivalent to “If p

implies p, and ‘x is a c’ implies p for all values of x, then p is true”.

† Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen? Brunswick, 1893.

‡ Allgemeine Arithmetik, Leipzig, 1885.9


RELATIONS




94. Next after subject-predicate propositions come two types of

  propositions which appear equally simple. These are the propositions in

  which a relation is asserted between two terms, and those in which two

  terms are said to be two. The latter class of propositions will be

  considered hereafter; the former must be considered at once. It has often

  been held that every proposition can be reduced to one of the subject-

  predicate type, but this view we shall, throughout the present work, find

  abundant reason for rejecting. It might be held, however, that all

  propositions not of the subject-predicate type, and not asserting numbers,

  could be reduced to propositions containing two terms and a relation.

This opinion would be more difficult to refute, but this too, we shall find,

has no good grounds in its favour.* We may therefore allow that there

are relations having more than two terms; but as these are more complex,

it will be well to consider first such as have two terms only.

A relation between two terms is a concept which occurs in a proposition in

which there are two terms not occurring as concepts,† and in which the

interchange of the two terms gives a different proposition. This last mark is

required to distinguish a relational proposition from one of the type “a and b

are two”, which is identical with “b and a are two”. A relational proposition

may be symbolized by aRb, where R is the relation and a and b are the terms;

and aRb will then always, provided a and b are not identical, denote a

different proposition from bRa. That is to say, it is characteristic of a relation

of two terms that it proceeds, so to speak, from one to the other. This is what

may be called the sense of the relation, and is, as we shall find, the source of

order and series. It must be held as an axiom that aRb implies and is implied

by a relational proposition bR'a, in which the relation R' proceeds from b to a,

and may or may not be the same relation as R. But even when aRb implies

and is implied by bRa, it must be strictly maintained that these are differentpropositions. We may distinguish the term from which the relation proceeds

as the referent, and the term to which it proceeds as the relatum. The sense of

a relation is a fundamental notion, which is not capable of definition. The

relation which holds between b and a whenever R holds between a and b will

be called the converse of R, and will be denoted (following Schröder) by Ř.

The relation of R to Ř is the relation of oppositeness, or difference of sense;

and this must not be defined (as would seem at first sight legitimate) by the

above mutual implication in any single case, but only by the fact of its

holding for all cases in which the given relation occurs. The grounds for this

view are derived from certain propositions in which terms are related to

themselves not-symmetrically, i.e. by a relation whose converse is not

identical with itself. These propositions must now be examined.

95. There is a certain temptation to affirm that no term can be related to

  itself; and there is a still stronger temptation to affirm that, if a term can

be related to itself, the relation must be symmetrical, i.e. identical with its

  converse. But both these temptations must be resisted. In the first place,

if no term were related to itself, we should never be able to assert self-

  identity, since this is plainly a relation. But since there is such a notion as

  identity, and since it seems undeniable that every term is identical with

  itself, we must allow that a term may be related to itself. Identity,

  however, is still a symmetrical relation, and may be admitted without any

great qualms. The matter becomes far worse when we have to admit not-

  symmetrical relations of terms to themselves. Nevertheless the following

  propositions seem undeniable; Being is, or has being; 1 is one, or has

  unity; concept is conceptual: term is a term; class-concept is a class-

  concept. All these are of one of the three equivalent types which we

  distinguished at the beginning of Chapter 5, which may be called

  respectively subject-predicate propositions, propositions asserting the

  relation of predication, and propositions asserting membership of a class.

  What we have to consider is, then, the fact that a predicate may be

  predicable of itself. It is necessary, for our present purpose, to take our

  propositions in the second form (Socrates has humanity), since the

  subject-predicate form is not in the above sense relational. We may take,

as the type of such propositions, “unity has unity”. Now it is certainly

  undeniable that the relation of predication is asymmetrical, since subjects

  cannot in general be predicated of their predicates. Thus “unity has unity”

  asserts one relation of unity to itself, and implies another, namely the  converse relation: unity has to itself both the relation of subject to

  predicate, and the relation of predicate to subject. Now if the referent and

the relatum are identical, it is plain that the relatum has to the referent the

  same relation as the referent has to the relatum. Hence if the converse of

a relation in a particular case were defined by mutual implication in that

  particular case, it would appear that, in the present case, our relation has

  two converses, since two different relations of relatum to referent are

  implied by “unity has unity”. We must therefore define the converse of a

  relation by the fact that aRb implies and is implied by bŘa whatever a

and b may be, and whether or not the relation R holds between them.

That is to say, a and b are here essentially variables, and if we give them

any constant value, we may find that aRb implies and is implied by bR' a,

  where R' is some relation other than Ř.

  Thus three points must be noted with regard to relations of two terms: (1)

they all have sense, so that, provided a and b are not identical, we can

distinguish aRb from bRa; (2) they all have a converse, i.e. a relation Ř such

that aRb implies and is implied by bRŘa, whatever a and b may be; (3) some

relations hold between a term and itself, and such relations are not necessarily

symmetrical, i.e. there may be two different relations, which are each other’s

converses, and which both hold between a term and itself.

96. For the general theory of relations, especially in its mathematical

  developments, certain axioms relating classes and relations are of great

  importance. It is to be held that to have a given relation to a given term is

a predicate, so that all terms having this relation to this term form a class.

It is to be held further that to have a given relation at all is a predicate, so

that all referents with respect to a given relation form a class. It follows,

by considering the converse relation, that all relata also form a class.

  These two classes I shall call respectively the domain and the converse

  domain of the relation; the logical sum of the two I shall call the field of

the relation.

The axiom that all referents with respect to a given relation form a class

seems, however, to require some limitation, and that on account of the

contradiction mentioned at the end of Chapter 6. This contradiction may be

stated as follows. We saw that some predicates can be predicated of

themselves. Consider now those of which this is not the case. These are the

referents (and also the relata) in what seems like a complex relation, namely

the combination of non-predicability with identity. But there is no predicatewhich attaches to all of them and to no other terms. For this predicate will

either be predicable or not predicable of itself. If it is predicable of itself, it is

one of those referents by relation to which it was defined, and therefore, in

virtue of their definition, it is not predicable of itself. Conversely, if it is not

predicable of itself, then again it is one of the said referents, of all of which

(by hypothesis) it is predicable, and therefore again it is predicable of itself.

This is a contradiction, which shows that all the referents considered have no

exclusive common predicate, and therefore, if defining predicates are

essential to classes, do not form a class.

The matter may be put otherwise. In defining the would-be class of

predicates, all those not predicable of themselves have been used up. The

common predicate of all these predicates cannot be one of them, since for

each of them there is at least one predicate (namely itself) of which it is not

predicable. But again, the supposed common predicate cannot be any other

predicate, for if it were, it would be predicable of itself, i.e. it would be a

member of the supposed class of predicates, since these were defined as those

of which it is predicable. Thus no predicate is left over which could attach to

all the predicates considered.

It follows from the above that not every definable collection of terms

forms a class defined by a common predicate. This fact must be borne in

mind, and we must endeavour to discover what properties a collection must

have in order to form such a class. The exact point established by the above

contradiction may be stated as follows: A proposition apparently containing

only one variable may not be equivalent to any proposition asserting that the

variable in question has a certain predicate. It remains an open question

whether every class must have a defining predicate.

That all terms having a given relation to a given term form a class defined

by an exclusive common predicate results from the doctrine of Chapter 7, that

the proposition aRb can be analysed into the subject a and the assertion Rb.

To be a term of which Rb can be asserted appears to be plainly a predicate.

But it does not follow, I think, that to be a term of which, for some value of y,

Ry can be asserted, is a predicate. The doctrine of propositional functions

requires, however, that all terms having the latter property should form a

class. This class I shall call the domain of the relation R as well as the class of

referents. The domain of the converse relation will be also called the

converse domain, as well as the class of relata. The two domains together will

be called the field of the relation—a notion chiefly important as regardsseries. Thus if paternity be the relation, fathers form its domain, children its

converse domain, and fathers and children together its field.

It may be doubted whether a proposition aRb can be regarded as asserting

aR of b, or whether only Řa can be asserted of b. In other words, is a

relational proposition only an assertion concerning the referent, or also an

assertion concerning the relatum? If we take the latter view, we shall have,

connected with (say) “a is greater than b”, four assertions, namely “is greater

than b”, “a is greater than”, “is less than a” and “b is less than”. I am inclined

myself to adopt this view, but I know of no argument on either side.

97. We can form the logical sum and product of two relations or of a class

of relations exactly as in the case of classes, except that here we have to

deal with double variability. In addition to these ways of combination, we

  have also the relative product, which is in general non-commutative, and

  therefore requires that the number of factors should be finite. If R, S be

  two relations, to say that their relative product RS holds between two

  terms x, z is to say that there is a term y to which x has the relation R, and

  which itself has the relation S to z. Thus brother-in-law is the relative

  product of wife and brother or of sister and husband: father-in-law is the

  relative product of wife and father, whereas the relative product of father

and wife is mother or stepmother.

98. There is a temptation to regard a relation as definable in extension as a

class of couples. This has the formal advantage that it avoids the

  necessity for the primitive proposition asserting that every couple has a

  relation holding between no other pair of terms. But it is necessary to

give sense to the couple, to distinguish the referent from the relatum: thus

a couple becomes essentially distinct from a class of two terms, and must

  itself be introduced as a primitive idea. It would seem, viewing the matter

  philosophically, that sense can only be derived from some relational

  proposition, and that the assertion that a is referent and b relatum already

  involves a purely relational proposition in which a and b are terms,

  though the relation asserted is only the general one of referent to relatum.

  There are, in fact, concepts such as greater, which occur otherwise than

as terms in propositions having two terms (§§ 48, 54); and no doctrine of

  couples can evade such propositions. It seems therefore more correct to

take an intensional view of relations, and to identify them rather with

  class-concepts than with classes. This procedure is formally more

  convenient, and seems also nearer to the logical facts. Throughout  Mathematics there is the same rather curious relation of intensional and

  extensional points of view: the symbols other than variable terms (i.e. the

  variable class-concepts and relations) stand for intensions, while the

  actual objects dealt with are always extensions. Thus in the calculus of

  relations, it is classes of couples that are relevant, but the symbolism

  deals with them by means of relations. This is precisely similar to the

state of things explained in relation to classes, and it seems unnecessary

to repeat the explanations at length.

99. Mr Bradley, in Appearance and Reality, Chapter 3, has based an

  argument against the reality of relations upon the endless regress arising

from the fact that a relation which relates two terms must be related to

each of them. The endless regress is undeniable, if relational propositions

are taken to be ultimate, but it is very doubtful whether it forms any

logical difficulty. We have already had occasion (§ 55) to distinguish two

  kinds of regress, the one proceeding merely to perpetually new implied

  propositions, the other in the meaning of a proposition itself; of these two

kinds, we agreed that the former, since the solution of the problem of

  infinity, has ceased to be objectionable, while the latter remains

  inadmissible. We have to inquire which kind of regress occurs in the

  present instance. It may be urged that it is part of the very meaning of a

  relational proposition that the relation involved should have to the terms

the relation expressed in saying that it relates them, and that this is what

  makes the distinction, which we formerly (§ 54) left unexplained,

  between a relating relation and a relation in itself. It may be urged,

  however, against this view, that the assertion of a relation between the

  relation and the terms, though implied, is no part of the original

  proposition, and that a relating relation is distinguished from a relation in

  itself by the indefinable element of assertion which distinguishes a

  proposition from a concept. Against this it might be retorted that, in the

  concept “difference of a and b”, difference relates a and b just as much as

in the proposition “a and b differ”; but to this it may be rejoined that we

  found the difference of a and b, except in so far as some specific point of

  difference may be in question, to be indistinguishable from bare

  difference. Thus it seems impossible to prove that the endless regress

  involved is of the objectionable kind. We may distinguish, I think,

  between “a exceeds b” and “a is greater than b”, though it would be

  absurd to deny that people usually mean the same thing by these two  propositions. On the principle, from which I can see no escape, that every

  genuine word must have some meaning, the is and than must form part of

“a is greater than b”, which thus contains more than two terms and a

  relation. The is seems to state that a has to greater the relation of

  referent, while the than states similarly that b has to greater the relation

of relatum. But “a exceeds b” may be held to express solely the relation

of a to b, without including any of the implications of further relations.

  Hence we shall have to conclude that a relational proposition aRb does

not include in its meaning any relation of a or b to R, and that the endless

  regress, though undeniable, is logically quite harmless. With these

  remarks, we may leave the further theory of relations to later Parts of the

  present work.

* See inf., Part IV, Chap. 25, § 200.

† This description, as we saw above (§ 48), excludes the pseudo-relation of

subject to predicate.10


THE CONTRADICTION




100. Before taking leave of fundamental questions, it is necessary to

  examine more in detail the singular contradiction, already mentioned,

with regard to predicates not predicable of themselves. Before attempting

to solve this puzzle, it will be well to make some deductions connected

with it, and to state it in various different forms. I may mention that I was

led to it in the endeavour to reconcile Cantor’s proof that there can be no

  greatest cardinal number with the very plausible supposition that the

class of all terms (which we have seen to be essential to all formal

  propositions) has necessarily the greatest possible number of members.*

Let w be a class-concept which can be asserted of itself, i.e. such that “w is

a w”. Instances are class-concept, and the negations of ordinary class-

concepts, e.g. not-man. Then (α) if w be contained in another class v, since w

is a w, w is a v; consequently there is a term of v which is a class-concept that

can be asserted of itself. Hence by contraposition, (β) if u be a class-concept

none of whose members are class-concepts that can be asserted of

themselves, no class-concept contained in u can be asserted of itself. Hence

further, (γ) if u be any class-concept whatever, and u' the class-concept of

those members of u which are not predicable of themselves, this class-

concept is contained in itself, and none of its members are predicable of

themselves; hence by (β) u' is not predicable of itself. Thus u' is not a u' , and

is therefore not a u; for the terms of u that are not terms of u' are all

predicable of themselves, which u' is not. Thus (δ) if u be any class-concept

whatever, there is a class-concept contained in u which is not a member of u,

and is also one of those class-concepts that are not predicable of themselves.

So far, our deductions seem scarcely open to question. But if we now take the

last of them, and admit the class of those class-concepts that cannot be

asserted of themselves, we find that this class must contain a class-concept

not a member of itself and yet not belonging to the class in question.We may observe also that, in virtue of what we have proved in (β), the

class of class-concepts which cannot be asserted of themselves, which we

will call w, contains as members of itself all its sub-classes, although it is

easy to prove that every class has more sub-classes than terms. Again, if y be

any term of w, and w' be the whole of w except y, then w' , being a sub-class

of w, is not a w' but is a w, and therefore is y. Hence each class-concept which

is a term of w has all other terms of w as its extension. It follows that the

concept bicycle is a teaspoon, and teaspoon is a bicycle. This is plainly

absurd, and any number of similar absurdities can be proved.

101. Let us leave these paradoxical consequences, and attempt the exact

  statement of the contradiction itself. We have first the statement in terms

of predicates, which has been given already. If x be a predicate, x may or

may not be predicable of itself. Let us assume that “not-predicable of

  oneself” is a predicate. Then to suppose either that this predicate is, or

that it is not, predicable of itself, is self-contradictory. The conclusion, in

this case, seems obvious: “not-predicable of oneself” is not a predicate.

Let us now state the same contradiction in terms of class-concepts. A class-

concept may or may not be a term of its own extension. “Class-concept

which is not a term of its own extension” appears to be a class-concept. But if

it is a term of its own extension, it is a class-concept which is not a term of its

own extension, and vice versâ. Thus we must conclude, against appearances,

that “class-concept which is not a term of its own extension” is not a class-

concept.

In terms of classes the contradiction appears even more extraordinary. A

class as one may be a term of itself as many. Thus the class of all classes is a

class; the class of all the terms that are not men is not a man, and so on. Do

all the classes that have this property form a class? If so, is it as one a

member of itself as many or not? If it is, then it is one of the classes which, as

ones, are not members of themselves as many, and vice versâ. Thus we must

conclude again that the classes which as ones are not members of themselves

as many do not form a class—or rather, that they do not form a class as one,

for the argument cannot show that they do not form a class as many.

102. A similar result, which, however, does not lead to a contradiction, may

be proved concerning any relation. Let R be a relation, and consider the

class w of terms which do not have the relation R to themselves. Then it

is impossible that there should be any term a to which all of them and no

  other terms have the relation R. For, if there were such a term, the  propositional function “x does not have the relation R to x” would be

  equivalent to “x has the relation R to a”. Substituting a for x throughout,

  which is legitimate since the equivalence is formal, we find a

  contradiction. When in place of R we put ε, the relation of a term to a

  class-concept which can be asserted of it, we get the above contradiction.

The reason that a contradiction emerges here is that we have taken it as

an axiom that any propositional function containing only one variable is

  equivalent to asserting membership of a class defined by the

  propositional function. Either this axiom, or the principle that every class

can be taken as one term, is plainly false, and there is no fundamental

  objection to dropping either. But having dropped the former, the question

  arises: Which propositional functions define classes which are single

  terms as well as many, and which do not? And with this question our real

  difficulties begin.

Any method by which we attempt to establish a one-one or many-one

correlation of all terms and all propositional functions must omit at least one

propositional function. Such a method would exist if all propositional

functions could be expressed in the form…εu, since this form correlates u

with …εu. But the impossibility of any such correlation is proved as follows.

Let  be a propositional function correlated with x; then, if the correlation
    x

covers all terms, the denial of  (x) will be a propositional function, since it
                                    x

is a proposition for all values of x. But it cannot be included in the

correlation; for if it were correlated with a,  (x) would be equivalent, for all
                                                    a

values of x, to the denial of  (x); but this equivalence is impossible for the
                                x

value a, since it makes  (a) equivalent to its own denial. It follows that
                            a

there are more propositional functions than terms—a result which seems

plainly impossible, although the proof is as convincing as any in

Mathematics. We shall shortly see how the impossibility is removed by the

doctrine of logical types.

103. The first method which suggests itself is to seek an ambiguity in the

  notion of ε. But in Chapter 6 we distinguished the various meanings as

far as any distinction seemed possible, and we have just seen that with

each meaning the same contradiction emerges. Let us, however, attempt

to state the contradiction throughout in terms of propositional functions.

  Every propositional function which is not null, we supposed, defines a

class, and every class can certainly be defined by a propositional  function. Thus to say that a class as one is not a member of itself as many

is to say that the class as one does not satisfy the function by which itself

as many is defined. Since all propositional functions except such as are

null define classes, all will be used up, in considering all classes having

the above property, except such as do not have the above property. If any

  propositional function were satisfied by every class having the above

  property, it would therefore necessarily be one satisfied also by the class

w of all such classes considered as a single term. Hence the class w does

not itself belong to the class w, and therefore there must be some

  propositional function satisfied by the terms of w but not by w itself.

  Thus the contradiction re-emerges, and we must suppose, either that there

is no such entity as w, or that there is no propositional function satisfied

by its terms and by no others.

It might be thought that a solution could be found by denying the

legitimacy of variable propositional functions. If we denote by κ, for the

moment, the class of values satisfying , our propositional function is the

denial of  (k), where  is the variable. The doctrine of Chapter 7, that  is

not a separable entity, might make such a variable seem illegitimate; but this

objection can be overcome by substituting for  the class of propositions x,

or the relation of x to x. Moreover it is impossible to exclude variable

propositional functions altogether. Wherever a variable class or a variable

relation occurs, we have admitted a variable propositional function, which is

thus essential to assertions about every class or about every relation. The

definition of the domain of a relation, for example, and all the general

propositions which constitute the calculus of relations, would be swept away

by the refusal to allow this type of variation. Thus we require some further

characteristic by which to distinguish two kinds of variation. This

characteristic is to be found, I think, in the independent variability of the

function and the argument. In general, x is itself a function of two variables, 

 and x; of these, either may be given a constant value, and either may be

varied without reference to the other. But in the type of propositional

functions we are considering in this Chapter, the argument is itself a function

of the propositional function: instead of x, we have  {f()}, where f() is

defined as a function of . Thus when  is varied, the argument of which  is

asserted is varied too. Thus “x is an x” is equivalent to: “ can be asserted of

the class of terms satisfying ”, this class of terms being x. If here  is varied,

the argument is varied at the same time in a manner dependent upon thevariation of . For this reason,  {f()}, though it is a definite proposition

when x is assigned, is not a propositional function, in the ordinary sense,

when x is variable. Propositional functions of this doubtful type may be

called quadratic forms, because the variable enters into them in a way

somewhat analogous to that in which, in Algebra, a variable appears in an

expression of the second degree.

104. Perhaps the best way to state the suggested solution is to say that, if a

  collection of terms can only be defined by a variable propositional

  function, then, though a class as many may be admitted, a class as one

must be denied. When so stated, it appears that propositional functions

may be varied, provided the resulting collection is never itself made into

the subject in the original propositional function. In such cases there is

only a class as many, not a class as one. We took it as axiomatic that the

class as one is to be found wherever there is a class as many; but this

  axiom need not be universally admitted, and appears to have been the

  source of the contradiction. By denying it, therefore, the whole difficulty

will be overcome.

A class as one, we shall say, is an object of the same type as its terms; i.e.

any propositional function  (x) which is significant when one of the terms is

substituted for x is also significant when the class as one is substituted. But

the class as one does not always exist, and the class as many is of a different

type from the terms of the class, even when the class has only one term, i.e.

there are propositional functions  (u) in which u may be the class as many,

which are meaningless if, for u, we substitute one of the terms of the class.

And so “x is one among x’s” is not a proposition at all if the relation involved

is that of a term to its class as many; and this is the only relation of whose

presence a propositional function always assures us. In this view, a class as

many may be a logical subject, but in propositions of a different kind from

those in which its terms are subjects; of any object other than a single term,

the question whether it is one or many will have different answers according

to the proposition in which it occurs. Thus we have “Socrates is one among

men”, in which men are plural; but “men are one among species of animals”,

in which men are singular. It is the distinction of logical types that is the key

to the whole mystery.*

105. Other ways of evading the contradiction, which might be suggested,

  appear undesirable, on the ground that they destroy too many quite

  necessary kinds of propositions. It might be suggested that identity is  introduced in “x is not an x” in a way which is not permissible. But it has

  been already shown that relations of terms to themselves are unavoidable,

and it may be observed that suicides or self-made men or the heroes of

  Smiles’s Self-Help are all defined by relations to themselves. And

  generally, identity enters in a very similar way into formal implication, so

that it is quite impossible to reject it.

A natural suggestion for escaping from the contradiction would be to

demur to the notion of all terms or of all classes. It might be urged that no

such sum-total is conceivable; and if all indicates a whole, our escape from

the contradiction requires us to admit this. But we have already abundantly

seen that if this view were maintained against any term, all formal truth

would be impossible, and Mathematics, whose characteristic is the statement

of truths concerning any term, would be abolished at one stroke. Thus the

correct statement of formal truths requires the notion of any term or every

term, but not the collective notion of all terms.

It should be observed, finally, that no peculiar philosophy is involved in

the above contradiction, which springs directly from common sense, and can

only be solved by abandoning some common-sense assumption. Only the

Hegelian philosophy, which nourishes itself on contradictions, can remain

indifferent, because it finds similar problems everywhere. In any other

doctrine, so direct a challenge demands an answer, on pain of a confession of

impotence. Fortunately, no other similar difficulty, so far as I know, occurs in

any other portion of the Principles of Mathematics.

106. We may now briefly review the conclusions arrived at in Part I. Pure

  Mathematics was defined as the class of propositions asserting formal

  implications and containing no constants except logical constants. And

logical constants are: implication, the relation of a term to a class of

  which it is a member, the notion of such that, the notion of relation and

such further notions as are involved in formal implication, which we

  found (§ 93) to be the following: propositional function, class,* denoting,

and any or every term. This definition brought Mathematics into very

  close relation to Logic, and made it practically identical with Symbolic

  Logic. An examination of Symbolic Logic justified the above

  enumeration of mathematical indefinables. In Chapter 3 we distinguished

  implication and formal implication. The former holds between any two

  propositions provided the first be false or the second true. The latter is

not a relation, but the assertion, for every value of the variable or  variables, of a propositional function which, for every value of the

  variable or variables, asserts an implication. Chapter 4 distinguished what

may be called things from predicates and relations (including the is of

  predications among relations for this purpose). It was shown that this

  distinction is connected with the doctrine of substance and attributes, but

does not lead to the traditional results. Chapters 5 and 6 developed the

  theory of predicates. In the former of these chapters it was shown that

certain concepts, derived from predicates, occur in propositions not about

  themselves, but about combinations of terms, such as are indicated by all,

  every, any, a, some and the. Concepts of this kind, we found, are

  fundamental in Mathematics, and enable us to deal with infinite classes

by means of propositions of finite complexity. In Chapter 6 we

  distinguished predicates, class-concepts, concepts of classes, classes as

  many and classes as one. We agreed that single terms, or such

  combinations as result from and, are classes, the latter being classes as

  many; and that classes as many are the objects denoted by concepts of

  classes, which are the plurals of class-concepts. But in the present chapter

we decided that it is necessary to distinguish a single term from the class

  whose only member it is, and that consequently the null-class may be

  admitted.

In Chapter 7 we resumed the study of the verb. Subject-predicate

propositions, and such as express a fixed relation to a fixed term, could be

analysed, we found, into a subject and an assertion; but this analysis becomes

impossible when a given term enters into a proposition in a more complicated

manner than as referent of a relation. Hence it became necessary to take

propositional function as a primitive notion. A propositional function of one

variable is any proposition of a set defined by the variation of a single term,

while the other terms remain constant. But in general it is impossible to

define or isolate the constant element in a propositional function, since what

remains, when a certain term, wherever it occurs, is left out of a proposition,

is in general no discoverable kind of entity. Thus the term in question must be

not simply omitted, but replaced by a variable.

The notion of the variable, we found, is exceedingly complicated. The x is

not simply any term, but any term with a certain individuality; for if not, any

two variables would be indistinguishable. We agreed that a variable is any

term quâ term in a certain propositional function, and that variables are

distinguished by the propositional functions in which they occur, or, in thecase of several variables, by the place they occupy in a given multiply

variable propositional function. A variable, we said, is the term in any

proposition of the set denoted by a given propositional function.

  Chapter 9 pointed out that relational propositions are ultimate, and that

they all have sense: i.e. the relation being the concept as such in a proposition

with two terms, there is another proposition containing the same terms and

the same concept as such, as in “A is greater than B” and “B is greater than

A”. These two propositions, though different, contain precisely the same

constituents. This is a characteristic of relations, and an instance of the loss

resulting from analysis. Relations, we agreed, are to be taken intensionally,

not as classes of couples.*

  Finally, in the present chapter, we examined the contradiction resulting

from the apparent fact that, if w be the class of all classes which as single

terms are not members of themselves as many, then w as one can be proved

both to be and not to be a member of itself as many. The solution suggested

was that it is necessary to distinguish various types of objects, namely terms,

classes of terms, classes of classes, classes of couples of terms, and so on;

and that a propositional function x in general requires, if it is to have any

meaning, that x should belong to some one type. Thus xεx was held to be

meaningless, because ε requires that the relatum should be a class composed

of objects which are of the type of the referent. The class as one, where it

exists, is, we said, of the same type as its constituents; but a quadratic

propositional function in general appears to define only a class as many, and

the contradiction proves that the class as one, if it ever exists, is certainly

sometimes absent.


* See Part V, Chap. 43, § 344 ff.

* On this subject, see Appendix.

* The notion of class in general, we decided, could be replaced, as an

indefinable, by that of the class of propositions defined by a propositional

function.

* On this point, however, see Appendix.                                    Part II


                                  Number11


DEFINITION OF CARDINAL


NUMBERS




107. We have now briefly reviewed the apparatus of general logical notions

with which Mathematics operates. In the present Part, it is to be shown

how this apparatus suffices, without new indefinables or new postulates,

to establish the whole theory of cardinal integers as a special branch of

  Logic.* No mathematical subject has made, in recent years, greater

  advances than the theory of Arithmetic. The movement in favour of

  correctness in deduction, inaugurated by Weierstrass, has been brilliantly

  continued by Dedekind, Cantor, Frege and Peano, and attains what seems

its final goal by means of the logic of relations. As the modern

  mathematical theory is but imperfectly known even by most

  mathematicians, I shall begin this Part by four chapters setting forth its

  outlines in a non-symbolic form. I shall then examine the process of

  deduction from a philosophical standpoint, in order to discover, if

  possible, whether any unperceived assumptions have covertly intruded

  themselves in the course of the argument.

108. It is often held that both number and particular numbers are

  indefinable. Now definability is a word which, in Mathematics, has a

  precise sense, though one which is relative to some given set of notions.†

  Given any set of notions, a term is definable by means of these notions

  when, and only when, it is the only term having to certain of these

  notions a certain relation which itself is one of the said notions. But

  philosophically, the word definition has not, as a rule, been employed in

this sense; it has, in fact, been restricted to the analysis of an idea into its

  constituents. This usage is inconvenient and, I think, useless; moreover it

  seems to overlook the fact that wholes are not, as a rule, determinate

  when their constituents are given, but are themselves new entities (whichmay be in some sense simple), defined, in the mathematical sense, by

certain relations to their constituents. I shall, therefore, in future, ignore

the philosophical sense, and speak only of mathematical definability. I

shall, however, restrict this notion more than is done by Professor Peano

and his disciples. They hold that the various branches of Mathematics

  have various indefinables, by means of which the remaining ideas of the

  said subjects are defined. I hold—and it is an important part of my

  purpose to prove—that all Pure Mathematics (including Geometry and

  even rational Dynamics) contains only one set of indefinables, namely

the fundamental logical concepts discussed in Part I. When the various

logical constants have been enumerated, it is somewhat arbitrary which

of them we regard as indefinable, though there are apparently some

  which must be indefinable in any theory. But my contention is, that the

  indefinables of Pure Mathematics are all of this kind, and that the

  presence of any other indefinables indicates that our subject belongs to

  Applied Mathematics. Moreover, of the three kinds of definition admitted

by Peano—the nominal definition, the definition by postulates and the

  definition by abstraction*—I recognize only the nominal: the others, it

  would seem, are only necessitated by Peano’s refusal to regard relations

as part of the fundamental apparatus of logic, and by his somewhat undue

  haste in regarding as an individual what is really a class. These remarks

will be best explained by considering their application to the definition of

  cardinal numbers.

109. It has been common in the past, among those who regarded numbers as

  definable, to make an exception as regards the number 1, and to define

the remainder by its means. Thus 2 was 1 + 1, 3 was 2 + 1, and so on.

This method was only applicable to finite numbers, and made a tiresome

  difference between 1 and other numbers; moreover the meaning of + was

  commonly not explained. We are able now-a-days to improve greatly

  upon this method. In the first place, since Cantor has shown how to deal

with the infinite, it has become both desirable and possible to deal with

the fundamental properties of numbers in a way which is equally

  applicable to finite and infinite numbers. In the second place, the logical

  calculus has enabled us to give an exact definition of arithmetical

  addition; and in the third place, it has become as easy to define 0 and 1 as

to define any other number. In order to explain how this is done, I shall

  first set forth the definition of numbers by abstraction; I shall then pointout formal defects in this definition, and replace it by a nominal

  definition.

  Numbers are, it will be admitted, applicable essentially to classes. It is true

that, where the number is finite, individuals may be enumerated to make up

the given number, and may be counted one by one without any mention of a

class-concept. But all finite collections of individuals form classes, so that

what results is after all the number of a class. And where the number is

infinite, the individuals cannot be enumerated, but must be defined by

intension, i.e. by some common property in virtue of which they form a class.

Thus when any class-concept is given, there is a certain number of

individuals to which this class-concept is applicable, and the number may

therefore be regarded as a property of the class. It is this view of numbers

which has rendered possible the whole theory of infinity, since it relieves us

of the necessity of enumerating the individuals whose number is to be

considered. This view depends fundamentally upon the notion of all, the

numerical conjunction as we agreed to call it (§ 59). All men, for example,

denotes men conjoined in a certain way; and it is as thus denoted that they

have a number. Similarly all numbers or all points denotes numbers or points

conjoined in a certain way, and as thus conjoined numbers or points have a

number. Numbers, then, are to be regarded as properties of classes.

The next question is: Under what circumstances do two classes have the

same number? The answer is, that they have the same number when their

terms can be correlated one to one, so that any one term of either corresponds

to one and only one term of the other. This requires that there should be some

one-one relation whose domain is the one class and whose converse domain

is the other class. Thus, for example, if in a community all the men and all the

women are married, and polygamy and polyandry are forbidden, the number

of men must be the same as the number of women. It might be thought that a

one-one relation could not be defined except by reference to the number 1.

But this is not the case. A relation is one-one when, if x and x' have the

relation in question to y, then x and x' are identical; while if x has the relation

in question to y and y' , then y and y' are identical. Thus it is possible, without

the notion of unity, to define what is meant by a one-one relation. But in

order to provide for the case of two classes which have no terms, it is

necessary to modify slightly the above account of what is meant by saying

that two classes have the same number. For if there are no terms, the terms

cannot be correlated one to one. We must say: Two classes have the samenumber when, and only when, there is a one-one relation whose domain

includes the one class, and which is such that the class of correlates of the

terms of the one class is identical with the other class. From this it appears

that two classes having no terms have always the same number of terms; for

if we take any one-one relation whatever, its domain includes the null-class,

and the class of correlates of the null-class is again the null-class. When two

classes have the same number, they are said to be similar.

  Some readers may suppose that a definition of what is meant by saying that

two classes have the same number is wholly unnecessary. The way to find

out, they may say, is to count both classes. It is such notions as this which

have, until very recently, prevented the exhibition of Arithmetic as a branch

of Pure Logic. For the question immediately arises: What is meant by

counting? To this question we usually get only some irrelevant psychological

answer, as, that counting consists in successive acts of attention. In order to

count 10, I suppose that ten acts of attention are required: certainly a most

useful definition of the number 10! Counting has, in fact, a good meaning,

which is not psychological. But this meaning is highly complex; it is only

applicable to classes which can be well-ordered, which are not known to be

all classes; and it only gives the number of the class when this number is

finite—a rare and exceptional case. We must not, therefore, bring in counting

where the definition of numbers is in question.

The relation of similarity between classes has the three properties of being

reflexive, symmetrical and transitive; that is to say, if u, v, w be classes, u is

similar to itself; if u be similar to v, v is similar to u; and if u be similar to v,

and v to w, then u is similar to w. These properties all follow easily from the

definition. Now these three properties of a relation are held by Peano and

common sense to indicate that when the relation holds between two terms,

those two terms have a certain common property, and vice versâ. This

common property we call their number.* This is the definition of numbers by

abstraction.

110. Now this definition by abstraction, and generally the process employed

in such definitions, suffers from an absolutely fatal formal defect: it does

not show that only one object satisfies the definition.† Thus instead of

  obtaining one common property of similar classes, which is the number

of the classes in question, we obtain a class of such properties, with no

  means of deciding how many terms this class contains. In order to make

this point clear, let us examine what is meant, in the present instance, bya common property. What is meant is, that any class has to a certain

  entity, its number, a relation which it has to nothing else, but which all

  similar classes (and no other entities) have to the said number. That is,

there is a many-one relation which every class has to its number and to

  nothing else. Thus, so far as the definition by abstraction can show, any

set of entities to each of which some class has a certain many-one

  relation, and to one and only one of which any given class has this

  relation, and which are such that all classes similar to a given class have

this relation to one and the same entity of the set, appear as the set of

  numbers, and any entity of this set is the number of some class. If, then,

there are many such sets of entities—and it is easy to prove that there are

an infinite number of them—every class will have many numbers, and

the definition wholly fails to define the number of a class. This argument

is perfectly general, and shows that definition by abstraction is never a

  logically valid process.

111. There are two ways in which we may attempt to remedy this defect.

One of these consists in defining as the number of a class the whole class

of entities, chosen one from each of the above sets of entities, to which

all classes similar to the given class (and no others) have some many-one

  relation or other. But this method is practically useless, since all entities,

  without exception, belong to every such class, so that every class will

  have as its number the class of all entities of every sort and description.

The other remedy is more practicable, and applies to all the cases in

  which Peano employs definition by abstraction. This method is, to define

as the number of a class the class of all classes similar to the given class.

  Membership of this class of classes (considered as a predicate) is a

  common property of all the similar classes and of no others; moreover

  every class of the set of similar classes has to the set a relation which it

has to nothing else, and which every class has to its own set. Thus the

  conditions are completely fulfilled by this class of classes, and it has the

  merit of being determinate when a class is given, and of being different

for two classes which are not similar. This, then, is an irreproachable

  definition of the number of a class in purely logical terms.

To regard a number as a class of classes must appear, at first sight, a

wholly indefensible paradox. Thus Peano (F. 1901, § 32) remarks that “we

cannot identify the number of [a class] a with the class of classes in question

[i.e. the class of classes similar to a], for these objects have differentproperties”. He does not tell us what these properties are, and for my part I

am unable to discover them. Probably it appeared to him immediately evident

that a number is not a class of classes. But something may be said to mitigate

the appearance of paradox in this view. In the first place, such a word as

couple or trio obviously does denote a class of classes. Thus what we have to

say is, for example, that “two men” means “logical product of class of men

and couple”, and “there are two men” means “there is a class of men which is

also a couple”. In the second place, when we remember that a class-concept

is not itself a collection, but a property by which a collection is defined, we

see that, if we define the number as the class-concept, not the class, a number

is really defined as a common property of a set of similar classes and of

nothing else. This view removes the appearance of paradox to a great degree.

There is, however, a philosophical difficulty in this view, and generally in the

connection of classes and predicates. It may be that there are many predicates

common to a certain collection of objects and to no others. In this case, these

predicates are all regarded by Symbolic Logic as equivalent, and any one of

them is said to be equal to any other. Thus if the predicate were defined by

the collection of objects, we should not obtain, in general, a single predicate,

but a class of predicates; for this class of predicates we should require a new

class-concept, and so on. The only available class-concept would be

“predicability of the given collection of terms and of no others”. But in the

present case, where the collection is defined by a certain relation to one of its

terms, there is some danger of a logical error. Let u be a class; then the

number of u, we said, is the class of classes similar to u. But “similar to u”

cannot be the actual concept which constitutes the number of u; for, if v be

similar to u, “similar to v” defines the same class, although it is a different

concept. Thus we require, as the defining predicate of the class of similar

classes, some concept which does not have any special relation to one or

more of the constituent classes. In regard to every particular number that may

be mentioned, whether finite or infinite, such a predicate is, as a matter of

fact, discoverable; but when all we are told about a number is that it is the

number of some class u, it is natural that a special reference to u should

appear in the definition. This, however, is not the point at issue. The real

point is, that what is defined is the same whether we use the predicate

“similar to u” or “similar to v”, provided u is similar to v. This shows that it is

not the class-concept or defining predicate that is defined, but the class itself

whose terms are the various classes which are similar to u or to v. It is suchclasses, therefore, and not predicates such as “similar to u”, that must be

taken to constitute numbers.

  Thus, to sum up: Mathematically, a number is nothing but a class of

similar classes: this definition allows the deduction of all the usual properties

of numbers, whether finite or infinite, and is the only one (so far as I know)

which is possible in terms of the fundamental concepts of general logic. But

philosophically we may admit that every collection of similar classes has

some common predicate applicable to no entities except the classes in

question, and if we can find, by inspection, that there is a certain class of such

common predicates, of which one and only one applies to each collection of

similar classes, then we may, if we see fit, call this particular class of

predicates the class of numbers. For my part, I do not know whether there is

any such class of predicates, and I do know that, if there be such a class, it is

wholly irrelevant to Mathematics. Wherever Mathematics derives a common

property from a reflexive, symmetrical and transitive relation, all

mathematical purposes of the supposed common property are completely

served when it is replaced by the class of terms having the given relation to a

given term; and this is precisely the case presented by cardinal numbers. For

the future, therefore, I shall adhere to the above definition, since it is at once

precise and adequate to all mathematical uses.


* Cantor has shown that it is necessary to separate the study of Cardinal

and Ordinal numbers, which are distinct entities, of which the former are

simpler, but of which both are essential to ordinary Mathematics. On Ordinal

numbers, cf. Chaps. 29, 38, infra.

† See Peano, F. 1901, p. 6 ff. and Padoa, “Théorie Algébrique des

Nombres Entiers”, Congrès, Vol. III, p. 314 ff.

* Cf. Burali-Forti, “Sur les différentes définitions du nombre réel”,

Congrès, III, p. 294 ff.

* Cf. Peano, F. 1901, § 32, ·0, Note.

† On the necessity of this condition, cf. Padoa, loc. cit., p. 324. Padoa

appears not to perceive, however, that all definitions define the single

individual of a class: when what is defined is a class, this must be the only

term of some class of classes.12


ADDITION AND


MULTIPLICATION




112. In most mathematical accounts of arithmetical operations we find the

error of endeavouring to give at once a definition which shall be

  applicable to rationals, or even to real numbers, without dwelling at

  sufficient length upon the theory of integers. For the present, integers

  alone will occupy us. The definition of integers, given in the preceding

  chapter, obviously does not admit of extension to fractions; and in fact

the absolute difference between integers and fractions, even between

  integers and fractions whose denominator is unity, cannot possibly be too

  strongly emphasized. What rational fractions are, and what real numbers

are, I shall endeavour to explain at a later stage; positive and negative

  numbers also are at present excluded. The integers with which we are

now concerned are not positive, but signless. And so the addition and

  multiplication to be defined in this chapter are only applicable to

  integers; but they have the merit of being equally applicable to finite and

  infinite integers. Indeed, for the present, I shall rigidly exclude all

  propositions which involve either the finitude or the infinity of the

  numbers considered.

113. There is only one fundamental kind of addition, namely the logical

kind. All other kinds can be defined in terms of this and logical

  multiplication. In the present chapter the addition of integers is to be

  defined by its means. Logical addition, as was explained in Part I, is the

  same as disjunction; if p and q are propositions, their logical sum is the

  proposition “p or q”, and if u and v are classes, their logical sum is the

class “u or v”, i.e. the class to which belongs every term which either

  belongs to u or belongs to v. The logical sum of two classes u and v may

be defined in terms of the logical product of two propositions, as theclass of terms belonging to every class in which both u and v are

  contained.* This definition is not essentially confined to two classes, but

may be extended to a class of classes, whether finite or infinite. Thus if k

be a class of classes, the logical sum of the classes composing k (called

for short the sum of k) is the class of terms belonging to every class

  which contains every class which is a term of k. It is this notion which

  underlies arithmetical addition. If k be a class of classes no two of which

  have any common terms (called for short an exclusive class of classes),

then the arithmetical sum of the numbers of the various classes of k is the

  number of terms in the logical sum of k. This definition is absolutely

  general, and applies equally whether k or any of its constituent classes be

  finite or infinite. In order to assure ourselves that the resulting number

  depends only upon the numbers of the various classes belonging to k, and

not upon the particular class k that happens to be chosen, it is necessary

to prove (as is easily done) that if k' be another exclusive class of classes,

  similar to k, and every member of k is similar to its correlate in k' , and

  vice versâ, then the number of terms in the sum of k is the same as the

  number in the sum of k' . Thus, for example, suppose k has only two

  terms, u and v, and suppose u and v have no common part. Then the

  number of terms in the logical sum of u and v is the sum of the number of

  terms in u and in v; and if u' be similar to u, and v' to v, and u' , v' have no

  common part, then the sum of u' and v' is similar to the sum of u and v.

114. With regard to this definition of a sum of numbers, it is to be observed

that it cannot be freed from reference to classes which have the numbers

in question. The number obtained by summation is essentially the

  number of the logical sum of a certain class of classes or of some similar

class of similar classes. The necessity of this reference to classes emerges

  when one number occurs twice or more often in the summation. It is to

be observed that the numbers concerned have no order of summation, so

that we have no such proposition as the commutative law: this

  proposition, as introduced in Arithmetic, results only from a defective

  symbolism, which causes an order among the symbols which has no

  correlative order in what is symbolized. But owing to the absence of

order, if one number occurs twice in a summation, we cannot distinguish

a first and a second occurrence of the said number. If we exclude a

  reference to classes which have the said number, there is no sense in the

  supposition of its occurring twice: the summation of a class of numberscan be defined, but in that case, no number can be repeated. In the above

  definition of a sum, the numbers concerned are defined as the numbers of

certain classes, and therefore it is not necessary to decide whether any

  number is repeated or not. But in order to define, without reference to

  particular classes, a sum of numbers of which some are repeated, it is

  necessary first to define multiplication.

This point may be made clearer by considering a special case, such as 1 +

1. It is plain that we cannot take the number 1 itself twice over, for there is

one number 1, and there are not two instances of it. And if the logical

addition of 1 to itself were in question, we should find that 1 and 1 is 1,

according to the general principle of Symbolic Logic. Nor can we define 1 +

1 as the arithmetical sum of a certain class of numbers. This method can be

employed as regards 1 + 2, or any sum in which no number is repeated; but as

regards 1 + 1, the only class of numbers involved is the class whose only

member is 1, and since this class has one member, not two, we cannot define

1 + 1 by its means. Thus the full definition of 1 + 1 is as follows: 1 + 1 is the

number of a class w which is the logical sum of two classes u and v which

have no common term and have each only one term. The chief point to be

observed is, that logical addition of classes is the fundamental notion, while

the arithmetical addition of numbers is wholly subsequent.

115. The general definition of multiplication is due to Mr A. N.

  Whitehead.* It is as follows. Let k be a class of classes, no two of which

  have any term in common. Form what is called the multiplicative class of

k, i.e. the class each of whose terms is a class formed by choosing one

and only one term from each of the classes belonging to k. Then the

  number of terms in the multiplicative class of k is the product of all the

  numbers of the various classes composing k. This definition, like that of

  addition given above, has two merits, which make it preferable to any

  other hitherto suggested. In the first place, it introduces no order among

the numbers multiplied, so that there is no need of the commutative law,

  which, here as in the case of addition, is concerned rather with the

  symbols than with what is symbolized. In the second place, the above

  definition does not require us to decide, concerning any of the numbers

  involved, whether they are finite or infinite. Cantor has given†

  definitions of the sum and product of two numbers, which do not require

a decision as to whether these numbers are finite or infinite. These

  definitions can be extended to the sum and product of any finite numberof finite or infinite numbers; but they do not, as they stand, allow the

  definition of the sum or product of an infinite number of numbers. This

  grave defect is remedied in the above definitions, which enable us to

  pursue Arithmetic, as it ought to be pursued, without introducing the

  distinction of finite and infinite until we wish to study it. Cantor’s

  definitions have also the formal defect of introducing an order among the

  numbers summed or multiplied: but this is, in his case, a mere defect in

the symbols chosen, not in the ideas which he symbolizes. Moreover it is

not practically desirable, in the case of the sum or product of two

  numbers, to avoid this formal defect, since the resulting cumbrousness

  becomes intolerable.

116. It is easy to deduce from the above definitions the usual connection of

  addition and multiplication, which may be thus stated. If k be a class of b

  mutually exclusive classes, each of which contains a terms, then the

logical sum of k contains a × b terms.* It is also easy to obtain the
                  b
  definition of a, and to prove the associative and distributive laws, and
                                              bcbc
the formal laws for powers, such as aa = a + . But it is to be observed

that exponentiation is not to be regarded as a new independent operation,

  since it is merely an application of multiplication. It is true that

  exponentiation can be independently defined, as is done by Cantor,† but

there is no advantage in so doing. Moreover exponentiation unavoidably
                                          ba
  introduces ordinal notions, since a is not in general equal to b. For this

  reason we cannot define the result of an infinite number of

  exponentiations. Powers, therefore, are to be regarded simply as

  abbreviations for products in which all the numbers multiplied together

are equal. From the data which we now possess, all those propositions

  which hold equally of finite and infinite numbers can be deduced. The

next step, therefore, is to consider the distinction between the finite and

the infinite.

* F. 1901, § 2, Prop. 1 ·0.

* American Journal of Mathematics, Oct. 1902.

† Math. Annalen, Vol. XLVI,§ 3.

* See Whitehead, loc. cit.

† Loc. cit., § 4.13


FINITE AND INFINITE




117. The purpose of the present chapter is not to discuss the philosophical

  difficulties concerning the infinite, which are postponed to Part V. For

the present I wish merely to set forth briefly the mathematical theory of

  finite and infinite as it appears in the theory of cardinal numbers. This is

its most fundamental form, and must be understood before the ordinal

  infinite can be adequately explained.*

Let u be any class, and let u' be a class formed by taking away one term x

from u. Then it may or may not happen that u is similar to u' . For example, if

u be the class of all finite numbers, and u' the class of all finite numbers

except 0, the terms of u' are obtained by adding 1 to each of the terms of u,

and this correlates one term of u with one of u' and vice versâ, no term of

either being omitted or taken twice over. Thus u' is similar to u. But if u

consists of all finite numbers up to n, where n is some finite number, and u'

consists of all these except 0, then u' is not similar to u. If there is one term x

which can be taken away from u to leave a similar class u' , it is easily proved

that if any other term y is taken away instead of x we also get a class similar

to u. When it is possible to take away one term from u and leave a class u'

similar to u, we say that u is an infinite class. When this is not possible, we

say that u is a finite class. From these definitions it follows that the null-class

is finite, since no term can be taken from it. It is also easy to prove that if u be

a finite class, the class formed by adding one term to u is finite; and

conversely if this class is finite, so is u. It follows from the definition that the

numbers of finite classes other than the null-class are altered by subtracting 1,

while those of infinite classes are unaltered by this operation. It is easy to

prove that the same holds of the addition of 1.

118. Among finite classes, if one is a proper part of another, the one has a

  smaller number of terms than the other. (A proper part is a part not the

  whole.) But among infinite classes, this no longer holds. This distinctionis, in fact, an essential part of the above definitions of the finite and the

  infinite. Of two infinite classes, one may have a greater or a smaller

  number of terms than the other. A class u is said to be greater than a class

v, or to have a number greater than that of v, when the two are not

  similar, but v is similar to a proper part of u. It is known that if u is

  similar to a proper part of v, and v to a proper part of u (a case which can

only arise when u and v are infinite), then u is similar to v; hence “u is

  greater than v” is inconsistent with “v is greater than u”. It is not at

  present known whether, of two different infinite numbers, one must be

  greater and the other less. But it is known that there is a least infinite

  number, i.e. a number which is less than any different infinite number.

This is the number of finite integers, which will be denoted, in the

  present work, by α.* This number is capable of several definitions in
                      0

  which no mention is made of the finite numbers. In the first place it may

be defined (as is implicitly done by Cantor†) by means of the principle of

  mathematical induction. This definition is as follows: α is the number of
                                                                  0

any class u which is the domain of a one-one relation R, whose converse

  domain is contained in but not coextensive with u, and which is such that,

calling the term to which x has the relation R the successor of x, if s be

any class to which belongs a term of u which is not a successor of any

  other term of u, and to which belongs the successor of every term of u

  which belongs to s, then every term of u belongs to s. Or again, we may

define α as follows. Let P be a transitive and asymmetrical relation, and
          0

let any two different terms of the field of P have the relation P or its

  converse. Further let any class u contained in the field of P and having

  successors (i.e. terms to which every term of u has the relation P) have an

  immediate successor, i.e. a term whose predecessors either belong to u or

  precede some term of u; let there be one term of the field of P which has

no predecessors, but let every term which has predecessors have

  successors and also have an immediate predecessor; then the number of

  terms in the field of P is α. Other definitions may be suggested, but as
                                0

all are equivalent it is not necessary to multiply them. The following

  characteristic is important: Every class whose number is α can be
                                                                      0

  arranged in a series having consecutive terms, a beginning but no end,

and such that the number of predecessors of any term of the series is

  finite; and any series having these characteristics has the number α.
                                                                                0It is very easy to show that every infinite class contains classes whose

number is α. For let u be such a class, and let x be a term of u. Then u is
            00

similar to the class obtained by taking away x, which we will call the class
                                                    0

u. Thus u is an infinite class. From this we can take away a term x, leaving
111

an infinite class u, and so on. The series of terms x, x, … is contained in u,
                    212

and is of the type which has the number α. From this point we can advance
                                                0

to an alternative definition of the finite and the infinite by means of

mathematical induction, which must now be explained.

119. If n be any finite number, the number obtained by adding 1 to n is also

finite, and is different from n. Thus beginning with 0 we can form a

  series of numbers by successive additions of 1. We may define finite

  numbers, if we choose, as those numbers that can be obtained from 0 by

such steps, and that obey mathematical induction. That is, the class of

  finite numbers is the class of numbers which is contained in every class s

to which belongs 0 and the successor of every number belonging to s,

  where the successor of a number is the number obtained by adding 1 to

the given number. Now α is not such a number, since, in virtue of
                                0

  propositions already proved, no such number is similar to a part of itself.

  Hence also no number greater than α is finite according to the new
                                            0

  definition. But it is easy to prove that every number less than α is finite
                                                                            0

with the new definition as with the old. Hence the two definitions are

  equivalent. Thus we may define finite numbers either as those that can be

  reached by mathematical induction, starting from 0 and increasing by 1 at

each step, or as those of classes which are not similar to the parts of

  themselves obtained by taking away single terms. These two definitions

are both frequently employed, and it is important to realize that either is a

  consequence of the other. Both will occupy us much hereafter; for the

  present it is only intended, without controversy, to set forth the bare

  outlines of the mathematical theory of finite and infinite, leaving the

  details to be filled in during the course of the work.

* On the present topic cf. Cantor, Math. Annalen, Vol. xlvi, §§ 5, 6, where

most of what follows will be found.

* Cantor employs for this number the Hebrew Aleph with the suffix 0, but

this notation is inconvenient.

† Math. Annalen, Vol. xlvi,§ 6.14


THEORY OF FINITE NUMBERS




120. Having now clearly distinguished the finite from the infinite, we can

  devote ourselves to the consideration of finite numbers. It is customary,

in the best treatises on the elements of Arithmetic,* not to define number

or particular finite numbers, but to begin with certain axioms or primitive

  propositions, from which all the ordinary results are shown to follow.

This method makes Arithmetic into an independent study, instead of

  regarding it, as is done in the present work, as merely a development,

  without new axioms or indefinables, of a certain branch of general Logic.

For this reason, the method in question seems to indicate a lesser degree

of analysis than that adopted here. I shall nevertheless begin by an

  exposition of the more usual method, and then proceed to definitions and

  proofs of what are usually taken as indefinables and indemonstrables. For

this purpose, I shall take Peano’s exposition in the Formulaire,† which

is, so far as I know, the best from the point of view of accuracy and

  rigour. This exposition has the inestimable merit of showing that all

  Arithmetic can be developed from three fundamental notions (in addition

to those of general Logic) and five fundamental propositions concerning

  these notions. It proves also that, if the three notions be regarded as

  determined by the five propositions, these five propositions are mutually

  independent. This is shown by finding, for each set of four out of the five

  propositions, an interpretation which renders the remaining proposition

false. It therefore only remains, in order to connect Peano’s theory with

that here adopted, to give a definition of the three fundamental notions

and a demonstration of the five fundamental propositions. When once

this has been accomplished, we will know with certainty that everything

in the theory of finite integers follows.

  Peano’s three indefinables are 0, finite integer* and successor of. It is

assumed, as part of the idea of succession (though it would, I think, be betterto state it as a separate axiom), that every number has one and only one

successor. (By successor is meant, of course, immediate successor.) Peano’s

primitive propositions are then the following. (1) 0 is a number. (2) If a is a

number, the successor of a is a number. (3) If two numbers have the same

successor, the two numbers are identical. (4) 0 is not the successor of any

number. (5) If s be a class to which belongs 0 and also the successor of every

number belonging to s, then every number belongs to s. The last of these

propositions is the principle of mathematical induction.

121. The mutual independence of these five propositions has been

  demonstrated by Peano and Padoa as follows.† (1) Giving the usual

  meanings to 0 and successor, but denoting by number finite integers

  other than 0, all the above propositions except the first are true. (2)

  Giving the usual meanings to 0 and successor, but denoting by number

only finite integers less than 10, or less than any other specified finite

  integer, all the above propositions are true except the second. (3) A series

  which begins by an antiperiod and then becomes periodic (for example,

the digits in a decimal which becomes recurring after a certain number of

  places) will satisfy all the above propositions except the third. (4) A

  periodic series (such as the hours on the clock) satisfies all except the

  fourth of the primitive propositions. (5) Giving to successor the meaning

  greater by 2, so that the successor of 0 is 2, and of 2 is 4, and so on, all

the primitive propositions are satisfied except the fifth, which is not

  satisfied if s be the class of even numbers including 0. Thus no one of the

five primitive propositions can be deduced from the other four.

122. Peano points out (loc. cit.) that other classes besides that of the finite

  integers satisfy the above five propositions. What he says is as follows:

  “There is an infinity of systems satisfying all the primitive propositions.

  They are all verified, e.g., by replacing number and 0 by number other

than 0 and 1. All the systems which satisfy the primitive propositions

  have a one-one correspondence with the numbers. Number is what is

  obtained from all these systems by abstraction; in other words, number is

the system which has all the properties enunciated in the primitive

  propositions, and those only.” This observation appears to me lacking in

logical correctness. In the first place, the question arises: How are the

  various systems distinguished, which agree in satisfying the primitive

  propositions? How, for example, is the system beginning with 1

  distinguished from that beginning with 0? To this question two different  answers may be given. We may say that 0 and 1 are both primitive ideas,

or at least that 0 is so, and that therefore 0 and 1 can be intrinsically

  distinguished, as yellow and blue are distinguished. But if we take this

  view—which, by the way, will have to be extended to the other primitive

ideas, number and succession—we shall have to say that these three

  notions are what I call constants, and that there is no need of any such

  process of abstraction as Peano speaks of in the definition of number. In

this method, 0, number and succession appear, like other indefinables, as

  ideas which must be simply recognized. Their recognition yields what

  mathematicians call the existence-theorem, i.e. it assures us that there

  really are numbers. But this process leaves it doubtful whether numbers

are logical constants or not, and therefore makes Arithmetic, according to

the definition in Part I, Chapter 1, primâ facie a branch of Applied

  Mathematics. Moreover it is evidently not the process which Peano has

in mind. The other answer to the question consists in regarding 0, number

and succession as a class of three ideas belonging to a certain class of

trios defined by the five primitive propositions. It is very easy so to state

the matter that the five primitive propositions become transformed into

the nominal definition of a certain class of trios. There are then no longer

any indefinables or indemonstrables in our theory, which has become a

pure piece of Logic. But 0, number and succession become variables,

  since they are only determined as one of the class of trios: moreover the

  existence-theorem now becomes doubtful, since we cannot know, except

by the discovery of at least one actual trio of this class, that there are any

such trios at all. One actual trio, however, would be a constant, and thus

we require some method of giving constant values to 0, number and

  succession. What we can show is that, if there is one such trio, there are

an infinite number of them. For by striking out the first term from any

class satisfying the conditions laid down concerning number, we always

  obtain a class which again satisfies the conditions in question. But even

this statement, since the meaning of number is still in question, must be

  differently worded if circularity is to be avoided. Moreover we must ask

  ourselves: Is any process of abstraction from all systems satisfying the

five axioms, such as Peano contemplates, logically possible? Every term

of a class is the term it is, and satisfies some proposition which becomes

  false when another term of the class is substituted. There is therefore no

term of a class which has merely the properties defining the class and no  others. What Peano’s process of abstraction really amounts to is the

  consideration of the class and variable members of it, to the exclusion of

  constant members. For only a variable member of the class will have

only the properties by which the class is defined. Thus Peano does not

  succeed in indicating any constant meaning for 0, number and

  succession, nor in showing that any constant meaning is possible, since

the existence-theorem is not proved. His only method, therefore, is to say

that at least one such constant meaning can be immediately perceived,

but is not definable. This method is not logically unsound, but it is

  wholly different from the impossible abstraction which he suggests. And

the proof of the mutual independence of his five primitive propositions is

only necessary in order to show that the definition of the class of trios

  determined by them is not redundant. Redundancy is not a logical error,

but merely a defect of what may be called style. My object, in the above

  account of cardinal numbers, has been to prove, from general Logic, that

there is one constant meaning which satisfies the above five propositions,

and that this constant meaning should be called number, or rather finite

  cardinal number. And in this way, new indefinables and indemonstrables

are wholly avoided; for when we have shown that the class of trios in

  question has at least one member, and when this member has been used

to define number, we easily show that the class of trios has an infinite

  number of members, and we define the class by means of the five

  properties enumerated in Peano’s primitive propositions. For the

  comprehension of the connection between Mathematics and Logic, this

  point is of very great importance, and similar points will occur constantly

  throughout the present work.

123. In order to bring out more clearly the difference between Peano’s

  procedure and mine, I shall here repeat the definition of the class

  satisfying his five primitive propositions, the definition of finite number

and the proof, in the case of finite numbers, of his five primitive

  propositions.

The class of classes satisfying his axioms is the same as the class of classes

whose cardinal number is α, i.e. the class of classes, according to my theory,
                              0

which is α. It is most simply defined as follows: α is the class of classes u
          00

each of which is the domain of some one-one relation R (the relation of a

term to its successor) which is such that there is at least one term which

succeeds no other term, every term which succeeds has a successor and u iscontained in any class s which contains a term of u having no predecessors

and also contains the successor of every term of u which belongs to s. This

definition includes Peano’s five primitive propositions and no more. Thus of

every such class all the usual propositions in the arithmetic of finite numbers

can be proved: addition, multiplication, fractions, etc. can be defined, and the

whole of analysis can be developed, in so far as complex numbers are not

involved. But in this whole development, the meaning of the entities and

relations which occur is to a certain degree indeterminate, since the entities

and the relation with which we start are variable members of a certain class.

Moreover, in this whole development, nothing shows that there are such

classes as the definition speaks of.

In the logical theory of cardinals, we start from the opposite end. We first

define a certain class of entities, and then show that this class of entities

belongs to the class α above defined. This is done as follows. (1) 0 is the
                        0

class of classes whose only member is the null-class. (2) A number is the

class of all classes similar to any one of themselves. (3) 1 is the class of all

classes which are not null and are such that, if x belongs to the class, the class

without x is the null-class; or such that, if x and y belong to the class, then x

and y are identical. (4) Having shown that if two classes be similar, and a

class of one term be added to each, the sums are similar, we define that, if n

be a number, n + 1 is the number resulting from adding a unit to a class of n

terms. (5) Finite numbers are those belonging to every class s to which

belongs 0, and to which n + 1 belongs if n belongs. This completes the

definition of finite numbers. We then have, as regards the five propositions

which Peano assumes: (1) 0 is a number. (2) Meaning n + 1 by the successor

of n, if n be a number, then n + 1 is a number. (3) If n + 1 = m + 1, then n =

m. (4) If n be any number, n + 1 is different from 0. (5) If s be a class, and 0

belongs to this class, and if when n belongs to it, n + 1 belongs to it, then all

finite numbers belong to it. Thus all the five essential properties are satisfied

by the class of finite numbers as above defined. Hence the class of classes α
                                                                                        0

has members, and the class finite number is one definite member of α. There
                                                                                0

is, therefore, from the mathematical standpoint, no need whatever of new

indefinables or indemonstrables in the whole of Arithmetic and Analysis.


* Except Frege’s Grundgesetze der Arithmetik (Jena, 1893).

† F. 1901, Part II and F. 1899, § 20 ff.F. 1901 differs from earlier editions

in making “number is a class” a primitive proposition. I regard this asunnecessary, since it is implied by “0 is a number”. I therefore follow the

earlier editions.

* Throughout the rest of this chapter, I shall use number as synonymous

with finite integer.

† F. 1899, p. 30.15


ADDITION OF TERMS AND


ADDITION OF CLASSES




124. Having now briefly set forth the mathematical theory of cardinal

  numbers, it is time to turn our attention to the philosophical questions

  raised by this theory. I shall begin by a few preliminary remarks as to the

  distinction between philosophy and mathematics, and as to the function

of philosophy in such a subject as the foundations of mathematics. The

  following observations are not necessarily to be regarded as applicable to

  other branches of philosophy, since they are derived specially from the

  consideration of the problems of logic.

The distinction of philosophy and mathematics is broadly one of point of

view: mathematics is constructive and deductive, philosophy is critical, and

in a certain impersonal sense controversial. Wherever we have deductive

reasoning, we have mathematics; but the principles of deduction, the

recognition of indefinable entities, and the distinguishing between such

entities, are the business of philosophy. Philosophy is, in fact, mainly a

question of insight and perception. Entities which are perceived by the so-

called senses, such as colours and sounds, are, for some reason, not

commonly regarded as coming within the scope of philosophy, except as

regards the more abstract of their relations; but it seems highly doubtful

whether any such exclusion can be maintained. In any case, however, since

the present work is essentially unconcerned with sensible objects, we may

confine our remarks to entities which are not regarded as existing in space

and time. Such entities, if we are to know anything about them, must be also

in some sense perceived, and must be distinguished one from another; their

relations also must be in part immediately apprehended. A certain body of

indefinable entities and indemonstrable propositions must form the starting-

point for any mathemat-ical reasoning; and it is this starting-point thatconcerns the philosopher. When the philosopher’s work has been perfectly

accomplished, its results can be wholly embodied in premisses from which

deduction may proceed. Now it follows from the very nature of such inquiries

that results may be disproved, but can never be proved. The disproof will

consist in pointing out contradictions and inconsistencies; but the absence of

these can never amount to proof. All depends, in the end, upon immediate

perception; and philosophical argument, strictly speaking, consists mainly of

an endeavour to cause the reader to perceive what has been perceived by the

author. The argument, in short, is not of the nature of proof, but of

exhortation. Thus the question of the present chapter: Is there any indefinable

set of entities commonly called numbers, and different from the set of entities

above defined? is an essentially philosophical question, to be settled by

inspection rather than by accurate chains of reasoning.

125. In the present chapter, we shall examine the question whether the

  above definition of cardinal numbers in any way presupposes some more

  fundamental sense of number. There are several ways in which this may

be supposed to be the case. In the first place, the individuals which

  compose classes seem to be each in some sense one, and it might be

  thought that a one-one relation could not be defined without introducing

the number 1. In the second place, it may very well be questioned

  whether a class which has only one term can be distinguished from that

one term. And in the third place, it may be held that the notion of class

  presupposes number in a sense different from that above defined: it may

be maintained that classes arise from the addition of individuals, as

  indicated by the word and, and that the logical addition of classes is

  subsequent to this addition of individuals. These questions demand a new

  inquiry into the meaning of one and of class, and here, I hope, we shall

  find ourselves aided by the theories set forth in Part I.

As regards the fact that any individual or term is in some sense one, this is

of course undeniable. But it does not follow that the notion of one is

presupposed when individuals are spoken of: it may be, on the contrary, that

the notion of term or individual is the fundamental one, from which that of

one is derived. This view was adopted in Part I, and there seems no reason to

reject it. And as for one-one relations, they are defined by means of identity,

without any mention of one, as follows: R is a one-one relation if, when x and

x' have the relation R to y, and x has the relation R to y and y' , then x and x'

are identical, and so are y and y' . It is true that here x, y, x' , y' are each oneterm, but this is not (it would seem) in any way presupposed in the definition.

This disposes (pending a new inquiry into the nature of classes) of the first of

the above objections.

The next question is as to the distinction between a class containing only

one member, and the one member which it contains. If we could identify a

class with its defining predicate or class-concept, no difficulty would arise on

this point. When a certain predicate attaches to one and only one term, it is

plain that that term is not identical with the predicate in question. But if two

predicates attach to precisely the same terms, we should say that, although

the predicates are different, the classes which they define are identical, i.e.

there is only one class which both define. If, for example, all featherless

bipeds are men, and all men are featherless bipeds, the classes men and

featherless bipeds are identical, though man differs from featherless biped.

This shows that a class cannot be identified with its class-concept or defining

predicate. There might seem to be nothing left except the actual terms, so that

when there is only one term, that term would have to be identical with the

class. Yet for many formal reasons this view cannot give the meaning of the

symbols which stand for classes in symbolic logic. For example, consider the

class of numbers which, added to 3, give 5. This is a class containing no

terms except the number 2. But we can say that 2 is a member of this class,

i.e. it has to the class that peculiar indefinable relation which terms have to

the classes they belong to. This seems to indicate that the class is different

from the one term. The point is a prominent one in Peano’s Symbolic Logic,

and is connected with his distinction between the relation of an individual to

its class and the relation of a class to another in which it is contained. Thus

the class of numbers which, added to 3, give 5, is contained in the class of

numbers, but is not a number; whereas 2 is a number, but is not a class

contained in the class of numbers. To identify the two relations which Peano

distinguishes is to cause havoc in the theory of infinity, and to destroy the

formal precision of many arguments and definitions. It seems, in fact,

indubitable that Peano’s distinction is just, and that some way must be found

of discriminating a term from a class containing that term only.

126. In order to decide this point, it is necessary to pass to our third

  difficulty, and reconsider the notion of class itself. This notion appears to

be connected with the notion of denoting, explained in Part I, Chapter 5.

We there pointed out five ways of denoting, one of which we called the

  numerical conjunction. This was the kind indicated by all. This kind of  conjunction appears to be that which is relevant in the case of classes.

For example, man being the class-concept, all men will be the class. But

it will not be all men quâ concept which will be the class, but what this

  concept denotes, i.e. certain terms combined in the particular way

  indicated by all. The way of combination is essential, since any man or

  some man is plainly not the class, though either denotes combinations of

  precisely the same terms. It might seem as though, if we identify a class

with the numerical conjunction of its terms, we must deny the distinction

of a term from a class whose only member is that term. But we found in

  Chapter 10 that a class must be always an object of a different logical

type from its members, and that, in order to avoid the proposition xεx,

this doctrine must be extended even to classes which have only one

  member. How far this forbids us to identify classes with numerical

  conjunctions, I do not profess to decide; in any case, the distinction

  between a term and the class whose only member it is must be made, and

yet classes must be taken extensionally to the degree involved in their

  being determinate when their members are given. Such classes are called

by Frege Werthverläufe; and cardinal numbers are to be regarded as

  classes in this sense.

127. There is still, however, a certain difficulty, which is this: a class seems

to be not many terms, but to be itself a single term, even when many

  terms are members of the class. This difficulty would seem to indicate

that the class cannot be identified with all its members, but is rather to be

  regarded as the whole which they compose. In order, however, to state

the difficulty in an unobjectionable manner, we must exclude unity and

  plurality from the statement of it, since these notions were to be defined

by means of the notion of class. And here it may be well to clear up a

  point which is likely to occur to the reader. Is the notion of one

  presupposed every time we speak of a term? A term, it may be said,

  means one term, and thus no statement can be made concerning a term

  without presupposing one. In some sense of one, this proposition seems

  indubitable. Whatever is, is one: being and one, as Leibniz remarks, are

  convertible terms.* It is difficult to be sure how far such statements are

  merely grammatical. For although whatever is, is one, yet it is equally

true that whatever are, are many. But the truth seems to be that the kind

of object which is a class, i.e. the kind of object denoted by all men, or by

any concept of a class, is not one except where the class has only oneterm, and must not be made a single logical subject. There is, as we said

in Part I, Chapter 6, in simple cases an associated single term which is

the class as a whole; but this is sometimes absent, and is in any case not

  identical with the class as many. But in this view there is not a

  contradiction, as in the theory that verbs and adjectives cannot be made

  subjects; for assertions can be made about classes as many, but the

  subject of such assertions is many, not one only as in other assertions.

  “Brown and Jones are two of Miss Smith’s suitors” is an assertion about

the class “Brown and Jones”, but not about this class considered as a

  single term. Thus one-ness belongs, in this view, to a certain type of

logical subject, but classes which are not one may yet have assertions

  made about them. Hence we conclude that one-ness is implied, but not

  presupposed, in statements about a term, and “a term” is to be regarded

as an indefinable.

128. It seems necessary, however, to make a distinction as regards the use

of one. The sense in which every object is one, which is apparently

  involved in speaking of an object, is, as Frege urges,* a very shadowy

  sense, since it is applicable to everything alike. But the sense in which a

class may be said to have one member is quite precise. A class u has one

  member when u is not null, and “x and y are u’s” implies “x is identical

with y”. Here the one-ness is a property of the class, which may therefore

be called a unit-class. The x which is its only member may be itself a

class of many terms, and this shows that the sense of one involved in one

term or a term is not relevant to Arithmetic, for many terms as such may

be a single member of a class of classes. One, therefore, is not to be

  asserted of terms, but of classes having one member in the above-defined

  sense; i.e. “u is one”, or better “u is a unit” means “u is not null, and ‘x

and y are u’s’ implies ‘x and y are identical’”. The member of u, in this

  case, will itself be none or one or many if u is a class of classes; but if u

is a class of terms, the member of u will be neither none nor one nor

  many, but simply a term.

129. The commonly received view, as regards finite numbers, is that they

  result from counting, or, as some philosophers would prefer to say, from

  synthesizing. Unfortunately, those who hold this view have not analysed

the notion of counting: if they had done so, they would have seen that it

is very complex, and presupposes the very numbers which it is supposed

to generate.The process of counting has, of course, a psychological aspect, but this is

quite irrelevant to the theory of Arithmetic. What I wish now to point out is

the logical process involved in the act of counting, which is as follows. When

we say one, two, three, etc., we are necessarily considering some one-one

relation which holds between the numbers used in counting and the objects

counted. What is meant by the “one, two, three” is that the objects indicated

by these numbers are their correlates with respect to the relation which we

have in mind. (This relation, by the way, is usually extremely complex, and is

apt to involve a reference to our state of mind at the moment.) Thus we

correlate a class of objects with a class of numbers; and the class of numbers

consists of all the numbers from 1 up to some number n. The only immediate

inference to be drawn from this correlation is, that the number of objects is

the same as the number of numbers from 1 up to n. A further process is

required to show that this number of numbers is n, which is only true, as a

matter of fact, when n is finite, or, in a certain wider sense, when n is α (the
                                                                                  0

smallest of infinite numbers). Moreover the process of counting gives us no

indication as to what the numbers are, as to why they form a series, or as to

how it is to be proved (in the cases where it is true) that there are n numbers

from 1 up to n. Hence counting is irrelevant in the foundations of Arithmetic;

and with this conclusion, it may be dismissed until we come to order and

ordinal numbers.

130. Let us return to the notion of the numerical conjunction. It is plain that

it is of such objects as “A and B”, “A and B and C”, that numbers other

than one are to be asserted. We examined such objects, in Part I, in

  relation to classes, with which we found them to be identical. Now we

must investigate their relation to numbers and plurality.

The notion to be now examined is the notion of a numerical conjunction

or, more shortly, a collection. This is not to be identified, to begin with, with

the notion of a class, but is to receive a new and independent treatment. By a

collection I mean what is conveyed by “A and B” or “A and B and C”, or any

other enumeration of definite terms. The collection is defined by the actual

mention of the terms, and the terms are connected by and. It would seem that

and represents a fundamental way of combining terms, and it might be urged

that just this way of combination is essential if anything is to result of which

a number other than 1 is to be asserted. Collections do not presuppose

numbers, since they result simply from the terms together with and: they

could only presuppose numbers in the particular case where the terms of thecollection themselves presupposed numbers. There is a grammatical

difficulty which, since no method exists of avoiding it, must be pointed out

and allowed for. A collection, grammatically, is one, whereas A and B, or A

and B and C, are essentially many. The strict meaning of collection is the

whole composed of many, but since a word is needed to denote the many

themselves, I choose to use the word collection in this sense, so that a

collection, according to the usage here adopted, is many and not one.

As regards what is meant by the combination indicated by and, it gives

what we called before the numerical conjunction. That is A and B is what is

denoted by the concept of a class of which A and B are the only terms, and is

precisely A and B denoted in the way which is indicated by all. We may say,

if u be the class-concept corresponding to a class of which A and B are the

only terms, that “all u’s” is a concept which denotes the terms A, B combined

in a certain way, and A and B are those terms combined in precisely that way.

Thus A and B appears indistinguishable from the class, though

distinguishable from the class-concept and from the concept of the class.

Hence if u be a class of more than one term, it seems necessary to hold that u

is not one, but many, since u is distinguished both from the class-concept and

from the whole composed of the terms of u.* Thus we are brought back to the

dependence of numbers upon classes; and where it is not said that the classes

in question are finite, it is practically necessary to begin with class-concepts

and the theory of denoting, not with the theory of and which has just been

given. The theory of and applies practically only to finite numbers, and gives

to finite numbers a position which is different, at least psychologically, from

that of infinite numbers. There are, in short, two ways of defining particular

finite classes, but there is only one practicable way of defining particular

infinite classes, namely by intension. It is largely the habit of considering

classes primarily from the side of extension which has hitherto stood in the

way of a correct logical theory of infinity.

131. Addition, it should be carefully observed, is not primarily a method of

  forming numbers, but of forming classes or collections. If we add B to A,

we do not obtain the number 2, but we obtain A and B, which is a

  collection of two terms, or a couple. And a couple is defined as follows:

u is a couple if u has terms, and if, if x be a term of u, there is a term of u

  different from x, but if x, y be different terms of u, and z differs from x

and from y, then every class to which z belongs differs from u. In this

  definition, only diversity occurs, together with the notion of a classhaving terms. It might no doubt be objected that we have to take just two

  terms x, y in the above definition: but as a matter of fact any finite

  number can be defined by induction without introducing more than one

term. For, if n has been defined, a class u has n + 1 terms when, if x be a

term of u, the number of terms of u which differ from x is n. And the

  notion of the arithmetical sum n + 1 is obtained from that of the logical

  sum of a class of n terms and a class of one term. When we say 1 + 1 = 2,

it is not possible that we should mean 1 and 1, since there is only one 1:

if we take 1 as an individual, 1 and 1 is nonsense, while if we take it as a

class, the rule of Symbolic Logic applies, according to which 1 and 1 is

1. Thus in the corresponding logical proposition, we have on the left-

hand side terms of which 1 can be asserted, and on the right-hand side we

  have a couple. That is, 1 + 1 = 2 means “one term and one term are two

  terms”, or, stating the proposition in terms of variables, “if u has one

term and v has one term, and u differs from v, their logical sum has two

  terms”. It is to be observed that on the left-hand side we have a numerical

  conjunction of propositions, while on the right-hand side we have a

  proposition concerning a numerical conjunction of terms. But the true

  premiss, in the above proposition, is not the conjunction of the three

  propositions, but their logical product. This point, however, has little

  importance in the present connection.

132. Thus the only point which remains is this: Does the notion of a term

  presuppose the notion of 1? For we have seen that all numbers except 0

  involve in their definitions the notion of a term, and if this in turn

  involves 1, the definition of 1 becomes circular, and 1 will have to be

  allowed to be indefinable. This objection to our procedure is answered by

the doctrine of § 128, that a term is not one in the sense which is relevant

to Arithmetic, or in the sense which is opposed to many. The notion of

any term is a logical indefinable, presupposed in formal truth and in the

  whole theory of the variable; but this notion is that of the variable

  conjunction of terms, which in no way involves the number 1. There is

  therefore nothing circular in defining the number 1 by means of the

  notion of a term or of any term.

To sum up: Numbers are classes of classes, namely of all classes similar to

a given class. Here classes have to be understood in the sense of numerical

conjunctions in the case of classes having many terms; but a class may have

no terms, and a class of one term is distinct from that term, so that a class isnot simply the sum of its terms. Only classes have numbers; of what is

commonly called one object, it is not true, at least in the sense required, to

say that it is one, as appears from the fact that the object may be a class of

many terms. “One object” seems to mean merely “a logical subject in some

proposition”. Finite numbers are not to be regarded as generated by counting,

which on the contrary presupposes them; and addition is primarily logical

addition, first of propositions, then of classes, from which latter arithmetical

addition is derivative. The assertion of numbers depends upon the fact that a

class of many terms can be a logical subject without being arithmetically one.

Thus it appeared that no philosophical argument could overthrow the

mathematical theory of cardinal numbers set forth in Chapters 11 to 14.


* Ed. Gerhardt, ii, p. 300.

* Grundlagen der Arithmetik, Breslau, 1884, p. 40.

* A conclusive reason against identifying a class with the whole composed

of its terms is, that one of these terms may be the class itself, as in the case

“class is a class”, or rather “classes are one among classes”. The logical type

of the class class is of an infinite order, and therefore the usual objection to

“xεx” does not apply in this case.16


WHOLE AND PART




133. For the comprehension of analysis, it is necessary to investigate the

  notion of whole and part, a notion which has been wrapped in obscurity

  —though not without certain more or less valid logical reasons—by the

  writers who may be roughly called Hegelian. In the present chapter I

  shall do my best to set forth a straightforward and non-mystical theory of

the subject, leaving controversy as far as possible on one side. It may be

well to point out, to begin with, that I shall use the word whole as strictly

  correlative to part, so that nothing will be called a whole unless it has

parts. Simple terms, such as points, instants, colours, or the fundamental

  concepts of logic, will not be called wholes.

  Terms which are not classes may be, as we saw in the preceding chapter,

of two kinds. The first kind are simple: these may be characterized, though

not defined, by the fact that the propositions asserting the being of such terms

have no presuppositions. The second kind of terms that are not classes, on the

other hand, are complex, and in their case, their being presupposes the being

of certain other terms. Whatever is not a class is called a unit, and thus units

are either simple or complex. A complex unit is a whole; its parts are other

units, whether simple or complex, which are presupposed in it. This suggests

the possibility of defining whole and part by means of logical priority, a

suggestion which, though it must be ultimately rejected, it will be necessary

to examine at length.

134. Wherever we have a one-sided formal implication, it may be urged, if

the two propositional functions involved are obtainable one from the

  other by the variation of a single constituent, then what is implied is

  simpler than what implies it. Thus “Socrates is a man” implies “Socrates

is a mortal”, but the latter proposition does not imply the former: also the

  latter proposition is simpler than the former, since man is a concept of

  which mortal forms part. Again, if we take a proposition asserting a  relation of two entities A and B, this proposition implies the being of A

and the being of B, and the being of the relation, none of which implies

the proposition, and each of which is simpler than the proposition. There

will only be equal complexity—according to the theory that intension

and extension vary inversely as one another—in cases of mutual

  implication, such as “A is greater than B” and “B is less than A”. Thus we

  might be tempted to set up the following definition: A is said to be part of

B when Bis implies A is, but A is does not imply B is. If this definition

  could be maintained, whole and part would not be a new indefinable, but

  would be derivative from logical priority. There are, however, reasons

why such an opinion is untenable.

The first objection is, that logical priority is not a simple relation:

implication is simple, but logical priority of A to B requires not only “B

implies A”, but also “A does not imply B”. (For convenience, I shall say that

A implies B when A is implies B is.) This state of things, it is true, is realized

when A is part of B; but it seems necessary to regard the relation of whole to

part as something simple, which must be different from any possible relation

of one whole to another which is not part of it. This would not result from the

above definition. For example, “A is greater and better than B” implies “B is

less than A”, but the converse implication does not hold: yet the latter

proposition is not part of the former.*

  Another objection is derived from such cases as redness and colour. These

two concepts appear to be equally simple: there is no specification, other and

simpler than redness itself, which can be added to colour to produce redness,

in the way in which specifications will turn mortal into man. Hence A is red

is no more complex than A is coloured, although there is here a one-sided

implication. Redness, in fact, appears to be (when taken to mean one

particular shade) a simple concept, which, although it implies colour, does

not contain colour as a constituent. The inverse relation of extension and

intension, therefore, does not hold in all cases. For these reasons, we must

reject, in spite of their very close connection, the attempt to define whole and

part by means of implication.

135. Having failed to define wholes by logical priority, we shall not, I think,

  find it possible to define them at all. The relation of whole and part is, it

  would seem, an indefinable and ultimate relation, or rather, it is several

  relations, often confounded, of which one at least is indefinable. The

  relation of a part to a whole must be differently discussed according tothe nature both of the whole and of the parts. Let us begin with the

  simplest case, and proceed gradually to those that are more elaborate.

    Whenever we have any collection of many terms, in the sense explained1. 

    in the preceding chapter, there the terms, provided there is some non-

    quadratic propositional function which they all satisfy, together form a

    whole. In the preceding chapter we regarded the class as formed by all

    the terms, but usage seems to show no reason why the class should not

    equally be regarded as the whole composed of all the terms in those

    cases where there is such a whole. The first is the class as many, the

    second the class as one. Each of the terms then has to the whole a certain

    indefinable relation,* which is one meaning of the relation of whole and

    part. The whole is, in this case, a whole of a particular kind, which I

    shall call an aggregate: it differs from wholes of other kinds by the fact

    that it is definite as soon as its constituents are known.

2. But the above relation holds only between the aggregate and the single

    terms of the collection composing the aggregate: the relation to our

    aggregate of aggregates containing some but not all the terms of our

    aggregate, is a different relation, though also one which would be

    commonly called a relation of part to whole. For example, the relation of

    the Greek nation to the human race is different from that of Socrates to

    the human race; and the relation of the whole of the primes to the whole

    of the numbers is different from that of 2 to the whole of the numbers.

    This most vital distinction is due to Peano.† The relation of a

    subordinate aggregate to one in which it is contained can be defined, as

    was explained in Part I, by means of implication and the first kind of

    relation of part to whole. If u, v be two aggregates, and for every value

    of x “x is a u” implies “x is a v”, then, provided the converse implication

    does not hold, u is a proper part (in the second sense) of v. This sense of

    whole and part, therefore, is derivative and definable.

3. But there is another kind of whole, which may be called a unity. Such a

    whole is always a proposition, though it need not be an asserted

      proposition. For example, “A differs from B”, or “A’s difference from

    B”, is a complex of which the parts are A and B and difference; but this

    sense of whole and part is different from the previous senses, since “A

    differs from B” is not an aggregate, and has no parts at all in the first two

    senses of parts. It is parts in this third sense that are chiefly considered

    by philosophers, while the first two senses are those usually relevant in    symbolic logic and mathematics. This third sense of part is the sense

    which corresponds to analysis: it appears to be indefinable, like the first

    sense—i.e., I know no way of defining it. It must be held that the three

    senses are always to be kept distinct: i.e., if A is part of B in one sense,

    while B is part of C in another, it must not be inferred (in general) that A

    is part of C in any of the three senses. But we may make a fourth general

    sense, in which anything which is part in any sense, or part in one sense

    of part in another, is to be called a part. This sense, however, has

    seldom, if ever, any utility in actual discussion.


136. The difference between the kinds of wholes is important, and

  illustrates a fundamental point in Logic. I shall therefore repeat it in other

  words. Any collection whatever, if defined by a non-quadratic

  propositional function, though as such it is many, yet composes a whole,

  whose parts are the terms of the collection or any whole composed of

  some of the terms of the collection. It is highly important to realize the

  difference between a whole and all its parts, even in this case where the

  difference is a minimum. The word collection, being singular, applies

  more strictly to the whole than to all the parts; but convenience of

  expression has led me to neglect grammar, and speak of all the terms as

the collection. The whole formed of the terms of the collection I call an

  aggregate. Such a whole is completely specified when all its simple

  constituents are specified; its parts have no direct connection inter se, but

only the indirect connection involved in being parts of one and the same

  whole. But other wholes occur, which contain relations or what may be

  called predicates, not occurring simply as terms in a collection, but as

  relating or qualifying. Such wholes are always propositions. These are

not completely specified when their parts are all known. Take, as a

  simple instance, the proposition “A differs from B”, where A and B are

  simple terms. The simple parts of this whole are A and B and difference;

but the enumeration of these three does not specify the whole, since there

are two other wholes composed of the same parts, namely the aggregate

  formed of A and B and difference, and the proposition “B differs from A”.

In the former case, although the whole was different from all its parts, yet

it was completely specified by specifying its parts; but in the present

  case, not only is the whole different, but it is not even specified by

  specifying its parts. We cannot explain this fact by saying that the parts  stand in certain relations which are omitted in the analysis; for in the

  above case of “A differs from B”, the relation was included in the

  analysis. The fact seems to be that a relation is one thing when it relates

and another when it is merely enumerated as a term in a collection. There

are certain fundamental difficulties in this view, which however I leave

  aside as irrelevant to our present purpose.*

  Similar remarks apply to A is, which is a whole composed of A and Being,

but is different from the whole formed of the collection A and Being. A is one

raises the same point, and so does A and B are two. Indeed all propositions

raise this point, and we may distinguish them among complex terms by the

fact that they raise it.

  Thus we see that there are two very different classes of wholes, of which

the first will be called aggregates, while the second will be called unities.

(Unit is a word having a quite different application, since whatever is a class

which is not null, and is such that, if x and y be members of it, x and y are

identical, is a unit.) Each class of wholes consists of terms not simply

equivalent to all their parts; but in the case of unities, the whole is not even

specified by its parts. For example, the parts A, greater than, B, may compose

simply an aggregate, or either of the propositions “A is greater than B”, “B is

greater than A”. Unities thus involve problems from which aggregates are

free. As aggregates are more specially relevant to mathematics than unities, I

shall in future generally confine myself to the former.

137. It is important to realize that a whole is a new single term, distinct

from each of its parts and from all of them: it is one, not many,* and is

related to the parts, but has a being distinct from theirs. The reader may

  perhaps be inclined to doubt whether there is any need of wholes other

than unities; but the following reasons seem to make aggregates logically

  unavoidable. (1) We speak of one collection, one manifold, etc., and it

  would seem that in all these cases there really is something that is a

  single term. (2) The theory of fractions, as we shall shortly see, appears

to depend partly upon aggregates. (3) We shall find it necessary, in the

  theory of extensive quantity, to assume that aggregates, even when they

are infinite, have what may be called magnitude of divisibility, and that

  two infinite aggregates may have the same number of terms without

having the same magnitude of divisibility: this theory, we shall find, is

  indispensable in metrical geometry. For these reasons, it would seem, the

  aggregate must be admitted as an entity distinct from all its constituents,and having to each of them a certain ultimate and indefinable relation.

138. I have already touched on a very important logical doctrine, which the

  theory of whole and part brings into prominence—I mean the doctrine

that analysis is falsification. Whatever can be analysed is a whole, and we

  have already seen that analysis of wholes is in some measure

  falsification. But it is important to realize the very narrow limits of this

  doctrine. We cannot conclude that the parts of a whole are not really its

parts, nor that the parts are not presupposed in the whole in a sense in

  which the whole is not presupposed in the parts, nor yet that the logically

prior is not usually simpler than the logically subsequent. In short, though

  analysis gives us the truth, and nothing but the truth, it can never give us

the whole truth. This is the only sense in which the doctrine is to be

  accepted. In any wider sense, it becomes merely a cloak for laziness, by

  giving an excuse to those who dislike the labour of analysis.

139. It is to be observed that what we called classes as one may always,

  except where they contain one term or none, or are defined by quadratic

  propositional functions, be interpreted as aggregates. The logical product

of two classes as one will be the common part (in the second of our three

  senses) of the two aggregates, and their sum will be the aggregate which

is identical with or part of (again in the second sense) any aggregate of

  which the two given aggregates are parts, but is neither identical with nor

part of any other aggregate.* The relation of whole and part, in the

  second of our three senses, is transitive and asymmetrical, but is

  distinguished from other such relations by the fact of allowing logical

  addition and multiplication. It is this peculiarity which forms the basis of

the Logical Calculus as developed by writers previous to Peano and

  Frege (including Schröder).† But wherever infinite wholes are concerned

it is necessary, and in many other cases it is practically unavoidable, to

  begin with a class-concept or predicate or propositional function, and

  obtain the aggregate from this. Thus the theory of whole and part is less

  fundamental logically than that of predicates or class-concepts or

  propositional functions; and it is for this reason that the consideration of

it has been postponed to so late a stage.

* Which may, if we choose, be taken as Peano’s ε. The objection to this

meaning for ε is that not every propositional function defines a whole of the

kind required. The whole differs from the class as many by being of the sametype as its terms.

† Cf. e.g. F. 1901, § 1, Prop. 4. 4, note (p. 12).

* See Part IV, Chap. 27.

* See Part I, Chap. 4, esp. § 54.

* I.e. it is of the same logical type as its simple parts.

* Cf. Peano, F. 1901, § 2, Prop. 1·0 (p. 19).

† See e.g. his Algebra der Logik, Vol. I (Leipzig, 1890).17


INFINITE WHOLES




140. In the present chapter the special difficulties of infinity are not to be

  considered: all these are postponed to Part V. My object now is to

  consider two questions: (1) Are there any infinite wholes? (2) If so, must

an infinite whole which contains parts in the second of our three senses

be an aggregate of parts in the first sense? In order to avoid the reference

to the first, second and third senses, I propose henceforward to use the

  following phraseology: a part in the first sense is to be called a term of

the whole;* a part in the second sense is to be called a part simply; and a

part in the third sense will be called a constituent of the whole. Thus

  terms and parts belong to aggregates, while constituents belong to

  unities. The consideration of aggregates and unities, where infinity is

  concerned, must be separately conducted. I shall begin with aggregates.

An infinite aggregate is an aggregate corresponding to an infinite class, i.e.

an aggregate which has an infinite number of terms. Such aggregates are

defined by the fact that they contain parts which have as many terms as

themselves. Our first question is: Are there any such aggregates?

  Infinite aggregates are often denied. Even Leibniz, favourable as he was to

the actual infinite, maintained that, where infinite classes are concerned, it is

possible to make valid statements about any term of the class, but not about

all the terms, nor yet about the whole which (as he would say) they do not

compose.† Kant, again, has been much criticized for maintaining that space is

an infinite given whole. Many maintain that every aggregate must have a

finite number of terms, and that where this condition is not fulfilled there is

no true whole. But I do not believe that this view can be successfully

defended. Among those who deny that space is a given whole, not a few

would admit that what they are pleased to call a finite space may be a given

whole, for instance, the space in a room, a box, a bag or a book-case. But

such a space is only finite in a psychological sense, i.e. in the sense that wecan take it in at a glance: it is not finite in the sense that it is an aggregate of a

finite number of terms, nor yet a unity of a finite number of constituents.

Thus to admit that such a space can be a whole is to admit that there are

wholes which are not finite. (This does not follow, it should be observed,

from the admission of material objects apparently occupying finite spaces, for

it is always possible to hold that such objects, though apparently continuous,

consist really of a large but finite number of material points.) With respect to

time, the same argument holds: to say, for example, that a certain length of

time elapses between sunrise and sunset, is to admit an infinite whole, or at

least a whole which is not finite. It is customary with philosophers to deny

the reality of space and time, and to deny also that, if they were real, they

would be aggregates. I shall endeavour to show, in Part VI, that these denials

are supported by a faulty logic, and by the now resolved difficulties of

infinity. Since science and common sense join in the opposite view, it will

therefore be accepted; and thus, since no argument à priori can now be

adduced against infinite aggregates, we derive from space and time an

argument in their favour.

  Again, the natural numbers, or the fractions between 0 and 1, or the sum-

total of all colours, are infinite, and seem to be true aggregates: the position

that, although true propositions can be made about any number, yet there are

no true propositions about all numbers, could be supported formerly, as

Leibniz supported it, by the supposed contradictions of infinity, but has

become, since Cantor’s solution of these contradictions, a wholly

unnecessary paradox. And where a collection can be defined by a non-

quadratic propositional function, this must be held, I think, to imply that there

is a genuine aggregate composed of the terms of the collection. It may be

observed also that, if there were no infinite wholes, the word Universe would

be wholly destitute of meaning.

141. We must, then, admit infinite aggregates. It remains to ask a more

  difficult question, namely: Are we to admit infinite unities? The question

may also be stated in the form: Are there any infinitely complex

  propositions? This question is one of great logical importance, and we

  shall require much care both in stating and in discussing it.

The first point is to be clear as to the meaning of an infinite unity. A unity

will be infinite when the aggregate of all its constituents is infinite, but this

scarcely constitutes the meaning of an infinite unity. In order to obtain the

meaning, we must introduce the notion of a simple constituent. We mayobserve, to begin with, that a constituent of a constituent is a constituent of

the unity, i.e. this form of the relation of part to whole, like the second, but

unlike the first form, is transitive. A simple constituent may now be defined

as a constituent which itself has no constituents. We may assume, in order to

eliminate the question concerning aggregates, that no constituent of our unity

is to be an aggregate, or, if there be a constituent which is an aggregate, then

this constituent is to be taken as simple. (This view of an aggregate is

rendered legitimate by the fact that an aggregate is a single term, and does not

have that kind of complexity which belongs to propositions.) With this the

definition of a simple constituent is completed.

We may now define an infinite unity as follows: A unity is finite when,

and only when, the aggregate of its simple constituents is finite. In all other

cases a unity is said to be infinite. We have to inquire whether there are any

such unities.*

If a unity is infinite, it is possible to find a constituent unity, which again

contains a constituent unity, and so on without end. If there be any unities of

this nature, two cases are primâ facie possible. (1) There may be simple

constituents of our unity, but these must be infinite in number. (2) There may

be no simple constituents at all, but all constituents, without exception, may

be complex; or, to take a slightly more complicated case, it may happen that,

although there are some simple constituents, yet these and the unities

composed of them do not constitute all the constituents of the original unity.

A unity of either of these two kinds will be called infinite. The two kinds,

though distinct, may be considered together.

An infinite unity will be an infinitely complex proposition: it will not be

analysable in any way into a finite number of constituents. It thus differs

radically from assertions about infinite aggregates. For example, the

proposition “any number has a successor” is composed of a finite number of

constituents: the number of concepts entering into it can be enumerated, and

in addition to these there is an infinite aggregate of terms denoted in the way

indicated by any, which counts as one constituent. Indeed it may be said that

the logical purpose which is served by the theory of denoting is, to enable

propositions of finite complexity to deal with infinite classes of terms: this

object is effected by all, any and every, and if it were not effected, every

general proposition about an infinite class would have to be infinitely

complex. Now, for my part, I see no possible way of deciding whether

propositions of infinite complexity are possible or not; but this at least isclear, that all the propositions known to us (and, it would seem, all

propositions that we can know) are of finite complexity. It is only by

obtaining such propositions about infinite classes that we are enabled to deal

with infinity; and it is a remarkable and fortunate fact that this method is

successful. Thus the question whether or not there are infinite unities must be

left unresolved; the only thing we can say, on this subject, is that no such

unities occur in any department of human knowledge, and therefore none

such are relevant to the foundations of mathematics.

142. I come now to our second question: Must an infinite whole which

  contains parts be an aggregate of terms? It is often held, for example, that

  spaces have parts, and can be divided ad lib., but that they have no simple

parts, i.e. they are not aggregates of points. The same view is put forward

as regards periods of time. Now it is plain that, if our definition of a part

by means of terms (i.e. of the second sense of part by means of the first)

was correct, the present problem can never arise, since parts only belong

to aggregates. But it may be urged that the notion of part ought to be

  taken as an indefinable, and that therefore it may apply to other wholes

than aggregates. This will require that we should add to aggregates and

  unities a new kind of whole, corresponding to the second sense of part.

This will be a whole which has parts in the second sense, but is not an

  aggregate or a unity. Such a whole seems to be what many philosophers

are fond of calling a continuum, and space and time are often held to

  afford instances of such a whole.

Now it may be admitted that, among infinite wholes, we find a distinction

which seems relevant, but which, I believe, is in reality merely psychological.

In some cases, we feel no doubt as to the terms, but great doubt as to the

whole, while in others, the whole seems obvious, but the terms seem a

precarious inference. The ratios between 0 and 1, for instance, are certainly

indivisible entities; but the whole aggregate of ratios between 0 and 1 seems

to be of the nature of a construction or inference. On the other hand, sensible

spaces and times seem to be obvious wholes; but the inference to indivisible

points and instants is so obscure as to be often regarded as illegitimate. This

distinction seems, however, to have no logical basis, but to be wholly

dependent on the nature of our senses. A slight familiarity with coordinate

geometry suffices to make a finite length seem strictly analogous to the

stretch of fractions between 0 and 1. It must be admitted, nevertheless, that in

cases where, as with the fractions, the indivisible parts are evident oninspection, the problem with which we are concerned does not arise. But to

infer that all infinite wholes have indivisible parts merely because this is

known to be the case with some of them, would certainly be rash. The

general problem remains, therefore, namely: Given an infinite whole, is there

a universal reason for supposing that it contains indivisible parts?

143. In the first place, the definition of an infinite whole must not be held to

deny that it has an assignable number of simple parts which do not

  reconstitute it. For example, the stretch of fractions from 0 to 1 has three

  simple parts, , ½, . But these do not reconstitute the whole, that is, the

  whole has other parts which are not parts of the assigned parts or of the

  sum of the assigned parts. Again, if we form a whole out of the number 1

and a line an inch long, this whole certainly has one simple part, namely

1. Such a case as this may be excluded by asking whether every part of

our whole either is simple or contains simple parts. In this case, if our

  whole be formed by adding n simple terms to an infinite whole, the n

  simple terms can be taken away, and the question can be asked

  concerning the infinite whole which is left. But again, the meaning of our

  question seems hardly to be: Is our infinite whole an actual aggregate of

  innumerable simple parts? This is doubtless an important question, but it

is subsequent to the question we are asking, which is: Are there always

  simple parts at all? We may observe that, if a finite number of simple

parts be found, and taken away from the whole, the remainder is always

  infinite. For if not, it would have a finite number; and since the term of

  two finite numbers is finite, the original whole would then be finite.

  Hence if it can be shown that every infinite whole contains one simple

  part, it follows that it contains an infinite number of them. For, taking

  away the one simple part, the remainder is an infinite whole, and

  therefore has a new simple part, and so on. It follows that every part of

the whole either is simple, or contains simple parts, provided that every

  infinite whole has at least one simple part. But it seems as hard to prove

this as to prove that every infinite whole is an aggregate.

If an infinite whole be divided into a finite number of parts, one at least of

these parts must be infinite. If this be again divided, one of its parts must be

infinite, and so on. Thus no finite number of divisions will reduce all the

parts to finitude. Successive divisions give an endless series of parts, and in

such endless series there is (as we shall see in Parts IV and V) no manner of

contradiction. Thus there is no method of proving by actual division thatevery infinite whole must be an aggregate. So far as this method can show,

there is no more reason for simple constituents of infinite wholes than for a

first moment in time or a last finite number.

But perhaps a contradiction may emerge in the present case from the

connection of whole and part with logical priority. It certainly seems a greater

paradox to maintain that infinite wholes do not have indivisible parts than to

maintain that there is no first moment in time or furthest limit to space. This

might be explained by the fact that we know many simple terms, and some

infinite wholes undoubtedly composed of simple terms, whereas we know of

nothing suggesting a beginning of time or space. But it may perhaps have a

more solid basis in logical priority. For the simpler is always implied in the

more complex, and therefore there can be no truth about the more complex

unless there is truth about the simpler. Thus in the analysis of our infinite

whole, we are always dealing with entities which would not be at all unless

their constituents were. This makes a real difference from the time-series, for

example: a moment does not logically presuppose a previous moment, and if

it did it would perhaps be self-contradictory to deny a first moment, as it has

been held (for the same reason) self-contradictory to deny a First Cause. It

seems to follow that infinite wholes would not have Being at all, unless there

were innumerable simple Beings whose Being is presupposed in that of the

infinite wholes. For where the presupposition is false, the consequence is

false also. Thus there seems a special reason for completing the infinite

regress in the case of infinite wholes, which does not exist where other

asymmetrical transitive relations are concerned. This is another instance of

the peculiarity of the relation of whole and part: a relation so important and

fundamental that almost all our philosophy depends upon the theory we adopt

in regard to it.

The same argument may be otherwise stated by asking how our infinite

wholes are to be defined. The definition must not be infinitely complex, since

this would require an infinite unity. Now if there is any definition which is of

finite complexity, this cannot be obtained from the parts, since these are

either infinitely numerous (in the case of an aggregate) or themselves as

complex as the whole (in the case of a whole which is not an aggregate). But

any definition which is of finite complexity will necessarily be intensional,

i.e. it will give some characteristic of a collection of terms. There seems to be

no other known method of defining an infinite whole, or of obtaining such a

whole in a way not involving any infinite unity.The above argument, it must be admitted, is less conclusive than could be

wished, considering the great importance of the point at issue. It may,

however, be urged in support of it that all the arguments on the other side

depend upon the supposed difficulties of infinity, and are therefore wholly

fallacious; also that the procedure of Geometry and Dynamics (as will be

shown in Parts VI and VII) imperatively demands points and instants. In all

applications, in short, the results of the doctrine here advocated are far

simpler, less paradoxical, and more logically satisfactory, than those of the

opposite view. I shall therefore assume, throughout the remainder of this

work, that all the infinite wholes with which we shall have to deal are

aggregates of terms.


* A part in this sense will also be sometimes called a simple or indivisible

part.

† Cf. Phil. Werke, ed. Gerhardt, ii, p. 315; also i, p. 338, v, pp. 144–5.

* In Leibniz’s philosophy, all contingent things are infinite unities.18


RATIOS AND FRACTIONS




144. The present chapter, in so far as it deals with relations of integers, is

  essentially confined to finite integers: those that are infinite have no

  relations strictly analogous to what are usually called ratios. But I shall

  distinguish ratios, as relations between integers, from fractions, which are

  relations between aggregates, or rather between their magnitudes of

  divisibility; and fractions, we shall find, may express relations which

hold where both aggregates are infinite. It will be necessary to begin with

the mathematical definition of ratio, before proceeding to more general

  considerations.

  Ratio is commonly associated with multiplication and division, and in this

way becomes indistinguishable from fractions. But multiplication and

division are equally applicable to finite and infinite numbers, though in the

case of infinite numbers they do not have the properties which connect them

with ratio in the finite case. Hence it becomes desirable to develop a theory of

ratio which shall be independent of multiplication and division.

Two finite numbers are said to be consecutive when, if u be a class having

one of the numbers, and one term be added to u, the resulting class has the

other number. To be consecutive is thus a relation which is one-one and

asymmetrical. If now a number a has to a number b the nth power of this

relation of consecutiveness (powers of relations being defined by relative

multiplication), then we have a + n = b. This equation expresses, between a

and b, a one-one relation which is determinate when n is given. If now the

mth power of this relation holds between a' and b' , we shall have a' + mn = b'

. Also we may define mn as 0 + mn. If now we have three numbers a, b, c

such that ab = c, this equation expresses between a and c a one-one relation

which is determinate when b is given. Let us call this relation B. Suppose we

have also a' b' = c. Then a has to a' a relation which is the relative product of

B and the converse of B' , where B' is derived from b' as B was derived from