continuity; moreover, the appeal to time and change, which appears in the

word fluxion, and to space, which appears in the Lemmas, was wholly

unnecessary, and served merely to hide the fact that no definition of

continuity had been given. Whether Leibniz avoided this error, seems highly

doubtful: it is at any rate certain that, in his first published account of the

Calculus, he defined the differential coefficient by means of the tangent to a

curve. And by his emphasis on the infinitesimal, he gave a wrong direction to

speculation as to the Calculus, which misled all mathematicians before

Weierstrass (with the exception, perhaps, of De Morgan), and all

philosophers down to the present day. It is only in the last thirty or forty years

that mathematicians have provided the requisite mathematical foundations for

a philosophy of the Calculus; and these foundations, as is natural, are as yet

little known among philosophers, except in France.† Philosophical works on

the subject, such as Cohen’s Princip der Infinitesimalmethode und seine

Geschichte,‡ are vitiated, as regards the constructive theory, by an undue

mysticism, inherited from Kant, and leading to such results as the

identification of intensive magnitude with the extensive infinitesimal.§ I shall

examine in the next chapter the conception of the infinitesimal, which is

essential to all philosophical theories of the Calculus hiterto propounded. For

the present, I am only concerned to give the constructive theory as it results

from modern mathematics.

304. The differential coefficient depends essentially upon the notion of a

  continuous function of a continuous variable. The notion to be defined is

not purely ordinal; on the contrary, it is applicable, in the first instance,

only to series of numbers, and thence, by extension, to series in which

  distances or stretches are numerically measureable. But first of all we

must define a continuous function.

We have already seen (Chap. 32) what is meant by a function of a variable,

and what is meant by a continuous variable (Chap. 36). If the function is one-

valued, and is only ordered by correlation with the variable, then, when the

variable is continuous, there is no sense in asking whether the function is

continuous; for such a series by correlation is always ordinally similar to its

prototype. But when, as where the variable and the field of the function are

both classes of numbers, the function has an order independent of correlation,

it may or may not happen that the values of the function, in the order

obtained by correlation, form a continuous series in the independent order.

When they do so in any interval, the function is said to be continuous in thatinterval. The precise definitions of continuous and discontinuous functions,

where both x and f(x) are numerical, are given by Dini* as follows. The

independent variable x is considered to consist of the real numbers, or of all

the real numbers in a certain interval; f(x), in the interval considered, is to be

one-valued, even at the end-points of the interval, and is to be also composed

of real numbers. We then have the following definitions, the function being

defined for the interval between α and β, and a being some real number in

this interval.

“We call f(x) continuous for x = a, or in the point a, in which it has the

value f(a), if for every positive number σ, different from 0, but as small as we

please, there exists a positive number ε, different from 0, such that, for all

values of δ which are numerically less than ε, the difference f(a + δ) − f(a) is

numerically less than σ. In other words, f(x) is continuous in the point x = a,

where it has the value f(a), if the limit of its values to the right and left of a is

the same, and equal to f(a).”

  “Again, f(x) is discontinuous for x = a, if, for any† positive value of σ,

there is no corresponding positive value of ε such that, for all values of δ

which are numerically less than ε, f(a + δ) − f(a) is always less than σ; in

other words, f(x) is discontinuous for x = a, when the values f(a + h) of f(x) to

the right of a, and the values f(a − h) of f(x) to the left of a, the one and the

other, have no determinate limits, or, if they have such, these are different on

the two sides of a; or, if they are the same, they differ from the value f(a),

which the function has in the point a.”

  These definitions of the continuity and discontinuity of a function, it must

be confessed, are somewhat complicated; but it seems impossible to

introduce any simplification without loss of rigour. Roughly, we may say that

a function is continuous in the neighbourhood of a, when its values as it

approaches a approach the value f(a), and have f(a) for their limit both to left

and right. But the notion of the limit of a function is a somewhat more

complicated notion than that of a limit in general, with which we have been

hitherto concerned. A function of a perfectly general kind will have no limit

as it approaches any given point. In order that it should have a limit as x

approaches a from the left, it is necessary and sufficient that, if any number ε

be mentioned, any two values of f(x), when x is sufficiently near to a, but less

than a, will differ by less than ε; in popular language, the value of the

function does not make any sudden jumps as x approaches a from the left.

Under similar circumstances, f(x) will have a limit as it approaches a from theright. But these two limits, even when both exist, need not be equal either to

each other or to f(a), the value of the function when x = a. The precise

condition for a determinate finite limit may be thus stated:*

“In order that the values of y to the right or left of a finite number a (for

instance to the right) should have a determinate and finite limit, it is

necessary and sufficient that, for every arbitrarily small positive number σ,

there should be a positive number ε, such that the difference y +  − y + 
                                                                        aεaδ

between the value y +  of y for x = a + ε, and the value y + , which
                      aεaδ

corresponds to the value a + δ of x, should be numerically less than σ, for

every δ which is greater than 0 and less than ε.”

It is possible, instead of thus defining the limit of a function, and then

discussing whether it exists, to define generally a whole class of limits.† In

this method, a number z belongs to the class of limits of y for x = a, if, within

any interval containing a, however small, y will approach nearer to z than by

any given difference. Thus, for example, sin 1/x, as x approaches zero, will

take every value from −1 to +1 (both inclusive) in every finite interval

containing zero, however small. Thus the interval from −1 to +1 forms, in

this case, the class of limits for x = 0. This method has the advantage that the

class of limits always exists. It is then easy to define the limit as the only

member of the class of limits, in case this class should happen to have only

one member. This method seems at once simpler and more general.

305. Being now agreed as to the meaning of a continuous function, and of

the limit of a function, we can attack the question of the derivative of a

  function, or differential coefficient. It was formerly supposed that all

  continuous functions could be differentiated, but this is now known to be

  erroneous. Some can be differentiated everywhere, others everywhere

  except in one point, others have everywhere a differential on the right,

but sometimes none on the left, others contain an infinite number of

  points, in any finite interval, in which they cannot be differentiated,

  though in an infinitely greater number of points they can be

  differentiated, others lastly—and these are properly the most general

  class—cannot be differentiated anywhere at all.‡ But the conditions

  under which a function may be differentiated, though they are of some

  importance to the philosophy of space and of motion, need not greatly

  concern us here; and in any case, we must first know what a differential

is.

If f(x) be a function which is finite and continuous at the point x, then itmay happen that the fraction


      {f(x + δ) − f(x)}/δ

 


has a definite limit as δ approaches to zero. If this does happen, the limit is

denoted by f'(x), and is called the derivative or differential of f(x) in the point

x. If, that is to say, there be some number z such that, given any number ε

however small, if δ be any number less than some number η, but positive,

then {f(x ± δ) − f(x)}/ ± δ differs from z by less than ε, then z is the derivative

of f(x) in the point x. If the limit in question does not exist, then f(x) has no

derivative at the point x. If f(x) be not continuous at this point, the limit does

not exist; if f(x) be continuous, the limit may or may not exist.

306. The only point which it is important to notice at present is, that there is

no implication of the infinitesimal in this definition. The number δ is

  always finite, and in the definition of the limit there is nothing to imply

the contrary. In fact, {f(x + δ) − f(x)}/δ, regarded as a function of δ, is

  wholly indeterminate when δ = 0. The limit of a function for a given

  value of the independent variable is, as we have seen, an entirely

  different notion from its value for the said value of the independent

  variable, and the two may or may not be the same number. In the present

  case, the limit may be definite, but the value for δ = 0 can have no

  meaning. Thus it is the doctrine of limits that underlies the Calculus, and

not any pretended use of the infinitesimal. This is the only point of

  philosophic importance in the present subject, and it is only to elicit this

  point that I have dragged the reader through so much mathematics.

307. Before examining the infinitesimal on its own account, it remains to

define the definite integral, and to show that this, too, does not involve

the infinitesimal. The indefinite integral, which is the mere converse of

the differential, is of no importance to us; but the definite integral has an

  independent definition, which must be briefly examined.

Just as the derivative of a function is the limit of a fraction, so the definite

integral is the limit of a sum.* The definite integral may be defined as

follows: Let f(x) be a function which is one-valued and finite in the interval α

to β (both inclusive). Divide this interval into any n portions by means of the

(n − 1) points x,x, … x − 1, and denote by δ, δ, … δ the n intervals x −
                12n12n1

α, x − x, … β − x −. In each of these intervals, δ, take any one of the
  12n1svalues, say f(ζ), which f(x) assumes in this interval, and multiply this value
              s


by the interval δ. Now form the sum . This sum will always be finite.
                s

If now, as n increases, this sum tends to one definite limit, however f(ζ) may
                                                                                  s

be chosen in its interval, and however the intervals be chosen (provided only

that all are less than any assigned number for sufficiently great values of n)—

then this one limit is called the definite integral of f(x) from α to β. If there is

no such limit, f(x) is not integrable from α to β.

308. As in the case of the derivative, there is only one important remark to

  make about this definition. The definite integral involves neither the

  infinite nor the infinitesimal, and is itself not a sum, but only and strictly

the limit of a sum. All the terms which occur in the sum whose limit is

the definite integral are finite, and the sum itself is finite. If we were to

  suppose the limit actually attained, it is true, the number of intervals

  would be infinite, and the magnitude of each would be infinitesimal; but

in this case, the sum becomes meaningless. Thus the sum must not be

  regarded as actually attaining its limit. But this is a respect in which

  series in general agree. Any series which always ascends or always

  descends and has no last term cannot reach its limit; other infinite series

may have a term equal to their limit, but if so, this is a mere accident. The

  general rule is, that the limit does not belong to the series which it limits;

and in the definition of the derivative and the definite integral we have

  merely another instance of this fact. The so-called infinitesimal calculus,

  therefore, has nothing to do with the infinitesimal, and has only indirectly

to do with the infinite—its connection with the infinite being, that it

  involves limits, and only infinite series have limits.

The above definitions, since they involve multiplication and division, are

essentially arithmetical. Unlike the definitions of limits and continuity, they

cannot be rendered purely ordinal. But it is evident that they may be at once

extended to any numerically measurable magnitudes, and therefore to all

series in which stretches or distances can be measured. Since spaces, times

and motions are included under this head, the Calculus is applicable to

Geometry and Dynamics. As to the axioms involved in the assumption that

geometrical and dynamical functions can be differentiated and integrated, I

shall have something to say at a later stage. For the present, it is time to make

a critical examination of the infinitesimal on its own account.* Cf. Mathematical Works, Gerhardt’s ed. iv, pp. 91–93; Phil. Works,

Gerhardt’s ed. ii, p. 282.

† See Math. Works, Gerhardt’s ed. vi, pp. 235, 247, 252.

‡ See Math. Works, Gerhardt’s ed., Vol. v, pp. 220 ff.

§ E.g. Phil. Works, Gerhardt’s ed. ii, p. 305. Cf. Cassirer, Leibniz’ System

(Marburg, 1902), pp. 206–7.

* Principia, Part I, Section i.

† See Couturat, De l’Infini Mathématique, passim.

‡ Berlin, 1883. The historical part of this work, it should be said, is

admirable.

§ Op. cit. p. 15.

* Op. cit. § 30, pp. 50, 51.

† The German (not the Italian) has every instead of any, but this is a slip.

* Dini, op. cit. p. 38.

† See Peano, Rivista di Matematica, ii, pp. 77–79; Formulaire, Part iii, §

78, 1.0.

‡ See Dini, op. cit. Chaps. x, xi, xii; Encyklopädie der math.

Wissenschaften, Band ii, Heft i (Leipzig, 1899), esp. pp. 20–22.

* The definition of the definite integral differs little in different modern

works. Cp. Dini, op. cit. §§ 178–181; Jordan, Cours d’Analyse, Vol. i (Paris,

1893), Chap. 1, §§ 41–58; Encyklopädie der mathematischen Wissenschaften,

ii, A. 2, § 31. The definition as the limit of a sum is more consonant with

Leibniz’s views than that as the inverse of a derivative, but was banished by

Bernoulli and Euler, and only brought back by Cauchy. See references in the

last-mentioned place.40


THE INFINITESIMAL AND


THE IMPROPER INFINITE




309. Until recent times, it was universally believed that continuity, the

  derivative, and the definite integral, all involved actual infinitesimals, i.e.

that even if the definitions of these notions could be formally freed from

  explicit mention of the infinitesimal, yet, where the definitions applied

the actual infinitesimal must always be found. This belief is now

  generally abandoned. The definitions which have been given in previous

  chapters do not in any way imply the infinitesimal, and this notion

  appears to have become mathematically useless. In the present chapter, I

  shall first give a definition of the infinitesimal, and then examine the

  cases where this notion arises. I shall end by a critical discussion of the

  belief that continuity implies the infinitesimal.

The infinitesimal has, in general, been very vaguely defined. It has been

regarded as a number or magnitude which, though not zero, is less than any

finite number or magnitude. It has been the dx or dy of the Calculus, the time

during which a ball thrown vertically upwards is at rest at the highest point of

its course, the distance between a point on a line and the next point, etc., etc.

But none of these notions are at all precise. The dx and dy, as we saw in the

last chapter, are nothing at all: dy/dx is the limit of a fraction whose

numerator and denominator are finite, but is not itself a fraction at all. The

time during which a ball is at rest at its highest point is a very complex

notion, involving the whole philosophic theory of motion; in Part VII we

shall find, when this theory has been developed, that there is no such time.

The distance between consecutive points presupposes that there are

consecutive points—a view which there is every reason to deny. And so with

most instances—they afford no precise definition of what is meant by the

infinitesimal.310. There is, so far as I know, only one precise definition, which renders

the infinitesimal a purely relative notion, correlative to something

  arbitrarily assumed to be finite. When, instead, we regard what had been

  taken to be infinitesimal as finite, the correlative notion is what Cantor

calls the improper infinite (Uneigentlich-Unendliches). The definition of

the relation in question is obtained by denying the axiom of Archimedes,

just as the transfinite was obtained by denying mathematical induction. If

P, Q be any two numbers, or any two measurable magnitudes, they are

  said to be finite with respect to each other when, if P be the lesser, there

  exists a finite integer n such that nP is greater than Q. The existence of

such an integer constitutes the axiom of Archimedes and the definition of

  relative finitude. It will be observed that it presupposes the definition of

  absolute finitude among numbers—a definition which, as we have seen,

  depends upon two points, (1) the connection of 1 with the logical notion

of simplicity, or of 0 with the logical notion of the null-class; (2) the

  principle of mathematical induction. The notion of relative finitude is

  plainly distinct from that of absolute finitude. The latter applies only to

  numbers, classes and divisibilities, whereas the former applies to any

kind of measurable magnitude. Any two numbers, classes, or divis-

  ibilities, which are both absolutely finite are also relatively finite; but the

  converse does not hold. For example, ω and ω.2, an inch and a foot, a day

and a year, are relatively finite pairs, though all three consist of terms

  which are absolutely infinite.

The definition of the infinitesimal and the improper infinite is then as

follows. If P, Q be two numbers, or two measurable magnitudes of the same

kind, and if, n being any finite integer whatever, nP is always less than Q,

then P is infinitesimal with respect to Q, and Q is infinite with respect to P.

With regard to numbers, these relative terms are not required; for if, in the

case supposed, P is absolutely finite, then Q is absolutely infinite; while if it

were possible for Q to be absolutely finite, P would be absolutely

infinitesimal—a case, however, which we shall see reason to regard as

impossible. Hence I shall assume in future that P and Q are not numbers, but

are magnitudes of a kind of which some, at least, are numerically measurable.

It should be observed that, as regards magnitudes, the axiom of Archimedes

is the only way of defining, not only the infinitesimal, but the infinite also. Of

a magnitude not numerically measurable, there is nothing to be said except

that it is greater than some of its kind, and less than others; but from suchpropositions infinity cannot be obtained. Even if there be a magnitude greater

than all others of its kind, there is no reason for regarding it as infinite.

Finitude and infinity are essentially numerical notions, and it is only by

relation to numbers that these terms can be applied to other entities.

311. The next question to be discussed is: What instances of infinitesimals

are to be found? Although there are far fewer instances than was formerly

  supposed, there are yet some that are important. To begin with, if we

  have been right in regarding divisibility as a magnitude, it is plain that

the divisibility of any whole containing a finite number of simple parts is

  infinitesimal as compared with one containing an infinite number. The

  number of parts being taken as the measure, every infinite whole will be

  greater than n times every finite whole, whatever finite number n may be.

This is therefore a perfectly clear instance. But it must not be supposed

that the ratio of the divisibilities of two wholes, of which one at least is

  transfinite, can be measured by the ratio of the cardinal numbers of their

  simple parts. There are two reasons why this cannot be done. The first is,

that two transfinite cardinals do not have any relation strictly analogous

to ratio; indeed, the definition of ratio is effected by means of

  mathematical induction. The relation of two transfinite cardinals α, γ

  expressed by the equation αβ = γ bears a certain resemblance to integral

  ratios, and αβ =γδ may be used to define other ratios. But ratios so

  defined are not very similar to finite ratios. The other reason why infinite

  divisibilities must not be measured by transfinite numbers is, that the

  whole must always have more divisibility than the part (provided the

  remaining part is not relatively infinitesimal), though it may have the

  same transfinite number. In short, divisibilities, like ordinals, are equal,

so long as the wholes are finite, when and only when the cardinal

  numbers of the wholes are the same; but the notion of magnitude of

  divisibility is distinct from that of cardinal number, and separates itself

visibly as soon as we come to infinite wholes.

Two infinite wholes may be such that one is infinitely less divisible than

the other. Consider, for example, the length of a finite straight line and the

area of the square upon that straight line; or the length of a finite straight line

and the length of the whole straight line of which it forms part (except in

finite spaces); or an area and a volume; or the rational numbers and the real

numbers; or the collection of points on a finite part of a line obtainable by

von Staudt’s quadrilateral construction, and the total collection of points onthe said finite part.* All these are magnitudes of one and the same kind,

namely divisibilities, and all are infinite divisibilities; but they are of many

different orders. The points on a limited portion of a line obtainable by the

quadrilateral construction form a collection which is infinitesimal with

respect to the said portion; this portion is ordinally infinitesimal† with respect

to any bounded area; any bounded area is ordinally infinitesimal with respect

to any bounded volume; and any bounded volume (except in finite spaces) is

ordinally infinitesimal with respect to all space. In all these cases, the word

infinitesimal is used strictly according to the above definition, obtained from

the axiom of Archimedes. What makes these various infinitesimals somewhat

unimportant, from a mathematical standpoint, is, that measurement

essentially depends upon the axiom of Archimedes, and cannot, in general, be

extended by means of transfinite numbers, for the reasons which have just

been explained. Hence two divisibilities, of which one is infinitesimal with

respect to the other, are regarded usually as different kinds of magnitude; and

to regard them as of the same kind gives no advantage save philosophic

correctness. All of them, however, are strictly instances of infinitesimals, and

the series of them well illustrates the relativity of the term infinitesimal.

An interesting method of comparing certain magnitudes, analogous to the

divisibilities of any infinite collections of points, with those of continuous

stretches is given by Stolz,* and a very similar but more general method is

given by Cantor.† These methods are too mathematical to be fully explained

here, but the gist of Stolz’s method may be briefly explained. Let a collection

of points x' be contained in some finite interval a to b. Divide the interval into

any number n of parts, and divide each of these parts again into any number

of parts, and so on; and let the successive divisions be so effected that all

parts become in time less than any assigned number δ. At each stage, add

together all the parts that contain points of x' . At the mth stage, let the

resulting sum be S. Then subsequent divisions may diminish this sum, but
                    m

cannot increase it. Hence as the number of divisions increases, S must
                                                                          m

approach a limit L. If x' is compact throughout the interval, we shall have L =

b − a; if any finite derivative of x' vanishes, L = 0. L obviously bears an

analogy to a definite integral; but no conditions are required for the existence

of L. But L cannot be identified with the divisibility; for some compact series,

e.g. that of rationals, are less divisible than others, e.g. the continuum, but

give the same value of L.

312. The case in which infinitesimals were formerly supposed to be  peculiarly evident is that of compact series. In this case, however, it is

  possible to prove that there can be no infinitesimal segments,‡ provided

  numerical measurement be possible at all—and if it be not possible, the

  infinitesimal, as we have seen, is not definable. In the first place, it is

  evident that the segment contained between two different terms is always

  infinitely divisible; for since there is a term c between any two a and b,

there is another d between a and c, and so on. Thus no terminated

  segment can contain a finite number of terms. But segments defined by a

class of terms may (as we saw in Chapter 34) have no limiting term. In

this case, however, provided the segment does not consist of a single

term a, it will contain some other term b, and therefore an infinite

  number of terms. Thus all segments are infinitely divisible. The next

  point is to define multiples of segments. Two terminated segments can be

  added by placing a segment equal to the one at the end of the other to

form a new segment; and if the two were equal, the new one is said to be

double of each of them. But if the two segments are not terminated, this

  process cannot be employed. Their sum, in this case, is defined by

  Professor Peano as the logical sum of all the segments obtained by

adding two terminated segments contained respectively in the two

  segments to be added.* Having defined this sum, we can define any finite

  multiple of a segment. Hence we can define the class of terms contained

in some finite multiple of our segment, i.e. the logical sum of all its finite

  multiples. If, with respect to all greater segments, our segment obeys the

  axiom of Archimedes, then this new class will contain all terms that

  come after the origin of our segment. But if our segment be infinitesimal

with respect to any other segment, then the class in question will fail to

  contain some points of this other segment. In this case, it is shown that all

  transfinite multiples of our segment are equal to each other. Hence it

  follows that the class formed by the logical sum of all finite multiples of

our segment, which may be called the infinite multiple of our segment,

must be a non-terminated segment, for a terminated segment is always

  increased by being doubled. “Each of these results”, so Professor Peano

  concludes, “is in contradiction with the usual notion of a segment. And

from the fact that the infinitesimal segment cannot be rendered finite by

  means of any actually infinite multiplication, I conclude, with Cantor,

that it cannot be an element in finite magnitudes” (p. 62). But I think an

  even stronger conclusion is warranted. For we have seen that, in compact  series, there is, corresponding to every segment, a segment of segments,

and that this is always terminated by its defining segment; further that the

  numerical measurement of segments of segments is exactly the same as

that of simple segments; whence, by applying the above result to

  segments of segments, we obtain a definite contradiction, since none of

  them can be unterminated, and an infinitesimal one cannot be terminated.

In the case of the rational or the real numbers, the complete knowledge

which we possess concerning them renders the non-existence of

infinitesimals demonstrable. A rational number is the ratio of two finite

integers, and any such ratio is finite. A real number other than zero is a

segment of the series of rationals; hence if x be a real number other than zero,

there is a class u, not null, of rationals such that, if y is a u, and z is less than

y, z is an x, i.e. belongs to the segment which is x. Hence every real number

other than zero is a class containing rationals, and all rationals are finite;

consequently every real number is finite. Consequently if it were possible, in

any sense, to speak of infinitesimal numbers, it would have to be in some

radically new sense.

313. I come now to a very difficult question, on which I would gladly say

  nothing—I mean, the question of the orders of infinity and

  infinitesimality of functions. On this question the greatest authorities are

  divided: Du Bois Reymond, Stolz, and many others, maintaining that

  these form a special class of magnitudes, in which actual infinitesimals

  occur, while Cantor holds strongly that the whole theory is erroneous.*

To put the matter as simply as possible, consider a function f(x) whose

limit, as x approaches zero, is zero. It may happen that, for some finite
                                    α
real number α, the ratio f(x)/x has a finite limit as x approaches zero.

  There can be only one such number, but there may be none. Then α, if

there is such a number, may be called the order to which f(x) becomes

  infinitesimal, or the order of smallness of f(x) as x approaches zero. But

for some functions, e.g. 1/log x, there is no such number α. If α be any
                                          α
  finite real number, the limit of 1/x logx, as x approaches zero, is infinite.
                                                α
That is, when x is sufficiently small, 1/x log x is very large, and may be

  made larger than any assigned number by making x sufficiently small—

and this whatever finite number α may be. Hence, to express the order of

  smallness of 1/log x, it is necessary to invent a new infinitesimal number,

  which may be denoted by 1/g. Similarly we shall need infinitely great
                                                                −x
  numbers to express the order of smallness of (say) e1/ as x approaches  zero. And there is no end to the succession of these orders of smallness:

that of 1/log (log x), for example, is infinitely smaller than that of 1/log x,

and so on. Thus we have a whole hierarchy of magnitudes, of which all

in any one class are infinitesimal with respect to all in any higher class,

and of which one class only is formed of all the finite real numbers.

In this development, Cantor finds a vicious circle; and though the question

is difficult, it would seem that Cantor is in the right. He objects (loc. cit.) that

such magnitudes cannot be introduced unless we have reason to think that

there are such magnitudes. The point is similar to that concerning limits; and

Cantor maintains that, in the present case, definite contradictions may be

proved concerning the supposed infinitesimals. If there were infinitesimal

numbers j, then even for them we should have


                              j
        Lim =  1/ (log x. x) = 0
            x0

 


        j
  since x must ultimately exceed ½. And he shows that even continuous,

differentiable and uniformly growing functions may have an entirely

ambiguous order of smallness or infinity: that, in fact, for some such

functions, this order oscillates between infinite and infinitesimal values,

according to the manner in which the limit is approached. Hence we may, I

think, conclude that these infinitesimals are mathematical fictions. And this

may be reinforced by the consideration that, if there were infinitesimal

numbers, there would be infinitesimal segments of the number-continuum,

which we have just seen to be impossible.

314. Thus to sum up what has been said concerning the infinitesimal, we

see, to begin with, that it is a relative term, and that, as regards

  magnitudes other than divisibilities, or divisibilities of wholes which are

  infinite in the absolute sense, it is not capable of being other than a

  relative term. But where it has an absolute meaning, there this meaning is

  indistinguishable from finitude. We saw that the infinitesimal, though

  completely useless in mathematics, does occur in certain instances—for

  example, lengths of bounded straight lines are infinitesimal as compared

to areas of polygons, and these again as compared to volumes of

  polyhedra. But such genuine cases of infinitesimals, as we saw, are

  always regarded by mathematics as magnitudes of another kind, because

no numerical comparison is possible, even by means of transfinite  numbers, between an area and a length, or a volume and an area.

  Numerical measurement, in fact, is wholly dependent upon the axiom of

  Archimedes, and cannot be extended as Cantor has extended numbers.

And finally we saw that there are no infinitesimal segments in compact

  series, and—what is closely connected—that orders of smallness of

  functions are not to be regarded as genuine infinitesimals. The

  infinitesimal, therefore—so we may conclude—is a very restricted and

  mathematically very unimportant conception, of which infinity and

  continuity are alike independent.

* See Part VI, Chap. 45.

† See Part VI, Chap. 47, § 397.

* Math. Annalen, 23, “Ueber einen zu einer unendlichen Punktmenge

gehörigen Grenzwerth”.

† Ib. “Ueber unendliche lineare Punktmannigfaltigkeiten”, No. 6.

‡ See Peano, Rivista di Matematica, Vol. ii, pp. 58–62.

* Loc. cit. p. 61, No. 9.

* See Du Bois Reymond, Allgemeine Functionentheorie (1882), p. 279 ff.;

Stolz, Allgemeine Arithmetik, Part i (Leipzig, 1885), Section ix, Anhang;

Cantor, Rivista di Matematica, v, pp. 104–8.41


PHILOSOPHICAL


ARGUMENTS CONCERNING


THE INFINITESIMAL




315. We have now completed our summary review of what mathematics

has to say concerning the continuous, the infinite and the infinitesimal.

And here, if no previous philosophers had treated of these topics, we

  might leave the discussion, and apply our doctrines to space and time.

For I hold the paradoxical opinion that what can be mathematically

  demonstrated is true. As, however, almost all philosophers disagree with

this opinion, and as many have written elaborate arguments in favour of

  views different from those above expounded, it will be necessary to

  examine controversially the principal types of opposing theories, and to

  defend, as far as possible, the points in which I differ from standard

  writers. For this purpose, the work of Cohen already referred to will be

  specially useful, not only because it deals explicitly with our present

  theme, but also because, largely owing to its historical excellence, certain

very important mathematical errors, which it appears to me to contain,

  have led astray other philosophers who have not an acquaintance with

  modern mathematics at first hand.*

316. In the above exposition, the differential appeared as a philosophically

  unimportant application of the doctrine of limits. Indeed, but for its

  traditional importance, it would scarcely have deserved even mention.

And we saw that its definition nowhere involves the infinitesimal. The dx

and dy of a differential are nothing in themselves, and dy/dx is not a

  fraction. Hence, in modern works on the Calculus, the notation f' (x) has

  replaced dy/dx, since the latter form suggests erroneous notions. The

  notation f' (x), it may be observed, is more similar to Newton’s , and its  similarity is due to the fact that, on this point, modern mathematics is

  more in harmony with Newton than with Leibniz. Leibniz employed the

form dy/dx because he believed in infinitesimals; Newton, on the other

hand, definitely asserts that his fluxion is not a fraction. “Those ultimate

  ratios”, he says, “with which quantities vanish are not truly the ratios of

  ultimate quantities, but limits towards which the ratios of quantities

  decreasing without limit do always converge, and to which they approach

nearer than by any given difference.”*

But when we turn to such works as Cohen’s, we find the dx and the dy

treated as separate entities, as real infinitesimals, as the intensively real

elements of which the continuum is composed (pp. 14, 28, 144, 147). The

view that the Calculus requires infinitesimals is apparently not thought open

to question; at any rate, no arguments whatever are brought up to support it.

This view is certainly assumed as self-evident by most philosophers who

discuss the Calculus. Let us see for ourselves what kind of grounds can be

urged in its favour.

317. Many arguments in favour of the view in question are derived by most

  writers from space and motion—arguments which Cohen to some extent

  countenances (pp. 34, 37), though he admits that the differential can be

  obtained from numbers alone, which however, following Kant, he

  regards as implying time (pp. 20, 21). Since the analysis of space and

  motion is still to come, I shall confine myself for the present to such

  arguments as can be derived from purely numerical instances. For the

sake of definiteness, I shall as far as possible extract the opinions to be

  controverted from Cohen.

318. Cohen begins (p. 1) by asserting that the problem of the infinitesimal is

not purely logical: it belongs rather to Epistemology, which is

  distinguished, I imagine, by the fact that it depends upon the pure

  intuitions as well as the categories. This Kantian opinion is wholly

  opposed to the philosophy which underlies the present work; but it would

take us too far from our theme to discuss it here, and I mention it chiefly

to explain the phraseology of the work we are examining. Cohen

  proceeds at once to reject the view that the infinitesimal calculus can be

  independently derived by mathematics from the method of limits. This

  method, he says (p. 1), “consists in the notion that the elementary

  conception of equality must be completed by the exact notion of the

limit. Thus in the first place the conception of equality is presupposed… .  Again, in the second place, the method of limits presupposes the

  conception of magnitude… . But in the presupposed conception of

  magnitude the limiting magnitude is at the same time presupposed. The

  equality which is defined in the elementary doctrine of magnitude pays

no attention to these limiting magnitudes. For it, magnitudes count as

  equal if and although their difference consists in a limiting magnitude.

  Hence the elementary conception of equality must be—this is the notion

of the method of limits—not so much completed as corrected by the

  exact conception of the limit. Equality is to be regarded as an earlier

  stage of the limiting relation.”*

319. I have quoted this passage in full, because its errors are typical of those

to which non-mathematicians are liable in this question. In the first place,

  equality has no relevance to limits. I imagine that Cohen has in mind

such cases as a circle and the inscribed polygon, where we cannot say

that the circle is equal to any of the polygons, but only that it is their

  limit; or, to take an arithmetical instance, a convergent series whose sum

is π or √2. But in all such instances there is much that is irrelevant and

  adventitious, and there are many unnecessary complications. The

  absolutely simplest instance of a limit is ω considered as the limit of the

  ordinal numbers. There is here certainly no kind of equality. Yet in all

  cases where limits are defined by progressions—and these are the usual

  cases—we have a series of the type presented by the finite ordinals

  together with ω. Consider, for example, the series  together with 2, the

n being capable of all positive integral finite values. Here the series is of

the same type as before, and here, as before, 2 is the limit of the series. But

  here—and this is what has misled Cohen—the difference between 2 and

the successive terms of the series becomes less than any assigned

  magnitude, and thus we seem to have a sort of extended quality between 2

and the late terms of the series . But let us examine this. In the first

place, it depends upon the fact that rationals are a series in which we

  have distances which are again rationals. But we know that distances are

  unnecessary to limits, and that stretches are equally effective. Now

  considering stretches, 2 is the limit of  because no rational comes

  between 2 and all terms of the series —precisely the sense in which ωis the limit of the finite integers. And it is only because  forms a

  progression, i.e. is similar to the series of finite integers, that we know its

  limit to be 2. The fact that the terms, as we advance, differ little from 2,

  depends either upon our having a series in which there is distance, which

is a fortuitous and irrelevant circumstance, or upon the fact that the

  successive stretches up to 2 may be made less than any assigned stretch

up to 2, which follows from the notion of a limit, but has nothing to do

with equality. And whenever our series which is to have a limit is part of

a series which is a function of ω, the stretch from any term to the limit is

  always infinite in the only sense in which such series have infinite

  stretches; and in a very real sense the stretch grows no smaller as we

  approach the limit, for both the ordinal and the cardinal number of its

  terms remain constant.

We have seen so fully already in what sense, and how far, magnitude is

involved in limits, that it seems unnecessary to say much on this subject here.

Magnitude is certainly not involved in the sense, which is undoubtedly that

intended by Cohen, that the limit and the terms limited must be magnitudes.

Every progression which forms part of a series which is a function of ω, and

in which there are terms after the progression, has a limit, whatever may be

the nature of the terms. Every endless series of segments of a compact series

has a limit, whatever may be the nature of the compact series. Now of course

in all series we have magnitudes, namely the divisibilities of stretches; but it

is not of these that we find the limit. Even in the case of segments, the limit is

an actual segment, not the magnitude of a segment; and what is relevant is

only that the segments are classes, not that they are quantities. But the

distinction of quantities and magnitudes is, of course, wholly foreign to

Cohen’s order of ideas.

320. But we now come to a greater error. The conception of magnitude,

  Cohen says, which is presupposed in limits, in turn presupposes limiting

  magnitudes. By limiting magnitudes, as appears from the context, he

  means infinitesimals, the ultimate differences, I suppose, between the

  terms of a series and its limit. What he means seems to be, that the kinds

of magnitude which lead to limits are compact series, and that, in

  compact series, we must have infinitesimals. Every point in this opinion

is mistaken. Limits, we have just seen, need not be limits of magnitudes;

  segments of a compact series, as we saw in the preceding chapter, cannotbe infinitesimal; and limits do not in any way imply that the series in

  which they occur are compact. These points have been so fully proved

  already that it is unnecessary to dwell upon them.

321. But the crowning mistake is the supposition that limits introduce a new

  meaning of equality. Among magnitudes, equality, as we saw in Part III,

has an absolutely rigid and unique meaning: it applies only to quantities,

and means that they have the same magnitude. There is no question of

  approximation here: what is meant is simply absolute logical identity of

  magnitude. Among numbers (which Cohen probably regards as

  magnitudes), there is no such thing as equality. There is identity, and

there is the relation which is usually expressed by the sign of equality, as

in the equation 2 × 3 = 6. This relation had puzzled those who

  endeavoured to philosophize about Arithmetic, until it was explained by

  Professor Peano.* When one term of the equation is a single number,

  while the other is an expression composed of two or more numbers, the

  equation expresses the fact that the class defined by the expression

  contains only one term, which is the single number on the other side of

the equation. This definition again is absolutely rigid: there is nothing

  whatever approximate in it, and it is incapable of any modification by

  infinitesimals. I imagine that what Cohen means may be expressed as

  follows. In forming a differential coefficient, we consider two numbers x

and x + dx, and two others y and y + dy. In elementary Arithmetic, x and

x + dx would count as equal, but not in the Calculus. There are, in fact,

  two ways of defining equality. Two terms may be said to be equal when

their ratio is unity, or when their difference is zero. But when we allow

real infinitesimals dx, x and x + dx will have the ratio unity, but will not

  have zero for their difference, since dx is different from absolute zero.

This view, which I suggest as equivalent to Cohen’s, depends upon a

  misunderstanding of limits and the Calculus. There are in the Calculus no

such magnitudes as dx and dy. There are finite differences ∆x and ∆y, but

no view, however elementary, will make x equal to x + ∆x. There are

  ratios of finite differences, ∆y/∆x, and in cases where the derivative of y

  exists, there is one real number to which ∆y/∆x can be made to approach

as near as we like by diminishing ∆x and ∆y. This single real number we

  choose to denote by dy/dx; but it is not a fraction, and dx and dy are

  nothing but typographical parts of one symbol. There is no correction

  whatever of the notion of equality by the doctrine of limits; the only new  element introduced is the consideration of infinite classes of terms

  chosen out of a series.

322. As regards the nature of the infinitesimal, we are told (p. 15) that the

  differential, or the inextensive, is to be identified with the intensive, and

the differential is regarded as the embodiment of Kant’s category of

  reality. This view (in so far as it is independent of Kant) is quoted with

  approval from Leibniz; but to me, I must confess, it seems destitute of all

  justification. It is to be observed that dx and dy, if we allow that they are

  entities at all, are not to be identified with single terms of our series, nor

yet with differences between consecutive terms, but must be always

  stretches containing an infinite number of terms, or distances

  corresponding to such stretches. Here a distinction must be made

  between series of numbers and series in which we have only measurable

  distances or stretches. The latter is the case of space and time. Here dx

and dy are not points or instants, which alone would be truly inextensive;

they are primarily numbers, and hence must correspond to infinitesimal

  stretches or distances—for it would be preposterous to assign a numerical

ratio to two points, or—as in the case of velocity—to a point and an

  instant. But dx and dy cannot represent the distances of consecutive

  points, nor yet the stretch formed by two consecutive points. Against this

we have, in the first place, the general ground that our series must be

  regarded as compact, which precludes the idea of consecutive terms. To

  evade this, if we are dealing with a series in which there are only

  stretches, not distances, would be impossible: for to say that there are

  always an infinite number of intermediate points except when the stretch

  consists of a finite number of terms would be a mere tautology. But when

there is distance, it might be said that the distance of two terms may be

  finite or infinitesimal, and that, as regards infinitesimal distances, the

  stretch is not compact, but consists of a finite number of terms. This

  being allowed for the moment, our dx and dy may be made to be the

  distances of consecutive points, or else the stretches composed of

  consecutive points. But now the distance of consecutive points,

  supposing for example that both are on one straight line, would seem to

be a constant, which would give dy/dx = ±1. We cannot suppose, in cases

  where x and y are both continuous, and the function y is one-valued, as

the Calculus requires, that x and x + dx are consecutive, but not y and y +

dy; for every value of y will be correlated with one and only one value ofx, and vice versâ; thus y cannot skip any supposed intermediate values

  between y and y + dy. Hence, given the values of x and y, even supposing

the distances of consecutive terms to differ from place to place, the value

of dy/dx will be determinate; and any other function y' which, for some

  value of x, is equal to y, will, for that value, have an equal derivative,

  which is an absurd conclusion. And leaving these mathematical

  arguments, it is evident, from the fact that dy and dx are to have a

  numerical ratio, that if they be intensive magnitudes, as is suggested, they

must be numerically measurable ones: but how this measurement is

  effected, it is certainly not easy to see. This point may be made clearer by

  confining ourselves to the fundamental case in which both x and y are

  numbers. If we regard x and x + dx as consecutive, we must suppose

  either that y and y + dy are consecutive, or that they are identical, or that

there are a finite number of terms between them, or that there are an

  infinite number. If we take stretches to measure dx and dy, it will follow

that dy/dx must be always zero, or integral, or infinite, which is absurd. It

will even follow that, if y is not constant, dy/dx must be ±1. Take for
                  2
  example y = x, where x and y are positive real numbers. As x passes

from one number to the next, y must do so likewise; for to every value of

y corresponds one of x, and y grows as x grows. Hence if y skipped the

  number next to any one of its values, it could never come back to pick it

up; but we know that every real number is among the values of y. Hence

y and y + dy must be consecutive, and dy/dx = 1. If we measure by

  distances, not stretches, the distance dy must be fixed when y is given,

and the distance dx when x is given. Now if x = 1, y = 1, dy/dx = 2; but,

  since x and y are the same number, dx and dy must be equal, since each is

the distance to the next number: therefore dy/dx = 1, which is absurd.

  Similarly, if we take for y a decreasing function, we shall find dy/dx =−1.

  Hence the admission of consecutive numbers is fatal to the Calculus; and

  since the Calculus must be maintained, the Calculus is fatal to

  consecutive numbers.

323. The notion that there must be consecutive numbers is reinforced by the

idea of continuous change, which is embodied in calling x and y

  “variables”. Change in time is a topic which we shall have to discuss at a

later stage, but which has, undoubtedly, greatly influenced the

  philosophy of the Calculus. People picture a variable to themselves—

  often unconsciously—as successively assuming a series of values, as  might happen in a dynamical problem. Thus they might say: How can x

pass from x to x, without passing through all intermediate values? And
              12

in this passage, must there not be a next value, which it assumes on first

  leaving the value x? Everything is conceived on the analogy of motion,
                        1

in which a point is supposed to pass through all intermediate positions in

its path. Whether or not this view of motion is correct, I do not now

  decide: at any rate it is irrelevant where a fundamental point in the theory

of continuous series is concerned, since time and the path of motion must

both be continuous series, and the properties of such series must be

  decided before appealing to motion to confirm our views. For my part, to

  return to Cohen, I must confess, it seems evident that intensive

  magnitude is something wholly different from infinitesimal extensive

  magnitude: for the latter must always be smaller than finite extensive

  magnitudes, and must therefore be of the same kind with them; while

  intensive magnitudes seem never in any sense smaller than any extensive

  magnitudes. Thus the metaphysical theory by which infinitesimals are to

be rescued seems, both mathematically and philosophically, destitute of

  grounds in its favour.

324. We cannot, then, agree with the following summary of Cohen’s theory

(p. 28): “That I may be able to posit an element in and for itself, is the

  desideratum, to which corresponds the instrument of thought reality. This

  instrument of thought must first be set up, in order to be able to enter into

that combination with intuition, with the consciousness of being given,

  which is completed in the principle of intensive magnitude. This

  presupposition of intensive reality is latent in all principles, and must

  therefore be made independent. This presupposition is the meaning of

  reality and the secret of the concept of the differential.” What we can

  agree to, and what, I believe, confusedly underlies the above statement,

is, that every continuum must consist of elements or terms; but these, as

we have just seen, will not fulfil the function of the dx and dy which

  occur in old-fashioned accounts of the Calculus. Nor can we agree that

  “this finite” (i.e. that which is the object of physical science) “can be

  thought as a sum of those infinitesimal intensive realities, as a definite

  integral” (p. 144). The definite integral is not a sum of elements of a

  continuum, although there are such elements: for example, the length of a

  curve, as obtained by integration, is not the sum of its points, but strictly

and only the limit of the lengths of inscribed polygons. The only sense  which can be given to the sum of the points of the curve is the logical

class to which they all belong, i.e. the curve itself, not its length. All

  lengths are magnitudes of divisibility of stretches, and all stretches

  consist of an infinite number of points; and any two terminated stretches

  have a finite ratio to each other. There is no such thing as an infinitesimal

  stretch; if there were, it would not be an element of the continuum; the

  Calculus does not require it, and to suppose its existence leads to

  contradictions. And as for the notion that in every series there must be

  consecutive terms, that was shown, in the last chapter of Part III, to

  involve an illegitimate use of mathematical induction. Hence

  infinitesimals as explaining continuity must be regarded as unnecessary,

  erroneous and self-contradictory.

* For example, Mr Latta, in his article “On the Relations of the Philosophy

of Spinoza and that of Leibniz”, Mind, N. S. No. 31.

* Principia, Bk i, Section i, Lemma xi, Scholium. The whole Scholium is

highly important, though portions of it are less free from error than the

passage quoted in the text.

* Or ratio: the German is Grenzverhältniss.

* See e.g. Riv. di Mat., vii, p. 35.42


THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE


CONTINUUM




325. The word continuity has borne among philosophers, especially since

the time of Hegel, a meaning totally unlike that given to it by Cantor.

  Thus Hegel says:* “Quantity, as we saw, has two sources: the exclusive

  unit, and the identification or equalization of these units. When we look,

  therefore, at its immediate relation to self, or at the characteristic of

  selfsameness made explicit by abstraction, quantity is Continuous

  magnitude; but when we look at the other characteristic, the One implied

in it, it is Discrete magnitude.” When we remember that quantity and

  magnitude, in Hegel, both mean “cardinal number”, we may conjecture

that this assertion amounts to the following: “Many terms, considered as

having a cardinal number, must all be members of one class; in so far as

they are each merely an instance of the class-concept, they are

  indistinguishable one from another, and in this aspect the whole which

they compose is called continuous; but in order to their maniness, they

must be different instances of the class-concept, and in this aspect the

  whole which they compose is called discrete.” Now I am far from

  denying—indeed I strongly hold—that this opposition of identity and

  diversity in a collection constitutes a fundamental problem of Logic—

  perhaps even the fundamental problem of philosophy. And being

  fundamental, it is certainly relevant to the study of the mathematical

  continuum as to everything else. But beyond this general connection, it

has no special relation to the mathematical meaning of continuity, as may

be seen at once from the fact that it has no reference whatever to order. In

this chapter, it is the mathematical meaning that is to be discussed. I have

quoted the philosophic meaning only in order to state definitely that this

is not here in question; and since disputes about words are futile, I mustask philosophers to divest themselves, for the time, of their habitual

  associations with the word, and allow it no signification but that obtained

from Cantor’s definition.

326. In confining ourselves to the arithmetical continuum, we conflict in

  another way with common preconceptions. Of the arithmetical

  continuum, M. Poincaré justly remarks:* “The continuum thus conceived

is nothing but a collection of individuals arranged in a certain order,

  infinite in number, it is true, but external to each other. This is not the

  ordinary conception, in which there is supposed to be, between the

  elements of the continuum, a sort of intimate bond which makes a whole

of them, in which the point is not prior to the line, but the line to the

point. Of the famous formula, the continuum is unity in multiplicity, the

  multiplicity alone subsists, the unity has disappeared.”

It has always been held to be an open question whether the continuum is

composed of elements; and even when it has been allowed to contain

elements, it has been often alleged to be not composed of these. This latter

view was maintained even by so stout a supporter of elements in everything

as Leibniz.† But all these views are only possible in regard to such continua

as those of space and time. The arithmetical continuum is an object selected

by definition, consisting of elements in virtue of the definition, and known to

be embodied in at least one instance, namely the segments of the rational

numbers. I shall maintain in Part VI that spaces afford other instances of the

arithmetical continuum. The chief reason for the elaborate and paradoxical

theories of space and time and their continuity, which have been constructed

by philosophers, has been the supposed contradictions in a continuum

composed of elements. The thesis of the present chapter is, that Cantor’s

continuum is free from contradictions. This thesis, as is evident, must be

firmly established, before we can allow the possibility that spatio-temporal

continuity may be of Cantor’s kind. In this argument, I shall assume, as

proved the thesis of the preceding chapter, that the continuity to be discussed

does not involve the admission of actual infinitesimals.

327. In this capricious world, nothing is more capricious than posthumous

fame. One of the most notable victims of posterity’s lack of judgment is

the Eleatic Zeno. Having invented four arguments, all immeasurably

  subtle and profound, the grossness of subsequent philosophers

  pronounced him to be a mere ingenious juggler, and his arguments to be

one and all sophisms. After two thousand years of continual refutation,  these sophisms were reinstated, and made the foundation of a

  mathematical renaissance, by a German professor, who probably never

  dreamed of any connection between himself and Zeno. Weierstrass, by

  strictly banishing all infinitesimals, has at last shown that we live in an

  unchanging world, and that the arrow, at every moment of its flight, is

  truly at rest. The only point where Zeno probably erred was in inferring

(if he did infer) that, because there is no change, therefore the world must

be in the same state at one time as at another. This consequence by no

  means follows, and in this point the German professor is more

  constructive than the ingenious Greek. Weierstrass, being able to embody

his opinions in mathematics, where familiarity with truth eliminates the

  vulgar prejudices of common sense, has been able to give to his

  propositions the respectable air of platitudes; and if the result is less

  delightful to the lover of reason than Zeno’s bold defiance, it is at any

rate more calculated to appease the mass of academic mankind.

  Zeno’s arguments are specially concerned with motion, and are not

therefore, as they stand, relevant to our present purpose. But it is instructive

to translate them, so far as possible, into arithmetical language.*

328. The first argument, that of dichotomy, asserts: “There is no motion, for

what moves must reach the middle of its course before it reaches the

end.” That is to say, whatever motion we assume to have taken place, this

  presupposes another motion, and this in turn another, and so on ad

  infinitum. Hence there is an endless regress in the mere idea of any

  assigned motion. This argument can be put into an arithmetical form, but

it appears then far less plausible. Consider a variable x which is capable

of all real (or rational) values between two assigned limits, say 0 and 1.

The class of its values is an infinite whole, whose parts are logically prior

to it: for it has parts, and it cannot subsist if any of the parts are lacking.

  Thus the numbers from 0 to 1 presuppose those from 0 to 1/2, these

  presuppose the numbers from 0 to 1/4, and so on. Hence, it would seem,

there is an infinite regress in the notion of any infinite whole; but without

such infinite wholes, real numbers cannot be defined, and arithmetical

  continuity, which applies to an infinite series, breaks down.

This argument may be met in two ways, either of which, at first sight,

might seem sufficient, but both of which are really necessary. First, we may

distinguish two kinds of infinite regresses, of which one is harmless.

Secondly, we may distinguish two kinds of whole, the collective and thedistributive, and assert that, in the latter kind, parts of equal complexity with

the whole are not logically prior to it. These two points must be separately

explained.

329. An infinite regress may be of two kinds. In the objectionable kind, two

or more propositions join to constitute the meaning of some proposition;

of these constituents, there is one at least whose meaning is similarly

  compounded; and so on ad infinitum. This form of regress commonly

  results from circular definitions. Such definitions may be expanded in a

  manner analogous to that in which continued fractions are developed

from quadratic equations. But at every stage the term to be defined will

  reappear, and no definition will result. Take for example the following:

  “Two people are said to have the same idea when they have ideas which

are similar; and ideas are similar when they contain an identical part.” If

an idea may have a part which is not an idea, such a definition is not

  logically objectionable; but if part of an idea is an idea, then, in the

  second place where identity of ideas occurs, the definition must be

  substituted; and so on. Thus wherever the meaning of a proposition is in

  question, an infinite regress is objectionable, since we never reach a

  proposition which has a definite meaning. But many infinite regresses are

not of this form. If A be a proposition whose meaning is perfectly

  definite, and A implies B, B implies C, and so on, we have an infinite

  regress of a quite unobjectionable kind. This depends upon the fact that

  implication is a synthetic relation, and that, although, if A be an aggregate

of propositions, A implies any proposition which is part of A, it by no

  means follows that any proposition which A implies is part of A. Thus

there is no logical necessity, as there was in the previous case, to

  complete the infinite regress before A acquires a meaning. If, then, it can

be shown that the implication of the parts in the whole, when the whole is

an infinite class of numbers, is of this latter kind, the regress suggested

by Zeno’s argument of dichotomy will have lost its sting.

330. In order to show that this is the case, we must distinguish wholes

  which are defined extensionally, i.e. by enumerating their terms, from

such as are defined intensionally, i.e. as the class of terms having some

  given relation to some given term, or, more simply, as a class of terms.

(For a class of terms, when it forms a whole, is merely all terms having

the class-relation to a class-concept.)* Now an extensional whole—at

least so far as human powers extend—is necessarily finite: we cannot  enumerate more than a finite number of parts belonging to a whole, and

if the number of parts be infinite, this must be known otherwise than by

  enumeration. But this is precisely what a class-concept effects: a whole

  whose parts are the terms of a class is completely defined when the class-

  concept is specified; and any definite individual either belongs, or does

not belong, to the class in question. An individual of the class is part of

the whole extension of the class, and is logically prior to this extension

  taken collectively; but the extension itself is definable without any

  reference to any specified individual, and subsists as a genuine entity

  even when the class contains no terms. And to say, of such a class, that it

is infinite, is to say that, though it has terms, the number of these terms is

not any finite number—a proposition which, again, may be established

  without the impossible process of enumerating all finite numbers. And

this is precisely the case of the real numbers between 0 and 1. They form

a definite class, whose meaning is known as soon as we know what is

  meant by real number, 0, 1 and between. The particular members of the

class, and the smaller classes contained in it, are not logically prior to the

class. Thus the infinite regress consists merely in the fact that every

  segment of real or rational numbers has parts which are again segments;

but these parts are not logically prior to it, and the infinite regress is

  perfectly harmless. Thus the solution of the difficulty lies in the theory of

  denoting and the intensional definition of a class. With this an answer is

  made to Zeno’s first argument as it appears in Arithmetic.

331. The second of Zeno’s arguments is the most famous: it is the one

  which concerns Achilles and the tortoise. “The slower”, it says, “will

  never be overtaken by the swifter, for the pursuer must first reach the

  point whence the fugitive is departed, so that the slower must always

  necessarily remain ahead.” When this argument is translated into

  arithmetical language, it is seen to be concerned with the one-one

  correlation of two infinite classes. If Achilles were to overtake the

  tortoise, then the course of the tortoise would be part of that of Achilles;

but, since each is at each moment at some point of his course,

  simultaneity establishes a one-one correlation between the positions of

  Achilles and those of the tortoise. Now it follows from this that the

  tortoise, in any given time, visits just as many places as Achilles does;

  hence—so it is hoped we shall conclude—it is impossible that the

  tortoise’s path should be part of that of Achilles. This point is purely  ordinal, and may be illustrated by Arithmetic. Consider, for example, 1 +

2x and 2 + x, and let x lie between 0 and 1, both inclusive. For each value

of 1 + 2x there is one and only one value of 2 + x, and vice versâ. Hence

as x grows from 0 to 1, the number of values assumed by 1 + 2x will be

the same as the number assumed by 2 + x. But 1 + 2x started from 1 and

ends at 3, while 2 + x started from 2 and ends at 3. Thus there should be

half as many values of 2 + x as of 1 + 2x. This very serious difficulty has

  been resolved, as we have seen, by Cantor; but as it belongs rather to the

  philosophy of the infinite than to that of the continuum, I leave its further

  discussion to the next chapter.

332. The third argument is concerned with the arrow. “If everything is in

rest or in motion in a space equal to itself, and if what moves is always in

the instant, the arrow in its flight is immovable.” This has usually been

  thought so monstrous a paradox as scarcely to deserve serious discussion.

To my mind, I must confess, it seems a very plain statement of a very

  elementary fact, and its neglect has, I think, caused the quagmire in

  which the philosophy of change has long been immersed. In Part VII, I

  shall set forth a theory of change which may be called static, since it

  allows the justice of Zeno’s remark. For the present, I wish to divest the

  remark of all reference to change. We shall then find that it is a very

  important and very widely applicable platitude, namely: “Every possible

  value of a variable is a constant.” If x be a variable which can take all

  values from 0 to 1, all the values it can take are definite numbers, such as

1/2 or 1/3, which are all absolute constants. And here a few words may

be inserted concerning variables. A variable is a fundamental concept of

  logic, as of daily life. Though it is always connected with some class, it is

not the class, nor a particular member of the class, nor yet the whole

class, but any member of the class. On the other hand, it is not the

  concept “any member of the class”, but it is that (or those) which this

  concept denotes. On the logical difficulties of this conception, I need not

now enlarge; enough has been said on this subject in Part I. The usual x

in Algebra, for example, does not stand for a particular number, nor for

all numbers, nor yet for the class number. This may be easily seen by

  considering some identity, say
              22
      (x + 1) = x + 2x + 1.

 This certainly does not mean what it would become if, say, 391 were

substituted for x, though it implies that the result of such a substitution would

be a true proposition. Nor does it mean what results from substituting for x

the class-concept number, for we cannot add 1 to this concept. For the same

reason, x does not denote the concept any number: to this, too, 1 cannot be

added. It denotes the disjunction formed by the various numbers; or at least

this view may be taken as roughly correct.* The values of x are then the

terms of the disjunction; and each of these is a constant. This simple logical

fact seems to constitute the essence of Zeno’s contention that the arrow is

always at rest.

333. But Zeno’s argument contains an element which is specially applicable

to continua. In the case of motion, it denies that there is such a thing as a

  state of motion. In the general case of a continuous variable, it may be

  taken as denying actual infinitesimals. For infinitesimals are an attempt

to extend to the values of a variable the variability which belongs to it

  alone. When once it is firmly realized that all the values of a variable are

  constants, it becomes easy to see, by taking any two such values, that

their difference is always finite, and hence that there are no infinitesimal

  differences. If x be a variable which may take all real values from 0 to 1,

  then, taking any two of these values, we see that their difference is finite,

  although x is a continuous variable. It is true the difference might have

  been less than the one we chose; but if it had been, it would still have

  been finite. The lower limit to possible differences is zero, but all

  possible differences are finite; and in this there is no shadow of

  contradiction. This static theory of the variable is due to the

  mathematicians, and its absence in Zeno’s day led him to suppose that

  continuous change was impossible without a state of change, which

  involves infinitesimals and the contradiction of a body’s being where it is

not.

334. The last of Zeno’s arguments is that of the measure. This is closely

  analogous to one which I employed in the preceding chapter, against

  those who regard dx and dy as distances of consecutive terms. It is only

  applicable, as M. Noël points out (loc. cit. p. 116), against those who

hold to indivisibles among stretches, the previous arguments being held

to have sufficiently refuted the partisans of infinite divisibility. We are

now to suppose a set of discrete moments and discrete places, motion

  consisting in the fact that at one moment a body is in one of these  discrete places, in another at another.













 


  Imagine three parallel lines composed of the points a,b, c, d; a' , b' , c' , d' ;

a'' , b'' c'' , d'' respectively. Suppose the second line, in one instant, to move

all its points to the left by one place, while the third moves them all one place

to the right. Then although the instant is indivisible, c' , which was over c'' ,

and is now over a'' , must have passed b'' during the instant; hence the instant

is divisible, contra hyp. This argument is virtually that by which I proved, in

the preceding chapter, that, if there are consecutive terms, then dy/dx = ±1

always; or rather, it is this argument together with an instance in which dy/dx

= 2. It may be put thus: Let y, z be two functions of x, and let dy/dx =−1.


Then , which contradicts the principle that the value of every

derivative must be ±1. To the argument in Zeno’s form, M. Evellin, who is an

advocate of indivisible stretches, replies that a'' and b' , do not cross each

other at all.* For if instants are indivisible—and this is the hypothesis—all

we can say is, that at one instant a' is over a'' , in the next, c' , is over a'' .

Nothing has happened between the instants, and to suppose that a'' and b'

have crossed is to beg the question by a covert appeal to the continuity of

motion. This reply is valid, I think, in the case of motion; both time and space

may, without positive contradiction, be held to be discrete, by adhering

strictly to distances in addition to stretches. Geometry, Kinematics and

Dynamics become false; but there is no very good reason to think them true.

In the case of Arithmetic, the matter is otherwise, since no empirical question

of existence is involved. And in this case, as we see from the above argument

concerning derivatives, Zeno’s argument is absolutely sound. Numbers areentities whose nature can be established beyond question; and among

numbers, the various forms of continuity which occur cannot be denied

without positive contradiction. For this reason the problem of continuity is

better discussed in connection with numbers than in connection with space,

time or motion.

335. We have now seen that Zeno’s arguments, though they prove a very

great deal, do not prove that the continuum, as we have become

  acquainted with it, contains any contradictions whatever. Since his day

the attacks on the continuum have not, so far as I know, been conducted

with any new or more powerful weapons. It only remains, therefore, to

  make a few general remarks. The notion to which Cantor gives the name

of continuum may, of course, be called by any other name in or out of the

  dictionary, and it is open to every one to assert that he himself means

  something quite different by the continuum. But these verbal questions

are purely frivolous. Cantor’s merit lies, not in meaning what other

  people mean, but in telling us what he means himself—an almost unique

merit, where continuity is concerned. He has defined, accurately and

  generally, a purely ordinal notion, free, as we now see, from

  contradictions, and sufficient for all Analysis, Geometry and Dynamics.

This notion was presupposed in existing mathematics, though it was not

known exactly what it was that was presupposed. And Cantor, by his

  almost unexampled lucidity, has successfully analysed the extremely

  complex nature of spatial series, by which, as we shall see in Part VI, he

has rendered possible a revolution in the philosophy of space and motion.

The salient points in the definition of the continuum are (1) the

  connection with the doctrine of limits, (2) the denial of infinitesimal

  segments. These two points being borne in mind, the whole philosophy

of the subject becomes illuminated.

336. The denial of infinitesimal segments resolves an antinomy which had

long been an open scandal, I mean the antinomy that the continuum both

does and does not consist of elements. We see now that both may be said,

  though in different senses. Every continuum is a series consisting of

  terms, and the terms, if not indivisible, at any rate are not divisible into

new terms of the continuum. In this sense there are elements. But if we

take consecutive terms together with their asymmetrical relation as

  constituting what may be called (though not in the sense of Part IV) an

  ordinal element, then, in this sense, our continuum has no elements. Ifwe take a stretch to be essentially serial, so that it must consist of at least

  two terms, then there are no elementary stretches; and if our continuum

be one in which there is distance, then likewise there are no elementary

  distances. But in neither of these cases is there the slightest logical

  ground for elements. The demand for consecutive terms springs, as we

saw in Part III, from an illegitimate use of mathematical induction. And

as regards distance, small distances are no simpler than large ones, but

all, as we saw in Part III, are alike simple. And large distances do not

  presuppose small ones: being intensive magnitudes, they may exist where

there are no smaller ones at all. Thus the infinite regress from greater to

  smaller distances or stretches is of the harmless kind, and the lack of

  elements need not cause any logical inconvenience. Hence the antinomy

is resolved, and the continuum, so far at least as I am able to discover, is

  wholly free from contradictions.

It only remains to inquire whether the same conclusion holds concerning

the infinite—an inquiry with which this Fifth Part will come to a close.


* Smaller Logic, § 100, Wallace’s Translation, p. 188.

* Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale, Vol. i, p. 26.

† See The Philosophy of Leibniz, by the present author, Chap. ix.

* Not being a Greek scholar, I pretend to no first-hand authority as to what

Zeno really did say or mean. The form of his four arguments which I shall

employ is derived from the interesting article of M. Noël, “Le mouvement et

les arguments de Zénon d’Elée”, Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale, Vol.

i, pp. 107–125. These arguments are in any case well worthy of

consideration, and as they are, to me, merely a text for discussion, their

historical correctness is of little importance.

* For precise statements, v. supra, Part I, Chaps. 6 and 10.

* See Chap. 8, esp. §93.

* Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale, Vol. i, p. 386.43


THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE


INFINITE




337. In our previous discussions of the infinite we have been compelled to

go into so many mathematical points that there has been no adequate

  opportunity for purely philosophical treatment of the question. In the

  present chapter, I wish, leaving mathematics aside, to inquire whether

any contradiction can be found in the notion of the infinite.

  Those who have objected to infinity have not, as a rule, thought it worth

while to exhibit precise contradictions in it. To have done so is one of the

great merits of Kant. Of the mathematical antinomies, the second, which is

concerned, essentially, with the question whether or not the continuum has

elements, was resolved in the preceding chapter, on the supposition that there

may be an actual infinite—that is, it was reduced to the question of infinite

number. The first antinomy is concerned with the infinite, but in an

essentially temporal form; for Arithmetic, therefore, this antinomy is

irrelevant, except on the Kantian view that numbers must be schematized in

time. This view is supported by the argument that it takes time to count, and

therefore without time we could not know the number of anything. By this

argument we can prove that battles always happen near telegraph wires,

because if they did not we should not hear of them. In fact, we can prove

generally that we know what we know. But it remains conceivable that we

don’t know what we don’t know; and hence the necessity of time remains

unproved.

Of other philosophers, Zeno has already been examined in connection with

the continuum; and the paradox which underlies Achilles and the tortoise will

be examined shortly. Plato’s Parmenides—which is perhaps the best

collection of antinomies ever made—is scarcely relevant here, being con-

cerned with difficulties more fundamental than any that have to do withinfinity. And as for Hegel, he cries wolf so often that when he gives the alarm

of a contradiction we finally cease to be disturbed. Leibniz, as we have seen,

gives as a contradiction the one-one correlation of whole and part, which

underlies the Achilles. This is, in fact, the only point on which most

arguments against infinity turn. In what follows I shall put the arguments in a

form adapted to our present mathematical knowledge; and this will prevent

me from quoting them from any classic opponents of infinity.

338. Let us first recapitulate briefly the positive theory of the infinite to

  which we have been led. Accepting as indefinable the notion proposition

and the notion constituent of a proposition, we may denote by (a) a

  proposition in which a is a constituent. We can then transform a into a

  variable x, and consider (x), where (x) is any proposition differing from 

  (a), if at all, only by the fact that some other object appears in the place of

a; (x) is what we called a propositional function. It will happen, in

  general, that (x) is true for some values of x and false for others. All the

  values of x, for which (x) is true, form what we called the class defined by

  (x); thus every propositional function defines a class, and the actual

  enumeration of the members of a class is not necessary for its definition.

  Again, without enumeration we can define the similarity of two classes:

  two classes u, v are similar when there is a one-one relation R such that

“x is a u” always implies “there is a v to which x has the relation R”, and

“y is a v” always implies “there is a u which has the relation R to y”.

  Further, R is a one-one relation if xRy, xRz together always imply that y is

  identical with z, and xRz, yRz together always imply that x is identical

with y; and “x is identical with y” is defined as meaning “every

  propositional function which holds of x also holds of y”. We now define

the cardinal number of a class u as the class of all classes which are

  similar to u; and every class has a cardinal number, since “u is similar to

v” is a propositional function of v, if v be variable. Moreover u itself is a

  member of its cardinal number, since every class is similar to itself. The

  above definition of a cardinal number, it should be observed, is based

  upon the notion of propositional functions, and nowhere involves

  enumeration; consequently there is no reason to suppose that there will

be any difficulty as regards the numbers of classes whose terms cannot

be counted in the usual elementary fashion. Classes can be divided into

  two kinds, according as they are or are not similar to proper parts of

  themselves. In the former case they are called infinite, in the latter finite.  Again, the number of a class defined by a propositional function which is

  always false is called 0; 1 is defined as the number of a class u such that

there is a term x, belonging to u, such that “y is a u and y differs from x”

is always false; and if n be any number, n + 1 is defined as the number of

a class u which has a member x, such that the propositional function “y is

a u and y differs from x” defines a class whose number is n. If n is finite,

n + 1 differs from n; if not, not. In this way, starting from 0, we obtain a

  progression of numbers, since any number n leads to a new number n +

1. It is easily proved that all the numbers belonging to the progression

  which starts from 1 and is generated in this way are different; that is to

say, if n belongs to this progression, and m be any one of its

  predecessors, a class of n terms cannot have a one-one correlation with

one of m terms. The progression so defined is the series of finite

  numbers. But there is no reason to think that all numbers can be so

  obtained; indeed it is capable of formal proof that the number of the finite

  numbers themselves cannot be a term in the progression of finite

  numbers. A number not belonging to this progression is called infinite.

The proof that n and n + 1 are different numbers proceeds from the fact

that 0 and 1, or 1 and 2, are different numbers, by means of mathematical

  induction; if n and n + 1 be not terms of this progression, the proof fails;

and what is more, there is direct proof of the contrary. But since the

  previous proof depended upon mathematical induction, there is not the

  slightest reason why the theorem should extend to infinite numbers.

  Infinite numbers cannot be expressed, like finite ones, by the decimal

  system of notation, but they can be distinguished by the classes to which

they apply. The finite numbers being all defined by the above

  progression, if a class u has terms, but not any finite number of terms,

then it has an infinite number. This is the positive theory of infinity.

339. That there are infinite classes is so evident that it will scarcely be

  denied. Since, however, it is capable of formal proof, it may be as well to

  prove it. A very simple proof is that suggested in the Parmenides, which

is as follows. Let it be granted that there is a number 1. Then 1 is, or has

Being, and therefore there is Being. But 1 and Being are two: hence there

is a number 2; and so on. Formally, we have proved that 1 is not the

  number of numbers; we prove that n is the number of numbers from 1 to

n, and that these numbers together with Being form a class which has a

new finite number, so that n is not the number of finite numbers. Thus 1is not the number of finite numbers; and if n − 1 is not the number of

  finite numbers, no more is n. Hence the finite numbers, by mathematical

  induction, are all contained in the class of things which are not the

  number of finite numbers. Since the relation of similarity is reflexive for

  classes, every class has a number; therefore the class of finite numbers

has a number which, not being finite, is infinite. A better proof,

  analogous to the above, is derived from the fact that, if n be any finite

  number, the number of numbers from 0 up to and including n is n + 1,

  whence it follows that n is not the number of numbers. Again, it may be

  proved directly, by the correlation of whole and part, that the number of

  propositions or concepts is infinite.* For of every term or concept there is

an idea, different from that of which it is the idea, but again a term or

  concept. On the other hand, not every term or concept is an idea. There

are tables, and ideas of tables; numbers, and ideas of numbers; and so on.

  Thus there is a one-one relation between terms and ideas, but ideas are

only some among terms. Hence there is an infinite number of terms and

of ideas.*

340. The possibility that whole and part may have the same number of

  terms is, it must be confessed, shocking to common-sense. Zeno’s

  Achilles ingeniously shows that the opposite view also has shocking

  consequences; for if whole and part cannot be correlated term for term, it

does strictly follow that, if two material points travel along the same path,

the one following the other, the one which is behind can never catch up:

if it did, we should have, correlating simultaneous positions, a unique and

  reciprocal correspondence of all the terms of a whole with all the terms

of a part. Common-sense, therefore, is here in a very sorry plight; it must

  choose between the paradox of Zeno and the paradox of Cantor. I do not

  propose to help it, since I consider that, in the face of proofs, it ought to

  commit suicide in despair. But I will give the paradox of Cantor a form

  resembling that of Zeno. Tristram Shandy, as we know, took two years

  writing the history of the first two days of his life, and lamented that, at

this rate, material would accumulate faster than he could deal with it, so

that he could never come to an end. Now I maintain that, if he had lived

for ever, and not wearied of his task, then, even if his life had continued

as eventfully as it began, no part of his biography would have remained

  unwritten. This paradox, which, as I shall show, is strictly correlative to

the Achilles, may be called for convenience the Tristram Shandy.In cases of this kind, no care is superfluous in rendering our arguments

formal. I shall therefore set forth both the Achilles and the Tristram Shandy

in strict logical shape.

    I. (1) For every position of the tortoise there is one and only one of

    Achilles; for every position of Achilles there is one and only one of the

    tortoise.


    (2) Hence the series of positions occupied by Achilles has the same

    number of terms as the series of positions occupied by the tortoise.

    (3) A part has fewer terms than a whole in which it is contained and with

    which it is not coextensive.

    (4) Hence the series of positions occupied by the tortoise is not a proper

    part of the series of positions occupied by Achilles.


    II. (1) Tristram Shandy writes in a year the events of a day.


    (2) The series of days and years has no last term.

    (3) The events of the nth day are written in the nth year.

    (4) Any assigned day is the nth, for a suitable value of n.

    (5) Hence any assigned day will be written about.

    (6) Hence no part of the biography will remain unwritten.

    (7) Since there is a one-one correlation between the times of happening

    and the times of writing, and the former are part of the latter, the whole

    and the part have the same number of terms.


Let us express both these paradoxes as abstractly as possible. For this

purpose, let u be a compact series of any kind, and let x be a variable which

can take all values in u after a certain value, which we will call 0. Let f(x) be

a one-valued function of x, and x a one-valued function of f(x); also let all the

values of f(x) belong to u. Then the arguments are the following.

I. Let f(0) be a term preceding 0; let f(x) grow as x grows, i.e. if xP x'

(where P is the generating relation), let f(x) P f(x' ). Further let f(x) take all

values in u intermediate between any two values of f(x). If, then, for some

value a of x, such that 0 P a, we have f(a) = a, then the series of values of f(x)

will be all from f(0) to a, while that of x will be only the terms from 0 to a,

which are a part of those from f(0) to a. Thus to suppose f(a) = a is to suppose

a one-one correlation, term for term, of whole and part, which Zeno andcommon-sense pronounce impossible.

II. Let f(x) be a function which is 0 when x is 0, and which grows

uniformly as x grows, our series being one in which there is measurement.

Then if x takes all values after 0, so does f(x); and if f(x) takes all such values,

so does x. The class of values of the one is therefore identical with that of the

other. But if at any time the value of x is greater than that of f(x), since f(x)

grows at a uniform rate, x will always be greater than f(x). Hence for any

assigned value of x, the class of values of f(x) from 0 to f(x) is a proper part of

the values of x from 0 to x. Hence we might infer that all the values of f(x)

were a proper part of all the values of x; but this, as we have seen, is

fallacious.

  These two paradoxes are correlative. Both, by reference to segments, may

be stated in terms of limits. The Achilles proves that two variables in a

continuous series, which approach equality from the same side, cannot ever

have a common limit; the Tristram Shandy proves that two variables which

start from a common term, and proceed in the same direction, but diverge

more and more, may yet determine the same limiting class (which, however,

is not necessarily a segment, because segments were defined as having terms

beyond them). The Achilles assumes that whole and part cannot be similar,

and deduces a paradox; the other, starting from a platitude, deduces that

whole and part may be similar. For common-sense, it must be confessed, this

is a most unfortunate state of things.

341. There is no doubt which is the correct course. The Achilles must be

  rejected, being directly contradicted by Arithmetic. The Tristram Shandy

must be accepted, since it does not involve the axiom that the whole

  cannot be similar to the part. This axiom, as we have seen, is essential to

the proof of the Achilles; and it is an axiom doubtless very agreeable to

  common-sense. But there is no evidence for the axiom except supposed

  self-evidence, and its admission leads to perfectly precise contradictions.

The axiom is not only useless, but positively destructive, in mathematics,

and against its rejection there is nothing to be set except prejudice. It is

one of the chief merits of proofs that they instil a certain scepticism as to

the result proved. As soon as it was found that the similarity of whole and

part could be proved to be impossible for every finite whole,* it became

not unplausible to suppose that for infinite wholes, where the

  impossibility could not be proved, there was in fact no such

  impossibility. In fact, as regards the numbers dealt with in daily life—in  engineering, astronomy, or accounts, even those of Rockefeller and the

  Chancellor of the Exchequer—the similarity of whole and part is

  impossible; and hence the supposition that it is always impossible is

  easily explained. But the supposition rests on no better foundation than

that formerly entertained by the inductive philosophers of Central Africa,

that all men are black.

342. It may be worth while, as helping to explain the difference between

  finite and infinite wholes, to point out that whole and part are terms

  capable of two definitions where the whole is finite, but of only one of

these, at least practically, where the whole is infinite.† A finite whole

may be taken collectively, as such and such individuals, A, B, C, D, E

say. A part of this whole may be obtained by enumerating some, but not

all, of the terms composing the whole; and in this way a single individual

is part of the whole. Neither the whole nor its parts need be taken as

  classes, but each may be defined by extension, i.e. by enumeration of

  individuals. On the other hand, the whole and the parts may be both

  defined by intension, i.e. by class-concepts. Thus we know without

  enumeration that Englishmen are part of Europeans; for whoever is an

  Englishman is a European, but not vice versâ. Though this might be

  established by enumeration, it need not be so established. When we come

to infinite wholes, this twofold definition disappears, and we have only

the definition by intension. The whole and the part must both be classes,

and the definition of whole and part is effected by means of the notions

of a variable and of logical implication. If a be a class-concept, an

  individual of a is a term having to a that specific relation which we call

the class-relation. If now b be another class such that, for all values of

x,“x is an a” implies “x is a b”, then the extension of a (i.e. the variable x)

is said to be part of the extension of b.* Here no enumeration of

  individuals is required, and the relation of whole and part has no longer

that simple meaning which it had where finite parts were concerned. To

say now that a and b are similar, is to say that there exists some one-one

  relation R fulfilling the following conditions: if x be an a, there is a term

y of the class b such that xRy; if y' be a b, there is a term x' of the class a

such that x' Ry. Although a is part of b, such a state of things cannot be

  proved impossible, for the impossibility could only be proved by

  enumeration, and there is no reason to suppose enumeration possible.

The definition of whole and part without enumeration is the key to the  whole mystery. The above definition, which is due to Professor Peano, is

that which is naturally and necessarily applied to infinite wholes. For

  example, the primes are a proper part of the integers, but this cannot be

  proved by enumeration. It is deduced from “if x be a prime, x is a

  number”, and “if x be a number, it does not follow that x is a prime”.

That the class of primes should be similar to the class of numbers only

  seems impossible because we imagine whole and part defined by

  enumeration. As soon as we rid ourselves of this idea the supposed

  contradiction vanishes.

343. It is very important to realize, as regards ω or α, that neither has a
                                                            0

  number immediately preceding it. This characteristic they share with all

  limits, for the limit of a series is never immediately preceded by any term

of the series which it limits. But ω is in some sense logically prior to

  other limits, for the finite ordinal numbers together with ω present the

  formal type of a progression together with its limit. When it is forgotten

that ω has no immediate predecessor, all sorts of contradictions emerge.

For suppose n to be the last number before ω; then n is a finite number,

and the number of finite numbers is n + 1. In fact, to say that ω has no

  predecessor is merely to say that the finite numbers have no last term.

  Though ω is preceded by all finite numbers, it is not preceded

  immediately by any of them: there is none next to ω. Cantor’s transfinite

  numbers have the peculiarity that, although there is one next after any

  assigned number, there is not always one next before. Thus there seem to

be gaps in the series. We have the series 1, 2, 3, … ν, …, which is infinite

and has no last term. We have another series ω, ω + 1, ω + 2, … ω + ν,

… which equally is infinite and has no last term. This second series

  comes wholly after the first, though there is no one term of the first

  which ω immediately succeeds. This state of things may, however, be

  paralleled by very elementary series, such as the series whose general

  terms are 1 − 1/ν and 2 − 1/ν, where ν may be any finite integer. The

  second series comes wholly after the first, and has a definite first term,

  namely 1. But there is no term of the first series which immediately

  precedes 1. What is necessary, in order that the second series should

  come after the first, is that there should be some series in which both are

  contained. If we call an ordinal part of a series any series which can be

  obtained by omitting some of the terms of our series without changing

the order of the remaining terms, then the finite and transfinite ordinalsall form one series, whose generating relation is that of ordinal whole and

part among the series to which the various ordinals apply. If ν be any

  finite ordinal, series of the type ν are ordinal parts of progressions;

  similarly every series of the type ω + 1 contains a progression as an

  ordinal part. The relation ordinal part is transitive and asymmetrical, and

  thus the finite and transfinite ordinals all belong to one series. The

  existence of ω (in the mathematical sense of existence) is not open to

  question, since ω is the type of order presented by the natural numbers

  themselves. To deny ω would be to affirm that there is a last finite

  number—a view which, as we have seen, leads at once to definite

  contradictions. And when this is admitted, ω + 1 is the type of the series

of ordinals including ω, i.e. of the series whose terms are all series of

  integers from 1 up to any finite number together with the whole series of

  integers. Hence all the infinite hierarchy of transfinite numbers easily

  follows.

344. The usual objections to infinite numbers, and classes, and series, and

the notion that the infinite as such is self-contradictory, may thus be

  dismissed as groundless. There remains, however, a very grave difficulty,

  connected with the contradiction discussed in Chapter 10 This difficulty

does not concern the infinite as such, but only certain very large infinite

  classes. Briefly, the difficulty may be stated as follows. Cantor has given

a proof * that there can be no greatest cardinal number, and when this

  proof is examined, it is found to state that, if u be a class, the number of

  classes contained in u is greater than the number of terms of u, or (what
                                            α
is equivalent), if α be any number, 2 is greater than α. But there are

certain classes concerning which it is easy to give an apparently valid

  proof that they have as many terms as possible. Such are the class of all

  terms, the class of all classes, or the class of all propositions. Thus it

  would seem as though Cantor’s proof must contain some assumption

  which is not verified in the case of such classes. But when we apply the

  reasoning of his proof to the cases in question, we find ourselves met by

  definite contradictions, of which the one discussed in Chapter 10 is an

  example.† The difficulty arises whenever we try to deal with the class of

all entities absolutely, or with any equally numerous class; but for the

  difficulty of such a view, one would be tempted to say that the

  conception of the totality of things, or of the whole universe of entities

and existents, is in some way illegitimate and inherently contrary to  logic. But it is undesirable to adopt so desperate a measure as long as

hope remains of some less heroic solution.

It may be observed, to begin with, that the class of numbers is not, as

might be supposed, one of those in regard to which difficulties occur. Among

finite numbers, if n were the number of numbers, we should have to infer that

n − 1 was the greatest of numbers, so that there would be no number n at all.

But this is a peculiarity of finite numbers. The number of numbers up to and

including α is α, but this is also the number of numbers up to and including
            00

α, where β is any finite ordinal or any ordinal applicable to a denumerable
β

well-ordered series. Thus the number of numbers up to and including α,

where α is infinite, is usually less than α, and there is no reason to suppose

that the number of all numbers is the greatest number. The number of

numbers may be less than the greatest number, and no contradiction arises

from the fact (if it be a fact) that the number of individuals is greater than the

number of numbers.

But although the class of numbers causes no difficulty, there are other

classes with which it is very hard to deal. Let us first examine Cantor’s proofs

that there is no greatest cardinal number, and then discuss the cases in which

contradictions arise.

345. In the first of Cantor’s proofs,* the argument depends upon the

  supposed fact that there is a one-one correspondence between the

  ordinals and the cardinals.† We saw that, when we consider the cardinal

  number of the series of the type represented by any ordinal, an infinite

  number of ordinals correspond to one cardinal—for example, all ordinals

of the second class, which form a non-denumerable collection,

  correspond to the single cardinal α. But there is another method of
                                          0

  correlation, in which only one ordinal corresponds to each cardinal. This

  method results from considering the series of cardinals itself. In this

  series, α corresponds to ω, α to ω + 1, and so on: there is always one
          01

and only one ordinal to describe the type of series presented by the

  cardinals from 0 up to any one of them. It seems to be assumed that there

is a cardinal for every ordinal, and that no class can have so many terms

that no well-ordered series can have a greater number of terms. For my

part I do not see any grounds for either supposition, and I do see definite

  grounds against the latter. For every term of a series must be an

  individual, and must be a different individual (a point often overlooked)from every other term of the series. It must be different, because there are

no instances of an individual: each individual is absolutely unique, and in

the nature of the case only one. But two terms in a series are two, and are

  therefore not one and the same individual. This most important point is

  obscured by the fact that we do not, as a rule, fully describe the terms of

our series. When we say: Consider a series a, b, c, d, b, d, e, a, …, where

  terms are repeated at intervals—such a series, for example, as is

  presented by the digits in a decimal—we forget the theorem that where

there is repetition our series is only obtainable by correlation; that is, the

  terms do not themselves have an order, but they have a one-many (not

  one-one) relation to terms which have an order.* Hence if we wish for a

  genuine series we must either go back to the series with which our terms

are correlated, or we must form the complex terms compounded of those

of the original series and those of the correlated series in pairs. But in

  either of these series there is no repetition. Hence every ordinal number

must correspond to a series of individuals, each of which differs from

each other. Now it may be doubted whether all individuals form a series

at all: for my part I cannot discover any transitive asymmetrical relation

  which holds between every pair of terms. Cantor, it is true, regards it as a

law of thought that every definite aggregate can be well-ordered; but I

see no ground for this opinion. But allowing this view, the ordinals will

  have a perfectly definite maximum, namely that ordinal which represents

the type of series formed by all terms without exception.† If the

  collection of all terms does not form a series it is impossible to prove that

there must be a maximum ordinal, which in any case there are reasons for

  denying.‡ But in this case we may legitimately doubt whether there are

as many ordinals as there are cardinals. Of course, if all cardinals form a

  well-ordered series, then there must be an ordinal for each cardinal. But

  although Cantor professes that he has a proof that of two different

  cardinals one must be the greater (Math. Annalen, xlvi, § 2), I cannot

  persuade myself that he does more than prove that there is a series,

  whose terms are cardinals of which any one is greater or less than any

other. That all cardinals are in this series I see no reason to think. There

may be two classes such that it is not possible to correlate either with a

part of the other; in this case the cardinal number of the one will be

  neither equal to, greater than, nor less than, that of the other. If all terms

belong to a single well-ordered series, this is impossible; but if not, I  cannot see any way of showing that such a case cannot arise. Thus the

  first proof that there is no cardinal which cannot be increased seems to

  break down.

346. The second of the proofs above referred to§ is quite different, and is

far more definite. The proof is interesting and important on its own

  account, and will be produced in outline. The article in which it occurs

  consists of three points: (1) a simple proof that there are powers higher

than the first, (2) the remark that this method of proof can be applied to

any power, (3) the application of the method to prove that there are

  powers higher than that of the continuum.* Let us examine the first of the

  above points, and then see whether the method is really general.

Let m and w, Cantor says, be two mutually exclusive characters, and

consider a collection M of elements E, where each element E is a

denumerable collection, x, x,…x,…, and each x is either an m or a w. (The
                            12n

two characters m and w may be considered respectively as greater and less

than some fixed term. Thus the x’s may be rational numbers, each of which is

an m when it is greater than 1, and a w when it is less than 1. These remarks

are logically irrelevant, but they make the argument easier to follow.) The

collection M is to consist of all possible elements E of the above description.

Then M is not denumerable, i.e. is of a power higher than the first. For let us

take any denumerable collection of E’s, which are defined as follows:


      E = (a, a, … a, …)
          111121n

      E = (a, a, … a, …)
          221222n

          ………………….

      E = (a, a, … a, …)
          pp1p2pn

          ………………..

 


  where the a’s are each an m or a w in some determinate manner. (For

example, the first p terms of E might be m’s, the rest all w’s. Or any other
                                  p

law might be suggested, which insures that the E’s of our series are all

different.) Then however our series of E’s be chosen, we can always find a

term E, belonging to the collection M, but not to the denumerable series of
      0

E’s. For let E be the series (b, b,…b …), where, for every n, b is
              012nn

different from a—i.e. if a is an m, b is a w, and vice versâ. Then every
                  nnnnnone of our denumerable series of E’s contains at least one term not identical

with the corresponding term of E, and hence E is not any one of the terms
                                      00

of our denumerable series of E’s. Hence no such series can contain all the

E’s, and therefore the E’s are not denumerable, i.e. M has a power higher than

the first.

We need not stop to examine the proof that there is a power higher than

that of the continuum, which is easily obtained from the above proof. We

may proceed at once to the general proof that, given any collection whatever,

there is a collection of a higher power. This proof is quite as simple as the

proof of the particular case. It proceeds as follows. Let u be any class, and

consider the class K of relations such that, if R be a relation of the class, every

term of the class u has the relation R either to 0 or to 1. (Any other pair of

terms will do as well as 0 and 1.) Then the class K has a higher power than

the class u. To prove this, observe in the first place that K has certainly not a

lower power; for, if x be any u, there will be a relation R of the class K such

that every u except x has the relation R to 0, but x has this relation to 1.

Relations of this kind, for the various values of x, form a class having a one-

one correlation with the terms of u, and contained in the class K. Hence K has

at least the same power as u. To prove that K has a greater power, consider

any class contained in K and having a one-one correlation with u. Then any

relation of this class may be called R, where x is some u—the suffix x
                                          x

denoting correlation with x. Let us now define a relation R' by the following

conditions: for every term x of u for which x has the relation R to 0, let x
                                                                        x

have the relation R' to 1; and for every term y of u for which y has the relation

R to 1, let y have the relation R' to 0. Then R' is defined for all terms of u,
y

and is a relation of the class K; but it is not any one of the relations R.
                                                                                x

Hence, whatever class contained in K and of the same power as u we may

take, there is always a term of K not belonging to this class; and therefore K

has a higher power than u.

347. We may, to begin with, somewhat simplify this argument, by

  eliminating the mention of 0 and 1 and relations to them. Each of the

  relations of the class K is defined when we know which of the terms of u

  have this relation to 0, that is, it is defined by means of a class contained

in u (including the null-class and u itself). Thus there is one relation of

the class K for every class contained in u, and the number of K is the

  same as that of classes contained in u. Thus if k be any class whatever,the logical product ku is a class contained in u, and the number of K is

that of ku, where k is a variable which may be any class. Thus the

  argument is reduced to this: that the number of classes contained in any

class exceeds the number of terms belonging to the class.*

  Another form of the same argument is the following. Take any relation R

which has the two properties (1) that its domain, which we will call ρ, is

equal to its converse domain, (2) that no two terms of the domain have

exactly the same set of relata. Then by means of R, any term of ρ is correlated

with a class contained in ρ, namely the class of relata to which the said term

is referent; and this correlation is one-one. We have to show that at least one

class contained in ρ is omitted in this correlation. The class omitted is the

class w which consists of all terms of the domain which do not have the

relation R to themselves, i.e. the class w which is the domain of the logical

product of R and diversity. For, if y be any term of the domain, and therefore

of the converse domain, y belongs to w if it does not belong to the class

correlated with y, and does not belong to w in the contrary case. Hence w is

not the same class as the correlate of y; and this applies to whatever term y we

select. Hence the class w is necessarily omitted in the correlation.

348. The above argument, it must be confessed, appears to contain no

  dubitable assumption. Yet there are certain cases in which the conclusion

  seems plainly false. To begin with the class of all terms. If we assume, as

was done in § 47, that every constituent of every proposition is a term,

then classes will be only some among terms. And conversely, since there

is, for every term, a class consisting of that term only, there is a one-one

  correlation of all terms with some classes. Hence the number of classes

  should be the same as the number of terms.* This case is adequately met

by the doctrine of types,† and so is the exactly analogous case of classes

and classes of classes. But if we admit the notion of all objects‡ of every

kind, it becomes evident that classes of objects must be only some among

  objects, while yet Cantor’s argument would show that there are more of

  them than there are objects. Or again, take the class of propositions.

  Every object can occur in some proposition, and it seems indubitable that

there are at least as many propositions as there are objects. For, if u be a

  fixed class, “x is a u” will be a different proposition for every different

  value of x; if, according to the doctrine of types, we hold that, for a given

u, x has a restricted range if “x is a u” is to remain significant, we only

  have to vary u suitably in order to obtain propositions of this form for  every possible x, and thus the number of propositions must be at least as

great as that of objects. But classes of propositions are only some among

  objects, yet Cantor’s argument shows that there are more of them than

there are propositions. Again, we can easily prove that there are more

  propositional functions than objects. For suppose a correlation of all

  objects and some propositional functions to have been affected, and let 
                                                                                        x

be the correlate of x. Then “not-(x)”, i.e. “ does not hold of x”, is a
                                        xx

  propositional function not contained in the correlation; for it is true or false

of x according as  is false or true of x, and therefore it differs from  for
                        xx

  every value of x. But this case may perhaps be more or less met by the

  doctrine of types.

349. It is instructive to examine in detail the application of Cantor’s

  argument to such cases by means of an actual attempted correlation. In

the case of terms and classes, for example, if x be not a class, let us

  correlate it with ιx, i.e. the class whose only member is x, but if x be a

class, let us correlate it with itself. (This is not a one-one, but a many-one

  correlation, for x and ιx are both correlated with ιx; but it will serve to

  illustrate the point in question.) Then the class which, according to

  Cantor’s argument, should be omitted from the correlation, is the class w

of those classes which are not members of themselves; yet this, being a

class, should be correlated with itself. But w, as we saw in Chapter 10, is

a self-contradictory class, which both is and is not a member of itself.

The contradiction, in this case, can be solved by the doctrine of types; but

the case of propositions is more difficult. In this case, let us correlate

  every class of propositions with the proposition which is its logical

  product; by this means we appear to have a one-one relation of all classes

of propositions to some propositions. But applying Cantor’s argument,

we find that we have omitted the class w of those propositions which are

logical products, but are not members of the classes of propositions

  whose logical products they are. This class, according to the definition of

our correlation, should be correlated with its own logical product, but on

  examining this logical product, we find that it both is and is not a

  member of the class w whose logical product it is.

  Thus the application of Cantor’s argument to the doubtful cases yields

contradictions, though I have been unable to find any point in which the

argument appears faulty. The only solution I can suggest is, to accept the

conclusion that there is no greatest number and the doctrine of types, and todeny that there are any true propositions concerning all objects or all

propositions. Yet the latter, at least, seems plainly false, since all propositions

are at any rate true or false, even if they had no other common properties. In

this unsatisfactory state, I reluctantly leave the problem to the ingenuity of

the reader.

350. To sum up the discussions of this Part: We saw, to begin with, that

  irrationals are to be defined as those segments of rationals which have no

limit, and that in this way analysis is able to dispense with any special

  axiom of continuity. We saw that it is possible to define, in a purely

  ordinal manner, the kind of continuity which belongs to real numbers,

and that continuity so defined is not self-contradictory. We found that the

  differential and integral calculus has no need of the infinitesimal, and

that, though some forms of infinitesimal are admissible, the most usual

form, that of infinitesimal segments in a compact series, is not implied by

  either compactness or continuity, and is in fact self-contradictory. Finally

we discussed the philosophical questions concerning continuity and

  infinity, and found that the arguments of Zeno, though largely valid, raise

no sort of serious difficulty. Having grasped clearly the twofold

  definition of the infinite, as that which cannot be reached by

  mathematical induction starting from 1, and as that which has parts

  which have the same number of terms as itself—definitions which may

be distinguished as ordinal and cardinal respectively—we found that all

the usual arguments, both as to infinity and as to continuity, are

  fallacious, and that no definite contradiction can be proved concerning

  either, although certain special infinite classes do give rise to hitherto

  unsolved contradictions.

It remains to apply to space, time, and motion, the three chief results of this

discussion, which are (1) the impossibility of infinitesimal segments, (2) the

definition of continuity, and (3) the definition and the consistent doctrine of

the infinite. These applications will, I hope, persuade the reader that the

above somewhat lengthy discussions have not been superfluous.


* Cf. Bolzano, Paradoxien des Unendlichen, § 13; Dedekind, Was sind

und was sollen die Zahlen?, No. 66.

* It is not necessary to suppose that the ideas of all terms exist, or form part

of some mind; it is enough that they are entities.

* The finite being here defined by mathematical induction, to avoidtautology.

† Cf. § 330.

* See Peano, Rivista di Matematica, vii, or Formulaire, Vol. ii, Part I.

* He has, as a matter of fact, offered two proofs, but we shall find that one

of them is not cogent.

† It was in this way that I discovered this contradiction; a similar one is

given at the end of Appendix B.

* Mannichfultigkeitslehre, p. 44.

† Cf. supra, Chap. 38, § 300.

* See Chap. 32, supra.

† On the maximum ordinal, see Burali-Forti, “Una questione sui numeri

transfiniti”, Rendiconti del circolo matematico di Palermo, 1897. Also my

article in R. d. M., Vol. viii, p. 43 note.

‡ Cf. Chap. 38, § 301.

§ Jahresbericht der deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, i. (1892), p. 77.

* Power is synonymous with cardinal number: the first power is that of the

finite integers, i.e. α.
                      0
                                                                                      α
* The number of classes contained in a class which has α members is 2;
                                  α
thus the argument shows that 2 is always greater than α.

* This results from the theorem of Schröder and Bernstein, according to

which, if u be similar to a part of v, and v to a part of u, then u and v must be

similar. See Borel, Leçons sur la Théorie des Fonctions (Paris, 1898), p. 102

ff.

† See Chapter 10 and Appendix B.

‡ For the use of the word object see p. 55, note.                                  Part VI


                                      Space44


DIMENSIONS AND COMPLEX


NUMBERS




351. The discussions of the preceding Parts have been concerned with two

  main themes, the logical theory of numbers and the theory of one-

  dimensional series. In the first two Parts, it was shown how, from the

  indispensable apparatus of general logical notions, the theory of finite

  integers and of rational numbers without sign could be developed. In the

  third Part, a particular case of order, namely the order of magnitude, was

  examined on its own account, and it was found that most of the problems

arising in the theory of quantity are purely ordinal. In the fourth Part, the

  general nature of one-dimensional series was set forth, and it was shown

that all the arithmetical propositions obtained by means of the logical

  theory of finite numbers could also be proved by assuming that the finite

  integers form a series of the kind which we called a progression. In the

fifth Part, we examined the problems raised by endless series and by

  compact series—problems which, under the names of infinity and

  continuity, have defied philosophers ever since the dawn of abstract

  thought. The discussion of these problems led to a combination of the

logical and ordinal theories of Arithmetic, and to the rejection, as

  universally valid, of two connected principles which, following Cantor,

we regarded as definitions of the finite, not as applicable to all collections

or series. These two principles were: (1) if one class be wholly contained

in, but not coextensive with, another, then the one has not the same

  number of terms as the other; (2) mathematical induction, which is purely

  ordinal, and may be stated as follows: a series generated by a one-one

  relation, and having a first term, is such that any property, belonging to

the first term and to the successor of any possessor of the property,

  belongs to every term of the series. These two principles we regarded as  definitions of finite classes and of progressions or finite series

  respectively, but as inapplicable to some classes and some series. This

view, we found, resolves all the difficulties of infinity and continuity,

  except a purely logical difficulty as to the notion of all classes. With this

  result, we completed the philosophical theory of one-dimensional series.

352. But in all our previous discussions, large branches of mathematics

  have remained unmentioned. One of the generalizations of number,

  namely complex numbers, has been excluded completely, and no

  mention has been made of the imaginary. The whole of Geometry, also,

has been hitherto foreign to our thoughts. These two omissions were

  connected. Not that we are to accept a geometrical, i.e. spatial, theory of

  complex numbers: this would be as much out of place as a geometrical

  theory of irrationals. Although this Part is called Space, we are to remain

in the region of pure mathematics: the mathematical entities discussed

will have certain affinities to the space of the actual world, but they will

be discussed without any logical dependence upon these affinities.

  Geometry may be considered as a pure à priori science, or as the study of

  actual space. In the latter sense, I hold it to be an experimental science, to

be conducted by means of careful measurements. But it is not in this

  latter sense that I wish to discuss it. As a branch of pure mathematics,

  Geometry is strictly deductive, indifferent to the choice of its premisses

and to the question whether there exist (in the strict sense) such entities

as its premisses define. Many different and even inconsistent sets of

  premisses lead to propositions which would be called geometrical, but all

such sets have a common element. This element is wholly summed up by

the statement that Geometry deals with series of more than one

  dimension. The question what may be the actual terms of such series is

  indifferent to Geometry, which examines only the consequences of the

  relations which it postulates among the terms. These relations are always

such as to generate a series of more than one dimension, but have, so far

as I can see, no other general point of agreement. Series of more than one

  dimension I shall call multiple series: those of one dimension will be

  called simple. What is meant by dimensions I shall endeavour to explain

in the course of the present chapter. At present, I shall set up, by

  anticipation, the following definition: Geometry is the study of series of

two or more dimensions. This definition, it will be seen, causes complex

  numbers to form part of the subject-matter of Geometry, since they  constitute a two-dimensional series; but it does not show that complex

  numbers have any logical dependence upon actual space.

The above definition of Geometry is, no doubt, somewhat unusual, and

will produce, especially upon Kantian philosophers, an appearance of wilful

misuse of words. I believe, however, that it represents correctly the present

usage of mathematicians, though it is not necessary for them to give an

explicit definition of their subject. How it has come to bear this meaning,

may be explained by a brief historical retrospect, which will illustrate also the

difference between pure and applied mathematics.

353. Until the nineteenth century, Geometry meant Euclidean Geometry,

i.e. a certain system of propositions deduced from premisses which were

  supposed to describe the space in which we live. The subject was pursued

very largely because (what is no doubt important to the engineer) its

  results were practically applicable in the existent world, and embodied in

  themselves scientific truths. But in order to be sure that this was so, one

of two things was necessary. Either we must be certain of the truth of the

  premisses on their own account, or we must be able to show that no other

set of premisses would give results consistent with experience. The first

of these alternatives was adopted by the idealists and was especially

  advocated by Kant. The second alternative represents, roughly, the

  position of empiricists before the non-Euclidean period (among whom

we must include Mill). But objections were raised to both alternatives.

For the Kantian view, it was necessary to maintain that all the axioms are

  self-evident—a view which honest people found it hard to extend to the

  axiom of parallels. Hence arose a search for more plausible axioms,

  which might be declared à priori truths. But, though many such axioms

were suggested, all could sanely be doubted, and the search only led to

  scepticism. The second alternative—the view that no other axioms would

give results consistent with experience—could only be tested by a greater

  mathematical ability than falls to the lot of most philosophers.

  Accordingly the test was wanting until Lobatchewsky and Bolyai

  developed their non-Euclidean system. It was then proved, with all the

  cogency of mathematical demonstration, that premisses other than

  Euclid’s could give results empirically indistinguishable, within the

  limits of observation, from those of the orthodox system. Hence the

  empirical argument for Euclid was also destroyed. But the investigation

  produced a new spirit among Geometers. Having found that the denial of  Euclid’s axiom of parallels led to a different system, which was self-

  consistent, and possibly true of the actual world, mathematicians became

  interested in the development of the consequences flowing from other

  sets of axioms more or less resembling Euclid’s. Hence arose a large

  number of Geometries, inconsistent, as a rule, with each other, but each

  internally self-consistent. The resemblance to Euclid required in a

  suggested set of axioms has gradually grown less, and possible deductive

  systems have been more and more investigated on their own account. In

this way, Geometry has become (what it was formerly mistakenly called)

a branch of pure mathematics, that is to say, a subject in which the

  assertions are that such and such consequences follow from such and

such premisses, not that entities such as the premisses describe actually

exist. That is to say, if Euclid’s axioms be called A, and P be any

  proposition implied by A, then, in the Geometry which preceded

  Lobatchewsky, P itself would be asserted, since A was asserted. But

  now-a-days, the geometer would only assert that A implies P, leaving A

and P themselves doubtful. And he would have other sets of axioms, A,
                                                                                      1

A … implying P, P … respectively: the implications would belong to
  212

  Geometry, but not A or P or any of the other actual axioms and
                          11

  propositions. Thus Geometry no longer throws any direct light on the

nature of actual space. But indirectly, the increased analysis and

  knowledge of possibilities, resulting from modern Geometry, has thrown

  immense light upon our actual space. Moreover it is now proved (what is

fatal to the Kantian philosophy) that every Geometry is rigidly deductive,

and does not employ any forms of reasoning but such as apply to

  Arithmetic and all other deductive sciences. My aim, in what follows,

will be to set forth first, in brief outlines, what is philosophically

  important in the deductions which constitute modern Geometry, and then

to proceed to those questions, in the philosophy of space, upon which

  mathematics throws light. In the first section of this Part, though I shall

be discussing Geometries as branches of pure mathematics, I shall select

for discussion only those which throw the most light either upon actual

  space, or upon the nature of mathematical reasoning. A treatise on non-

  Euclidean Geometry is neither necessary nor desirable in a general work

such as the present, and will therefore not be found in the following

  chapters.

354. Geometry, we said, is the study of series which have more than one  dimension. It is now time to define dimensions, and to explain what is

  meant by a multiple series. The relevance of our definition to Geometry

will appear from the fact that the mere definition of dimensions leads to a

  duality closely analogous to that of projective Geometry.

Let us begin with two dimensions. A series of two dimensions arises as

follows. Let there be some asymmetrical transitive relation P, which

generates a series u. Let every term of u be itself an asymmetrical transitive
                      11

relation, which generates a series. Let all the field of P form a simple series

of asymmetrical relations, and let each of these have a simple series of terms

for its field. Then the class u of terms forming the fields of all the relations
                                2

in the series generated by P is a two-dimensional series. In other words, the

total field of a class of asymmetrical transitive relations forming a simple

series is a double series. But instead of starting from the asymmetrical

relation P, we may start from the terms. Let there be a class of terms u, of
                                                                                  2

which any given one (with possibly one exception) belongs to the field of one

and only one of a certain class u of serial relations. That is if x be a term of
                                    1

u, x is also a term of the field of some relation of the class u. Now further
21

let u be a series. Then u will be a double series. This seems to constitute the
    12

definition of two-dimensional series.

To obtain three dimensions, we have only to suppose that u itself consists
                                                                        2

of series, or of asymmetrical transitive relations. Or, starting with the terms of

the three-dimensional series, let any term of a certain class u belong to one
                                                                      3

and only one series (again with one possible exception, which may belong to

many series) of a certain class u. Let every term of u be a term of some
                                    22

series belonging to a class u of series, and let u itself be a simple series.
                                11

Then u is a triple series, or a series of three dimensions. Proceeding in this
      3

way, we obtain the definition of n dimensions, which may be given as

follows: Let there be some series u whose terms are all themselves serial
                                        1

relations. If x be any term of u, and x any term of the field of x, let x be
              11212

again a serial relation, and so on. Proceeding to x, x, etc., let x, however
                                                        34n − 1

obtained, be always a relation generating a simple series. Then all the terms

x belonging to the field of any serial relation x, form an n-dimensional
nn − 1

series. Or, to give the definition which starts from the terms: Let u be a class
                                                                              n

of terms, any one of which, x say, belongs to the field of some serial
                                nrelation, x say, which itself belongs to a definite class u of serial
          n − 1n − 1

relations. Let each term x in general belong to the field of only one serial
                            n

relation x (with exceptions which need not be discussed at present). Let
        n − 1

u −  lead to a new class u of serial relations, in exactly the way in which
n1n − 2

u led to u. Let this proceed until we reach a class u, and let u be a
nn − 111

simple series. Then u is a series of n dimensions.
                        n

355. Before proceeding further, some observations on the above definitions

may be useful. In the first place, we have just seen that alternative

  definitions of dimensions suggest themselves, which have a relation

  analogous to what is called duality in projective Geometry. How far this

  analogy extends, is a question which we cannot discuss until we have

  examined projective Geometry. In the second place, every series of n

  dimensions involves series of all smaller numbers of dimensions, but a

  series of (n − 1) dimensions does not in general imply one of n

  dimensions. In the second form of the definition of n dimensions, the

class u is a series of (n − 1) dimensions, and generally, if m be less
        n − 1

than n, the class u is a series of (n − m) dimensions. And in the other
                      n − m

  method, all possible terms x together form a series of (n − 1)
                                  n − 1

  dimensions, and so on. In the third place, if n be finite, a class which is

an n-dimensional series is also a one-dimensional series. This may be

  established by the following rules: In the class u, which is a simple
                                                          1

  series, preserve the order unchanged. In u, keep the internal order of
                                                  2

each series unchanged, and place that series before which comes before

in u, and that after which comes after in u. Thus u is converted into a
      112

  simple series. Apply now the same process to u, and so on. Then by
                                                          3

  mathematical induction, if n be finite, or be any infinite ordinal number,

u can be converted into a simple series. This remarkable fact, which was
  n

  discovered, for finite numbers and ω, by Cantor,* has a very important

  bearing on the foundations of Geometry. In the fourth place, the

  definition of n dimensions can be extended to the case where n is ω, the

  first of the transfinite ordinals. For this purpose, it is only necessary to

  suppose that, whatever finite number m we may take, any u will belong
                                                                        m

to some simple series of series u + ; and that the sequence of classes of
                                        m1

  series so obtained obeys mathematical induction, and is therefore a  progression. Then the number of dimensions is ω. This case brings out,

what does not appear so clearly from the case of a finite number of

  dimensions, that the number of dimensions is an ordinal number.

356. There are very many ways of generating multiple series, as there are of

  generating simple series. The discussion of these various ways is not,

  however, of great importance, since it would follow closely the

  discussion of Part IV, Chapter 24. Instances will meet us in the course of

our examination of the various Geometries; and this examination will

give opportunities of testing our definition of dimensions. For the

  present, it is only important to observe that dimensions, like order and

  continuity, are defined in purely abstract terms, without any reference to

  actual space. Thus when we say that space has three dimensions, we are

not merely attributing to it an idea which can only be obtained from

  space, but we are effecting part of the actual logical analysis of space.

This will appear more clearly from the applicability of dimensions to

  complex numbers, to which we must now turn our attention.

357. The theory of imaginaries was formerly considered a very important

branch of mathematical philosophy, but it has lost its philosophical

  importance by ceasing to be controversial. The examination of

  imaginaries led, on the Continent, to the Theory of Functions—a subject

  which, in spite of its overwhelming mathematical importance, appears to

  have little interest for the philosopher. But among ourselves the same

  examination took a more abstract direction: it led to an examination of

the principles of symbolism, the formal laws of addition and

  multiplication and the general nature of a Calculus. Hence arose a freer

  spirit towards ordinary Algebra, and the possibility of regarding it (like

  ordinary Geometry) as one species of a genus. This was the guiding spirit

of Sir William Hamilton, De Morgan, Jevons and Peirce—to whom, as

  regards the result, though not as regards the motive, we must add Boole

and Grassmann. Hence the philosophy of imaginaries became merged in

the far wider and more interesting problems of Universal Algebra.*

  These problems cannot, in my opinion, be dealt with by starting with the

  genus, and asking ourselves: what are the essential principles of any

  Calculus? It is necessary to adopt a more inductive method, and examine

the number of the resultant series: i.e. an n-dimensional space has the

  same cardinal number of points as a finite portion of a line. See Acta

  Math., ii, p. 314 ff. various species one by one. The mathematical portionof this task has been admirably performed by Mr Whitehead: the

  philosophical portion is attempted in the present work. The possibility of

a deductive Universal Algebra is often based upon a supposed principle

of the Permanence of Form. Thus it is said, for example, that complex

  numbers must, in virtue of this principle, obey the same laws of addition

and multiplication as real numbers obey. But as a matter of fact there is

no such principle. In Universal Algebra, our symbols of operation, such

as + and ×, are variables, the hypothesis of any one Algebra being that

  these symbols obey certain prescribed rules. In order that such an

  Algebra should be important, it is necessary that there should be at least

one instance in which the suggested rules of operation are verified. But

  even this restriction does not enable us to make any general formal

  statement as to all possible rules of operation. The principle of the

  Permanence of Form, therefore, must be regarded as simply a mistake:

  other operations than arithmetical addition may have some or all of its

  formal properties, but operations can easily be suggested which lack

  some or all of these properties.

358. Complex numbers first appeared in mathematics through the

  algebraical generalization of number. The principle of this generalization

is the following: Given some class of numbers, it is required that

  numbers should be discovered or invented which will render soluble any

  equation in one variable, whose coefficients are chosen from the said

class of numbers. Starting with positive integers, this method leads at

once, by means of simple equations alone, to all rational numbers

  positive and negative. Equations of finite degrees will give all the so-

  called algebraic numbers, but to obtain transcendent numbers, such as e

and π, we need equations which are not of any finite degree. In this

  respect the algebraical generalization is very inferior to the arithmetical,

  since the latter gives all irrationals by a uniform method, whereas the

  former, strictly speaking, will give only the algebraic numbers. But with

  regard to complex numbers, the matter is otherwise. No arithmetical

  problem leads to these, and they are wholly incapable of arithmetical
                                                                  22
  definition. But the attempt to solve such equations as x + 1 = 0, or x + x

+ 1 = 0, at once demands a new class of numbers, since, in the whole

  domain of real numbers, none can be found to satisfy these equations. To

meet such cases, the algebraical generalization defined new numbers by

  means of the equations whose roots they were. It showed that, assuming  these new numbers to obey the usual laws of multiplication, each of them

fell into two parts, one real, the other the product of some real number

and a fixed number of the new kind. This fixed number could be chosen

  arbitrarily, and was always taken to be one of the square roots of −1.

  Numbers thus composed of two parts were called complex numbers, and

it was shown that no algebraic operation upon them could lead to any

new class of numbers. What is still more remarkable, it was proved that

any further generalization must lead to numbers disobeying some of the

  formal laws of Arithmetic.* But the algebraical generalization was

  wholly unable (as it was, in truth, at every previous stage) to prove that

there are such entities as those which it postulated. If the said equations

  have roots, then the roots have such and such properties; this is all that

the algebraical method allows us to infer. There is, however, no law of

nature to the effect that every equation must have a root; on the contrary,

it is quite essential to be able to point out actual entities which do have

the properties demanded by the algebraical generalization.

359. The discovery of such entities is only to be obtained by means of the

  theory of dimensions. Ordinary complex numbers form a series of two

  dimensions of a certain type, which happen to occur as roots of equations

in which the coefficients are real. Complex numbers of a higher order

  represent a certain type of n-dimensional series, but here there is no

  algebraical problem concerning real numbers which they are required to

solve. As a matter of fact, however, the algebraical generalization, as we

  have seen, does not tell us what our new entities are, nor whether they are

  entities at all: moreover it encourages the erroneous view that complex

  numbers whose imaginary part vanishes are real numbers. This error is

  analogous to that of supposing that some real numbers are rational, some

  rationals integral and positive integers identical with signless integers.

All the above errors having been exposed at length, the reader will

  probably be willing to admit the corresponding error in the present case.

No complex number, then, is a real number, but each is a term in some

  multiple series. It is not worth while to examine specially the usual two-

  dimensional complex numbers, whose claims, as we have seen, are

  purely technical. I shall therefore proceed at once to systems with n units.

I shall give first the usual purely formal definition,† then the logical

  objections to this definition and then the definition which I propose to

  substitute.Let n different entities, e, e, …… e, which we may call elements or
                              12n

units, be given; and let each be capable of association with any real number,

or, in special cases, with any rational or any integer. In this way let entities

αe arise, where α is a number, and αe differs from αe unless r = s and α
rrrrrssr

= α. That is, if either the numerical or the non-numerical parts of αe and
  srr

αe be different, then the wholes are different. Further, let there be a way of
ss

combining αe, αe, …, αe, for each set of values α, α, … α, to form a
              1122nn12n

new entity. (The class whose members are αe, αe, … αe will be such an
                                                    1122nn

entity.) Then the combination, which may be written as


      a = αe + αe + αe + …+ αe,
              112233nn

 


is a complex number of the nth order. The arrangement of the component

terms αe, αe, … αe may or may not be essential to the definition; but
        1122nn

the only thing always essential is, that the combination should be such that a

difference in any one or more of the numbers α, α, … α insures a
                                                      12n

difference in the resulting complex number.

360. The above definition suffers from the defect that it does not point out

any one entity which is the complex number defined by a set of real

  numbers. Given two real numbers, a, b, the two complex numbers a + ib,

b + ia are determinate; and it is desirable that such determinateness

  should appear in the general definition of complex numbers of any order.

But the e’s in the above definition are variables, and the suggested

  complex number is only determinate when the e’s are specified as well as

the α’s. Where, as in metrical Geometry or in the Dynamics of a finite

  system of particles, there are important meanings for the e’s, we may find

that complex numbers in the above sense are important. But no special

  interpretation can give us the complex number associated with a given set

of real numbers. We might take as the complex number the class of all

such entities as the above for all possible values of the e’s; but such a

class would be too general to serve our purposes. A better method seems

to be the following.

We wish a complex number of the nth order to be specified by the

enumeration of n real numbers in a certain order, i.e. by the numbers α, α,
                                                                                  12… α, where the order is indicated by the suffix. But we cannot define a
  n

complex number as a series of n real numbers, because the same real number

may recur, i.e. α and α need not be different whenever r and s are different.
                  rs

Thus what defines a real number is a one-many relation whose domain

consists of real numbers and whose converse domain consists of the first n

integers (or, in the case of a complex number of infinite order, of all the

integers); for the suffix in α indicates correlation with the integer r. Such
                              r

one-many relations may be defined to be the complex numbers, and in this

way a purely arithmetical definition is obtained. The n-dimensional series of

complex numbers of order n results from arranging all complex numbers

which differ only as to (say) α in the order of the real numbers which are α
                                  rr

in the various cases.

In order that complex numbers in the sense defined by Stolz should have

any importance, there must be some motive for considering assemblages of

terms selected out of continua. Such a motive exists in a metrical space of n

dimensions, owing to a circumstance which is essential to the utility, though

not to the definition, of complex numbers. Let a collection of entities (points)

be given, each of which has to each of the entities e, e, … e a numerically
                                                            12a

measurable relation (distance), and let each be uniquely defined by the n

relations which it has to e, e, … e. Then the complex number a will
                            12n

represent one of this collection of entities, and the elements e, e, … e will
                                                                        12n

themselves be terms of the collection.* Thus there is a motive for considering

the numbers α, which in the general case is practically absent.† But what is

essential to observe, and what applies equally to the usual complex numbers

of Algebra, is this: our numbers are not purely arithmetical, but involve

essential reference to a plurality of dimensions. Thus we have definitely

passed beyond the domain of Arithmetic, and this was my reason for

postponing the consideration of complex numbers to this late stage.


* Cantor has proved, not only that a simple series can be so formed, but

that, if n be not greater than ω, and the constituent series all have the same

cardinal number, this is also the cardinal

* See Whitehead, Universal Algebra, Cambridge, 1898; especially Book I.

* See Stolz, Allgemeine Arithmetik, ii, Section 1, § 10.

† See Stolz, ibid. ii, Section 1. § 9.

* e is not identical with 1 × e + 0 × e + …. The former is a point, the
    112latter a complex number.

† In geometrical applications, it is usual to consider only the ratios α: α:
                                                                                    12

…: α as relevant. In this case, our series has only (n − 1) dimensions.
    n45


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY




361. The foundations of Geometry have been subjected, in recent times, to a

  threefold scrutiny. First came the work of the non-Euclideans, which

  showed that various axioms, long known to be sufficient for certain

  results, were also necessary, i.e. that results inconsistent with the usual

  results but consistent with each other followed from the denial of those

  axioms. Next came the work of Dedekind and Cantor on the nature of

  continuity, which showed the necessity of investigating carefully the

  prerequisites of analytical Geometry. Lastly, a great change has been

  introduced by the Italian work on closed series, mentioned in Part IV, in

  virtue of which we are able, given a certain type of relation between four

  points of a line, to introduce an order of all the points of a line. The work

of the non-Euclideans has, by this time, produced probably almost all the

  modifications that it is likely to produce in the foundations, while the

  work of Dedekind and Cantor only becomes relevant at a fairly advanced

  stage of Geometry. The work on closed series, on the contrary, being

very recent, has not yet been universally recognized, although, as we

  shall see in the present chapter, it has enormously increased the range of

pure projective Geometry.

362. In the discussions of the present Part, I shall not divide Geometries, as

a rule, into Euclidean, hyperbolic, elliptic, and so on, though I shall of

  course recognize this division and mention it whenever it is relevant. But

this is not so fundamental a division as another, which applies, generally

  speaking, within each of the above kinds of Geometry, and corresponds

to a greater logical difference. The above kinds differ, not in respect of

the indefinables with which we start, nor yet in respect of the majority of

the axioms, but only in respect of comparatively few and late axioms.

The three kinds which I wish to discuss differ both in respect of the

  indefinables and in respect of the axioms, but unlike the three previouskinds, they are, roughly speaking, mutually compatible. That is to say,

  given a certain body of geometrical propositions concerning a certain

  number of entities, it is more or less arbitrary which of the entities we

take as indefinable and which of the propositions as indemonstrable. But

the logical differences which result from different selections are very

great, and the systems of deductions to which different selections lead

must be separately discussed.

All Geometries, as commonly developed, agree in starting with points as

indefinables. That is, there is a certain class-concept point (which need not be

the same in different Geometries), of which we assume that there are at least

two, or three, or four instances, according to circumstances. Further

instances, i.e. further points, result from special assumptions in the various

cases. Where the three great types of Geometry begin to diverge is as regards

the straight line. Projective Geometry begins with the whole straight line, i.e.

it asserts that any two points determine a certain class of points which is also

determined by any two other members of the class. If this class be regarded

as determined in virtue of a relation between the two points, then this relation

is symmetrical. What I shall call Descriptive Geometry, on the contrary,

begins with an asymmetrical relation, or a line with sense, which may be

called a ray; or again it may begin by regarding two points as determining the

stretch of points between them. Metrical Geometry, finally, takes the straight

line in either of the above senses, and adds either a second relation between

any two points, namely distance, which is a magnitude, or else the

consideration of stretches as magnitudes. Thus in regard to the relations of

two points, the three kinds of Geometry take different indefinables, and have

corresponding differences of axioms. Any one of the three, by a suitable

choice of axioms, will lead to any required Euclidean or non-Euclidean

space; but the first, as we shall see, is not capable of yielding as many

propositions as result from the second or the third. In the present chapter, I

am going to assume that set of axioms which gives the simplest form of

projective Geometry; and I shall call any collection of entities satisfying these

axioms a projective space. We shall see in the next chapter how to obtain a

set of entities forming a projective space from a set forming a Euclidean or

hyperbolic space; projective space itself is, so far as it goes, indistinguishable

from the polar form of elliptic space. It is defined, like all mathematical

entities, solely by the formal nature of the relations between its constituents,

not by what those constituents are in themselves. Thus we shall see in thefollowing chapter that the “points” of a projective space may each be an

infinite class of straight lines in a non-projective space. So long as the

“points” have the requisite type of mutual relations, the definition is satisfied.

363. Projective Geometry assumes a class of entities, called points, to

  which it assigns certain properties.* In the first place, there are to be at

least two different points, a and b say. These two points are to determine

a certain class of points, their straight line, which we will call ab. This

class is determined by b and a, as well as by a and b, i.e. there is no order

of a and b involved; moreover a (and therefore b) is itself a member of

the class. Further, the class contains at least one point other than a and b;

if c be any such point, then b belongs to the class ac, and every point of

ac belongs to ab. With these assumptions it follows† that, if c, d be any

  points of ab, then cd and ab coincide—i.e. any two points of a line

  determine that line, or two lines coincide if they have two points in

  common.

Before proceeding further, let us consider for a moment what is meant by

saying that two points determine a class of points. This expression is often

thought to require no explanation, but as a matter of fact it is not a perfectly

precise statement. The precise statement of what is meant is this: There is a

certain definite relation (K say) which holds between any couple of points

and one and only one corresponding class of points. Without some such

definite relation, there could be no question of two points determining a class.

The relation K may be ultimate and indefinable, in which case we need the

above properties of the class ab. We may obtain, however, a derivative

relation between two points, b and c say, namely that of being both collinear

with a given point a. This relation will be transitive and symmetrical, but will

always involve reference to a term other than those (b and c) which are its

terms. This suggests, as a simplification, that instead of a relation K between

a couple of points and a class of points, we might have a relation R between

the two points a and b. If R be a symmetrical aliorelative, transitive so far as

its being an aliorelative will permit (i.e. if aRb and bRc imply aRc, unless a

and c are identical), the above properties of the straight line will belong to the

class of terms having to a the relation R together with a itself. This view

seems simpler than the former, and leads to the same results. Since the view

that the straight line is derived from a relation of two points is the simpler, I

shall in general adopt it. Any two points a, b have, then, a relation R; a, c
                                                                                ab

have a relation R. If R and R are identical, while b and c differ, R is
                    acabacbcidentical with both R and R; if not, not. It is to be observed that the formal
                        abac

properties of any such relation R are those belonging to the disjunction of an

asymmetrical transitive relation and its converse—e.g. greater or less, before

or after, etc. These are all symmetrical aliorelatives, and are transitive so far

as their being aliorelatives will permit. But not all relations of the type in

question are analysable into a transitive asymmetrical relation or its converse;

for diversity, which is of the above type, is not so analysable. Hence to

assume that the straight line can be generated by an asymmetrical relation and

its converse is a new assumption, characteristic of what I shall call

Descriptive Geometry. For the present, such an assumption would be out of

place. We have, then, two indefinables, namely point, and the relation R or

K.* No others are required in projective space.

364. The next point is the definition of the plane. It is one of the merits of

  projective space that, unlike other spaces, it allows a very simple and

easy definition of the plane. For this purpose, we need a new axiom,

  namely: If a, b be two distinct points, there is at least one point not

  belonging to ab. Let this be c. Then the plane is the class of points lying

on any line determined by c and any point x of ab. That is, if x be any

  point of ab, and y any point of cx, then y is a point of the plane cab; and

if y be a point of the plane cab, then there is some point x in ab such that

y is a point of cx. It is to be observed that this definition will not apply to

the Euclidean or hyperbolic plane, since in these two lines may fail to

  intersect. The exclusion of Euclidean and hyperbolic space results from

the following axiom:† “If a, b, c be three non-collinear points, and a' be a

  point of bc other than b and c, b' a point of ac other than a and c, then

there is a point common to aa' and bb' .” By means of this axiom we can

  prove that the plane cab is the same as the plane abc or bac, and

  generally that, if d, e, f be any three non-collinear points of abc, the plane

def coincides with the plane abc; we can also show that any two lines in a

  plane intersect.

365. We can now proceed to the harmonic range and von Staudt’s

  quadrilateral construction. Given three collinear points a, b, c take any

  two points u, v collinear with c but not on ab. Construct the points of

  intersection au . bv and av . bu; join these points, and let the line joining

  them meet ab in d. This construction is called the quadrilateral

  construction. If we now assume that outside the plane abu there is at least

one point, we can prove that the point d is independent of u and v, and is  uniquely determined by a, b, c. The point d is called the harmonic of c

with respect to a and b, and the four points are said to form a harmonic

  range. The uniqueness‡ of the above construction—the proof of which, it

  should be observed, requires a point not in the plane of the construction§

  —is the fundamental proposition of projective Geometry. It gives a

  relation which may hold between four points of a line, and which, when

  two are given, is one-one as regards the other two. Denoting “c and d are

  harmonic with respect to a and b” by cHd, the following properties of
                                                  ab

the relation are important: (1) cHd implies dHc, i.e. H is
                                          ababab

  symmetrical; (2) cHd implies aHb, i.e. the relation of the pairs ab, cd
                        abcd

is symmetrical; (3) cHd implies that c and d are different points, i.e.
                            ab

H is an aliorelative. This last property is independent of the others, and
  ab

has to be introduced by an axiom.*

  Having obtained the harmonic range, we may proceed in two different

directions. We may regard the harmonic relation as a relation of two pairs of

points: hence, by keeping one of the pairs fixed, we obtain what is called an

involution. Or we may regard the harmonic relation, as in the symbol cHd,
                                                                                      ab

as a relation between two points, which involves a reference to two others. In

this way, regarding a, b, c, as fixed, we obtain three new points d, e, f on the

line ab by the relations cHd, aHe, bHf. Each of these may be used, with
                              abbcac

two of the previous points, to determine a fourth point, and so on. This leads

to what Möbius† calls a net, and forms the method by which Klein‡

introduces projective coordinates. This construction gives also the method of

defining an harmonic ratio. These two directions in which projective

Geometry may be developed must be separately pursued to begin with. I shall

take the former first.

366. By means of the harmonic relation, we define an involution. This

  consists of all pairs of points which are harmonic conjugates with respect

to two fixed points.§ That is to say, if a, b be the two fixed points, an

  involution is composed of all pairs of points x, y such that xHy. If four
                                                                          ab

  points x, y, x' , y' be given, it may or may not happen that there exist two

  points a, b such that xHy and x' Hy' . The possibility of finding such
                              abab

  points a, b constitutes a certain relation of x, y to x' , y' . It is plain that

this relation sometimes holds, for it holds when x, y are respectively

  identical with x' , y' . It is plain also that it sometimes does not hold; for ifx and y be identical, but not x' and y' , then the relation is impossible.

  Pieri¶ has shown how, by means of certain axioms, this relation of four

  terms may be used to divide the straight line into two segments with

  respect to any two of its points, and to generate an order of all the points

on a line. (It must be borne in mind that, in projective Geometry, the

  points of a line do not have an order to begin with.) This projective order

is obtained as follows.

367. Given any three different points a, b, c on a line, consider the class of

  points x such that a and c, b and x are each harmonic conjugates with

  respect to some pair of points y, y'—in other words, a and c, b and x are

pairs in an involution whose double points are y, y' . Here y, y' are

  supposed variable: that is, if any such points can be found, x is to belong

to the class considered. This class contains the point b, but not a or c. Let

us call it the segment (abc). Let us denote the relation of b to x (a and c

  being fixed) by bQx. Then Q is symmetrical, and also bQx implies
                        acacac

  aQc. We have here a relation of four points, from which, as we saw in
    bx

  Part IV, Chapter 24, an order will result if certain further axioms are

  fulfilled. Three such axioms are required, and are given by Pieri as

  follows.

(1) If d is on the line ab, but does not belong to the segment (abc), and

does not coincide with a or with c, then d must belong to the segment (bca).

(If d coincides with c, we know already that d belongs to the segment (bca).

This case is therefore excluded from the axiom to avoid a superfluity of

assumptions.) In virtue of this axiom, if a, b, c, d be distinct points on a line,

we must have either bQd or cQd. It follows that we must have either
                          acab

bQd or aQd. Thus at least two Q-relations hold between any four distinct
  acbc

collinear points. (2) If a, b, c be distinct collinear points, and d be a point

belonging to both the segments (bca) and (cab), then d cannot belong to the

segment (abc). That is, of the three segments to which d may belong, it never

belongs to more than two. From this and the previous axiom it results that, if

d be distinct from a, b and c, then d belongs to two and only two of the three

segments defined by a, b and c. (3) If a, b, c be distinct collinear points, and d

a point, other than b, of the segment (abc), and e a point of the segment (adc),

then e is a point of the segment (abc). (Here again, the condition that d is to

be other than b is required only to avoid superfluity, not for the truth of the

axiom.) In terms of Q, this axiom states that bQd and dQe imply bQe;
                                                        acacacthat is, Q is transitive. We saw already that Q is symmetrical. We can now
          acac

prove that, by means of this relation, all points of the line except a and c are

divided into two classes, which we may call (ac) and (ac). Any two points
                                                        12

in the same class have the relation Q, any two in different classes have not.
                                          ac

The division into two classes results from the fact that, if we do not have

bQd, nor yet dQe (b, d, e being points other than a and c), then we do
  acac

have bQe. That is to say, Q has the formal properties of sameness of sign,
        acac

and divides the line into two classes, just as sameness of sign divides

numbers into positive and negative.

The opposite of Q, which I shall denote by T, corresponds in like
                      acac

manner to difference of sign. T is not to denote the mere negation of Q,
                                    acac

but the fact of belonging to different segments. That is, bTd means that d
                                                                    ac

does not coincide with a or c, that d lies in the line ac, but not in the segment

(abc). Then bTd may be taken as meaning that b and d are separated by a
                ac

and c. It is a relation which has the formal properties of separation of couples,

as enumerated in Part IV, Chapter 24. If a, b, c, d, e be five distinct points in

one straight line, we have the following properties of the T-relation. (1) bTd
                                                                                        ac

is equivalent to dTb, aTc, cTa, cTa, etc. (2) We have one and only one
                    acbdbddb

of the three relations aTd, aTc, aTb. (3) dTb implies dTe or eTb.*
                            bcbdcdacacac

By comparing the above properties of T with those of separation of

couples, it will be seen that T leads to a closed series (in the sense of Part IV),

i.e. to a series in which there is a first term, but this first term is arbitrary. The

definition of the generating relation of the series (which involves, as in the

general case, three fixed points) is given by Pieri as follows. With regard to

the natural order abc, a precedes every other point of the line; c precedes

every point d not belonging to (abc) and not coinciding with a or c, i.e. every

point d such that dTb; a general point d precedes a general point e if dQb
                      acac

and eQc, or if dTb and eTc, i.e. if d belongs to the segment (abc) and e
        adacad

to the segment (acd), or if b and d are separated by a and c, and likewise c

and e by a and d. It is then shown, that of any two points of the line, one

precedes the other, and that the relation is transitive and asymmetrical; hence

all the points of the line acquire an order.

  Having now obtained an order among our points, we can introduce an

axiom of continuity, to which Pieri† gives a form analogous to that of

Dedekind’s axiom, namely: If any segment (abc) be divided into two parts hand k, such that, with regard to the order abc, every point of h precedes every

point of k, while h and k each contain at least one point, then there must be in

(abc) at least one point x such that every point of (abc) which precedes x

belongs to h, and every point of (abc) which follows x belongs to k. It follows

from this axiom that every infinite class contained in (abc) and having no last

(or first) term has a limit, which is either a point of (abc) or c (or a); and it is

easy to prove that, when h and k are given, there can be only one such point

as x in the axiom.

By means of the projective segment, it is easy to define triangles and

tetrahedra. Three points determine four triangles, which between them

contain all the points of the plane, and have no common points except the

angles. Also we can define harmonic transformations, and prove their

properties without any further axiom.‡ Only one other axiom is required to

complete our Geometry, namely: A plane and a line not in the plane always

have a common point. This amounts to the axiom of three dimensions.

Nothing is altered, in what precedes, by denying it, and proceeding to a space

of n dimensions or of an infinite number of dimensions. This last, in fact,

requires fewer axioms than a space of three dimensions.*

368. Let us now resume the other direction in which projective Geometry

may be developed, in which we start from three fixed points on a line,

and examine all the points obtainable from these three by successive

  quadrilateral constructions. We do not here, as in the development we

  have been examining, require any new axiom; but there is a

  corresponding restriction in the results obtainable. In order to give

  projective Geometry its fullest possible development we must combine

the results of both directions. Confining ourselves, to begin with, to one

  straight line, let us see how to construct a net and introduce projective

  coordinates. Denoting by aHd, as before, the proposition “a and d are
                                    bc

  harmonic conjugates with respect to b and c”, we can, by the

  quadrilateral construction, when a, b, c are given, determine the only

  point d satisfying this proposition. We next construct the point e for

  which bHe, then f for which dHf, g for which eHg, and so on. In this
              cdcecf

way we obtain a progression of points on our line, such that any three

  consecutive points, together with c, form a harmonic range. With our

former definition of a segment, all these points will belong to the

  segments (abc) and (bca). We may number these points, beginning with

a, 0, 1, 2, …, n, … . Since c does not belong to the progression, we may  assign to it the number ∞.† Consider next the points obtained as follows.

Let d' be such that d' Hc, let e' H b, f' H d' , and so on. We have
                              abad'ae'

  thus a new progression of points, such that any three consecutive points

  together with a form a harmonic range, and all belonging to the segments

(abc), (cab). To these points let us assign the numbers 1/n in order.

  Similarly we can construct a progression belonging to the two segments

(cab), (bca), and assign to them the negative integers. By proceeding in a

  similar manner with any triad of points so obtained, we can obtain more

and more points. The principle adopted in assigning numbers to points (a

  principle which, from our present standpoint, has no motive save

  convenience) is the following: if p, q, r be the numbers assigned to three

  points already constructed, and s be the number to be assigned to the

  harmonic conjugate (supposed not previously constructed) of the q-point

with respect to the p-point and the r-point, then we are to have 


                  .

In this manner, we can find one and only one point of our line for each

rational number, positive or negative.* Thus we obtain a denumerable

endless compact series of points on our line. Whether these are all the points

of our line or not, we cannot decide without a further axiom. If our line is to

be a continuous series, or a collection of the power of the continuum, we

must of course assume points not obtainable by quadrilateral constructions,

however often repeated, which start with three given elements. But as the

definition of our space is optional, we may, if we like, content ourselves with

a rational space, and introduce an axiom to the effect that all points of our

line can be obtained from three given points.

369. Before proceeding further, it may be well to point out a logical error,

  which is very apt to be committed, and has been committed, I think, even

by Klein.† So long as Pieri’s three axioms above enumerated are not

  assumed, our points have no order but that which results from the net,

  whose construction has just been explained. Hence only rational points

(i.e. such as, starting from three given points, have rational coordinates)

can have an order at all. If there be any other points, there can be no

  sense in which these can be limits of series of rational points, nor any

  reason for assigning irrational coordinates to them. For a limit and the

  series which it limits must both belong to some one series; but in this

  case, the rational points form the whole of the series. Hence other points(if there be any) cannot be assigned as limits of series of rational points.

The notion that this can be done springs merely from the habit of

  assuming that all the points of a line form a series, without explicitly

  stating this or its equivalent as an axiom. Indeed, just as we found that

  series of rationals properly have no limit except when they happen to

  have a rational limit, so series of points obtainable by the quadrilateral

  construction will not have limits, quâ terms of the series obtained from

the quadrilateral construction, except where they happen to have a limit

  within this series, i.e. when their coordinates have a rational limit. At this

point, therefore, it is highly desirable to introduce Pieri’s three axioms, in

  virtue of which all the points of a line have an order. We shall find that,

in the natural order cab, the order of the rational points, resulting from

  Pieri’s axioms, is the same as that of their coordinates assigned on the

  above principle.‡ Thus we have only to assume that all infinite series of

  rational points have limits, as parts of Pieri’s series, and that all points are

  either rational or limits of rational series, in order to show that our

  straight line has continuity in Cantor’s sense. In this case we shall assign

to non-rational points the irrational numbers corresponding to the series

  which such points limit.

370. Returning now to the quadrilateral construction, we define as the

  anharmonie ratio of four points whose coordinates are p, q, r, s the number


            . It can be shown that this number is independent of the choice of

our three original points a, b, c. It expresses the series of quadrilateral

  constructions required to obtain s when p, q, r are given, and thus

  expresses a purely projective relation of the four points. By the

  introduction of irrational points, in the manner just explained, it follows

that any four points on a line have an anharmonic ratio. (This cannot

  possibly be proved without Pieri’s three axioms or some equivalent to

  them.) The anharmonic ratio is unaltered by any linear transformation,

i.e. by substituting for every point x the point whose coordinate is (αx + β

)/(γx + δ), where α, β, γ, δ are any fixed numbers such that αδ − βγ is not

  zero. From this point we can at last advance to what was formerly the

  beginning of projective Geometry, namely the operation of projection, to

  which it owes its name.

It can be shown that, if p, r be harmonic conjugates with respect to q, s,

and p, q, r, s be joined to some point o, and if op, oq, or, os meet any line inp' , q' , r' , s' , then p' , r' are harmonic conjugates with respect to q' , s' . Hence

we can show that all anharmonic ratios are unaltered by the above operation.

Similarly if l be any straight line not coplanar with pqrs, and the planes lp, lq,

lr, ls meet any line not coplanar with l in p' , q' , r' , s' , these four points will

have the same anharmonic ratio as p, q, r, s. These facts are expressed by

saying that anharmonic ratio is unaltered by projection. From this point we

can proceed to the assignment of coordinates to any point in space.*

371. To begin with a plane, take three points a, b, c not in one straight line,

and assign coordinates in the above manner to the points of ab, ac. Let p

be any point of the plane abc, but not on the line bc. Then if cp meets ab

in p, and bp meets ac in p, and x, y are the coordinates of p, p
      1212

  respectively, let (x, y) be the two coordinates of p. In this way all points

of the plane not on bc acquire coordinates. To avoid this restriction, let us

  introduce three homogeneous coordinates, as follows. Take any four

  points a, b, c, e in a plane, no three of which are collinear; let ae meet bc

in e, be meet ca in e, ce meet ab in e. Assign coordinates to the points
      123

of bc, ca, ab as before, giving the coordinate 1 to e, e, e, and in ab
                                                              123

  giving 0 to a, and ∞ to b, and similarly for the other sides. In place of the

  single coordinate x of any point of bc, let us introduce the homogeneous

  coordinates x, x, where x = x/x. If now p be any point of the plane
                  2323

abc, let ap meet bc in p, bp meet ca in p, and cp meet ab in p. Let x,
                              1232

x be the homogeneous coordinates of p, x, x those of p; then x, x
  3131212

will be those of p.* Hence we may assign x, x, x as homogeneous
                      3123

  coordinates of p. In like manner we can assign four homogeneous

  coordinates to any point of space. We can also assign coordinates to the

  lines through a point, or the planes through a line, or all the planes of

  space, by means of the anharmonic ratios of lines and planes.† It is easy

to show that, in point-coordinates, a plane has a linear equation, and a

  linear equation represents a plane; and that, in plane-coordinates, a point

has a linear equation, and a linear equation represents a point. Thus we

  secure all the advantages of analytical Geometry. From this point

  onwards, the subject is purely technical, and ceases to have philosophic

  interest.

372. It is now time to ask ourselves what portions of the Geometry to which

we are accustomed are not included in projective Geometry. In the first

place, the series of points on a line, being obtained from a four-term  relation, is closed in the sense of Part IV. That is, the order of points

  requires three fixed points to be given before it can be defined. The

  practical effect of this is, that given only three points on a line, no one of

  them is between the other two. This is a definite difference between

  projective space and Euclidean or hyperbolic space. But it is easy to

  exaggerate this difference. We saw in Part IV that, wherever a series is

  generated by a two-term relation, there is also the four-term relation of

  separation of couples, by which we can generate a closed series

  consisting of the same terms. Hence in this respect the difference does

not amount to an inconsistency. Euclidean and hyperbolic spaces contain

what projective space contains, and something more besides. We saw

that the relation by which the projective straight line is defined has the

  formal properties of “P or ”, where P is transitive and asymmetrical. If

the said relation be actually of this form, we shall have an open series

with respect to P, and of three collinear points one will be between the

  other two. It is to be observed that, where the straight line is taken to be

  essentially closed, as in elliptic space, between must be excluded where

three points only are given. Hence elliptic space, in this respect, is not

only consistent with the projective axioms, but contains nothing more

than they do.

It is when we come to the plane that actual inconsistencies arise between

projective Geometry and Euclidean or hyperbolic Geometry. In projective

space, any two lines in a plane interesect; in the Euclidean and hyperbolic

Geometries, this does not occur. In elliptic Geometry, any two lines in a

plane intersect; but in the antipodal form they intersect twice. Thus only the

polar form wholly satisfies the projective axioms. Analogous considerations

apply to the intersection of two planes, or of a line and a plane. These

differences render the projective definition of a plane inapplicable to

Euclidean and hyperbolic spaces, and render the theory of these spaces far

more complicated than that of projective space.

  Finally, in metrical Geometry it is assumed either that two points have a

quantitative relation called distance, which is determined when the points are

given, or that stretches satisfy axioms in virtue of which their divisibilities

become numerically measurable. In this point, even elliptic space differs from

projective space, though the difference is of the nature of an addition, not an

inconsistency. But this matter cannot be discussed until we have examined

metrical Geometry, when we shall be in a position to examine also theprojective theory of distance to more advantage than is at present possible.

373. A few words may be added concerning the principle of duality. This

  principle states, in three dimensions, that the class of planes is also a

  projective space, the intersection of two planes being, as before, the

  straight line, and the intersection of three non-collinear planes taking the

  place of the point. In n dimensions, similarly, a projective space results

from all subclasses of (n − 1) dimensions. Such a duality, as we saw in

  Chapter 44, belongs always to n-dimensional series as such. It would

  seem (though this is only a conjecture) that projective Geometry employs

the smallest number of axioms from which it is possible to generate a

  series of more than two dimensions, and that projective duality therefore

  flows from that of dimensions in general. Other spaces have properties

  additional to those required to make them n-dimensional series, and in

  other spaces, accordingly, duality is liable to various limitations.

* In what follows, I am mainly indebted to Pieri, I Principii della

Geometria di Posizione. Turin, 1898. This is, in my opinion, the best work on

the present subject.

† Pieri, op. cit. § 1, prop. 25.

* We shall see in Chap. 49 that these notions, which are here provisionally

undefined, are themselves variable members of definable classes.

† Pieri, op. cit, § 3, p. 9.

‡ The proof of the uniqueness of the quadrilateral construction will be

found in any text-book of Projective Geometry, e.g. in Cremona’s (Oxford

1893), Chap. viii.

§ A proof that this proposition requires three dimensions is easily derivable

from a theorem given by Hilbert, Grundlagen der Geometrie, p. 51 (Gauss-

Weber Festschrift, Leipzig, 1899).

* See Fano, Giornale di Matimatiche, Vol. 30; Pieri, op. cit. § 4, p. 17 and

Appendix. Fano has proved the necessity of the above axiom in the only

conclusive manner, by constructing a system satisfying all the previous

axioms, but not this one. The discovery of its necessity is due to him. A

simpler but equivalent axiom is that our space contains at least one line on

which there are more than three points.

† Barycentrischer Calcul, Section ii, Chap. vi.

‡ Math. Annalen, 4, 6, 7, 37; Vorlesungen über nicht-Euklidische

Geometrie, Göttingen, 1893, Vol. i, p. 308 ff.§ In what follows, only involutions with real double points are in question.

¶ Op. cit. §§ 5, 6, 7. Pieri’s method was presumably suggested by von

Staudt. Cf. Geometrie der Lage, § 16: especially No. 216.

* This last property affords an instance (almost the only one known to me)

where Peirce’s relative addition occurs outside the Algebra of Relatives.

“dTe or eTb” is the relative sum of T and T, if d, e, and b be variable.
    acacacac

This property results formally from regarding T as the negation of the
                                                      ac

transitive relation Q.
                      ac

† Op. cit. § 9, p. 7.

‡ These developments will be found in Pieri, loc. cit. §§ 8, 10.

* Pieri, § 12.

† We must not assign to c the definite number ω, since we cannot assume,

without further axioms, that c is the limit of our progression. Indeed, so long

as we exclude Pieri’s three axioms above mentioned, we do not know, to

begin with, that c has any ordinal relation to the terms of our progression.

* On this subject, see Klein, Vorlesungen über nicht-Euklidische

Geometrie, p. 338 ff., where proofs will be found.

† e.g. Op. cit. p. 344.

‡ This has the one exception that e came last in the order of the

quadrilateral constructions, and comes first in Pieri’s order. This may be

remedied by the simple device of giving c the coordinate −∞ instead of ∞.

* See Pasch, Neuere Geometrie, § 22; Klein, Math. Annalen, 37.

* See Pasch, loc. cit.

† The anharmonic ratio of four lines through a point or of four planes

through a line is that of the four points in which they meet any line.46


DESCRIPTIVE GEOMETRY




374. The subject which I have called descriptive Geometry is not, as a rule,

  sharply distinguished from projective Geometry. These two terms, and

the term “Geometry of Position”, are commonly used as synonyms. But it

  seems improper to include in projective Geometry any property which is

not unaltered by projection, and it is by the introduction of one such

  property that I wish to define the subject of the present chapter. We have

seen that, in projective space, three points on a line are not such that a

  definite one of them is between the other two. The simplest possible

  proposition involving between, in projective Geometry, requires four

  points, and is as follows: “If a, b, c be distinct collinear points, and d is

on ac, but does not belong to the segment (abc), nor yet coincide with a

or c, then, with regard to the order abc, c is between b and d.” When we

  reflect that the definition of the segment (abc) involves the quadrilateral

    construction—which demands, for its proof, a point outside its own

  plane, and four pairs of triangles in perspective—we shall admit that the

  projective method of generating order is somewhat complicated. But at

any rate the ordinal propositions which result are unaltered by projection.

The elementary sense of between, on the contrary, which is to be

  introduced in the present chapter, is in general not unaltered by

  projection.*

In descriptive Geometry, we start, as before, with points, and as before,

any two points determine a class of points. But this class now consists only of

the points between the two given points. What is to be understood by between

is not explained by any writer on this subject except Vailati, in terms of a

transitive asymmetrical relation of two points; and Vailati’s explanation is

condemned by Peano,* on the ground that between is a relation of three

points, not of two only. This ground, as we know from Part IV, is inadequate

and even irrelevant. But on the subject of relations, even the bestmathematicians go astray, for want, I think, of familiarity with the Logic of

Relations. In the present case, as in that of projective Geometry, we may start

either with a relation of two points, or with a relation between a pair and a

class of points: either method is equally legitimate, and leads to the same

results, but the former is far simpler. Let us examine first the method of

Pasch and Peano, then that of Vailati.

375. We start, in the former method, with two indefinables, point and

  between. If a, b, c be three points, and c is between a and b, we say that c

is an ab, or belongs to the class of points ab. Professor Peano has

  enumerated, with his usual care, the postulates required as regards the

class ab.† In the first place, the points a and b must be distinct, and when

they are so, there always is a point between them. If c is between a and b,

it is also between b and a: a itself (and therefore b) is not between a and

b. We now introduce a new definition. If a, b be any two distinct points,

then a' b is the class of all points c such that b is between a and c.

  Similarly b' a will be the class of points d such that a is between b and d.

We then proceed to new postulates. If a and b be distinct points, a' b must

  contain at least one point. If a, b, c, d be points, and c is between a and d,

b between a and c, then b is between a and d. If b and c be between a and

d, b is between a and c, or identical with c, or between c and d. If c, d

belong to a' b, then either c and d are identical, or c is between b and d, or

d is between b and c. If b is between a and c, and c is between b and d,

then c is between a and d. This makes in all nine postulates with regard

to between. Peano confesses‡ that he is unable to prove that all of them

are independent: hence they are only shown to be sufficient, not

  necessary. The complete straight line (ab) is defined as b' a and a and ab

and b and a' b; that is, (1) points between which and b the point a lies; (2)

the point a; (3) points between a and b; (4) the point b; (5) points

  between which and a the point b lies.

  Concerning this method, we may observe to begin with that it is very

complicated. In the second place, we must remark, as before, that the phrase

“two points determine a class of points” must be expanded as follows: “There

is

a certain specific relation K, to whose domain belongs every couple of

distinct points. K is a many-one relation, and the relatum, corresponding to a

couple of points as referent, is a class of points.” In the third place, we may

observe that the points of the line only acquire order by relation to thesegments which they terminate, and that these acquire order by the relation of

whole and part, or logical inclusion. Let a, b be any two points, and consider

the class of points ab or b or a' b. Let c, d be any two distinct points of this

class. Then either ac is a proper part of ad, or ad is a proper part of ac. Here

ac and ad may be called segments, and we see that segments whose origin is

a and whose limits belong to ab or b or a' b form a series in virtue of the

transitive asymmetrical relation of whole and part. By correlation with these

segments, their extremities also acquire an order; and it is easy to prove that

this order is unchanged when we substitute for a any point of ab' . But the

order still results, as it always must, from a transitive asymmetrical relation of

two terms, and nothing is gained by not admitting such a relation

immediately between points.

376. Passing now to what I have called Vailati’s theory, we find a very

great simplification. We may state the present theory (which is not in

  every detail identical with that of Vailati) as follows. There is a certain

class, which we will call K, of transitive asymmetrical relations. Between

any two points there is one and only one relation of the class K. If R be a

  relation of the class K, Ř is also a relation of this class. Every such

  relation R defines a straight line; that is, if a, b be two points such that

aRb, then a belongs to the straight line ρ. (I use the corresponding Greek

  letter to denote the domain of a relation; thus if S be a relation, σ is the

class of terms having the relation S to some term or other.) If aRb, then

there is some point c such that aRc and cRb; also there is a point d such

that bRd. Further, if a, b be any two distinct points belonging to ρ, then

  either aRb or bRa. With this apparatus we have all that we require.

We may do well to enumerate formally the above definition of the class K,

or rather the postulates concerning its members—for K itself is not defined. I

may remark to begin with that I define the field of a class of relations as the

logical sum of the fields of the constituent relations; and that, if K be the

class, I denote its field by k. Then the axioms we require are as follows.


1. There is a class of relations K, whose field is defined to be the class

    point.

2. There is at least one point. If R be any term of K we have,

3. R is an aliorelative.

4. Ř is a term of K.
      2
5. R = R.6.  (the domain of Ř) is contained in ρ.

7. Between any two points there is one and only one relation of the class K.

8. If a, b be points of ρ, then either aRb or bRa.


The mutual independence of these axioms is easy to see. But let us first

briefly sketch the proof that they give all the required results. Since there is,

by (2), at least one point, and since by (1) this point has some relation of the

class K, and since by (3) all relations of the class K are aliorelatives, it

follows that there is some term, other than the one point, to which this one

point has a relation R of the class K. But since RŘ, by (4), is a relation of the

class K, it follows that the term to which the one point is so related is also a

point. Hence there are at least two distinct points. Let a, b be two distinct

points, and let R be the one relation of the class K between a and b. Thus we
                                                                  2
have aRb. But we do not have bRa, for if we did, since R = R, by (5), we

should have aRa, which contradicts (3). Thus R and RŘ are always different,
                                      2
i.e. each is asymmetrical. Since R = R, aRb and bRc imply aRc, i.e. R is

transitive. Hence the points which have to a the relation R or RŘ, together
                                            2
with a itself, form a series. Since R = R, aRb implies that there is some point

c such that aRc, cRb; i.e. the series generated by R is compact. Since, by (6), 

 is contained in ρ, aRb implies that there is some point c such that bRc.

Applying the same argument to RŘ, there is a point d such that dRa. Thus we

have ρ = ρ, and the field of R has no beginning or end. By (8), the field of R

is what, in Part IV, we called a connected series, that is, it does not fall apart

into two or more detached portions, but of any two of its terms one is before

and the other after. By (7), if there be more than one relation of the class K,

the fields of two such relations cannot, unless one is the converse of the

other, have more than one point in common. The field of one relation of the

class K is called a straight line; and thus (7) assures us that two straight lines

have at most one common point, while (8) assures us that, if ab, cd be the

same line, so are ac and bd. Thus it is proved that our axioms are sufficient

for the geometry of a line, while (7) goes beyond a single line, but is inserted

here because it does not imply the existence of points outside a single line, or

of more than one relation of the class K. It is most important to observe that,

in the above enumeration of fundamentals, there is only one indefinable,

namely K, not two as in Peano’s system.

377. With regard to the mutual independence of the axioms, it is to be

  observed that (1) is not properly an axiom, but the assumption of our  indefinable K. (2) may obviously be denied while all the others are

  maintained. If (3) be denied, and R be taken to be the symmetrical

  relation of projective Geometry, together with identity with some term of

ρ, we obtain projective Geometry, which is different from the present

  system, but self-consistent. If (4) be denied, all the rest can be

  maintained; the only difficulty is as regards (7), for if aRb, and Ř is not a

term of K, b will not have to a any relation of the class K, unless indeed it

has one which is not Ř, which seems to be not contradictory. As regards
                                                          22
(5), we may deny either that R is contained in R, or that R is contained

in R. To deny the former makes our series not compact, to which there is

no logical objection. The latter, but not the former, is false as regards

  angles,* which can be made to satisfy all the other axioms here laid

  down. (6) will become false if our lines have last terms: thus the space on

the left of a plane, together with this plane, will satisfy all the axioms

  except (6). As regards (7), it is plainly independent of all the rest; it

  consists of two parts, (a) the assertion that between any two points there

is at least one relation of the class K, (b) the assertion that there is not

  more than one such relation between two given points. If we consider a

  Euclidean and a hyperbolic space together, all the axioms will be true

  except (a). If we combine two different classes K, K of relations of the
                                                            12

  above kind, such that k = k, (b) alone will be false. Nevertheless it
                            12

  seems plain that (b) cannot be deduced from the other axioms. As regards

(8), it alone is false if we take for K the class of directions in Euclidean

  space, in which a set of parallel lines all have the same direction. Thus

the necessity of all except one of our axioms is strictly proved, and that

of this one is highly probable.

378. We saw that the above method enabled us to content ourselves with

one indefinable, namely the class of relations K. But we may go further,

and dispense altogether with indefinables. The axioms concerning the

class K were all capable of statement in terms of the logic of relations.

  Hence we can define a class C of classes of relations, such that every

  member of C is a class of relations satisfying our axioms. The axioms

then become parts of a definition, and we have neither indefinables nor

  axioms. If K be any member of the class C, and k be the field of K, then k

is a descriptive space, and every term of k is a descriptive point. Here

  every concept is defined in terms of general logical concepts. The same

  method can be applied to projective space, or to any other mathematical  entity except the indefinables of logic. This is, indeed, though

  grammatically inconvenient, the true way, philosophically speaking, to

define mathematical notions. Outside logic, indefinables and primitive

  propositions are not required by pure mathematics, and should therefore,

  strictly speaking, not be introduced. This subject will be resumed in

  Chapter 49.

379. The two ways of defining the straight line—that of Pasch and Peano,

and that which I have just explained—seem equally legitimate, and lead

to the same consequences. The choice between them is therefore of no

  mathematical importance. The two methods agree in enabling us, in

  terms of two points only, to define three parts of a straight line, namely

the part before a (b' a), the part between a and b (ab), and the part after b

(a' b). This is a point in which descriptive Geometry differs from

  projective Geometry: there we had, with respect to a and b, only two

  segments of the straight line ab, and these could not be defined without

  reference to another point c of the line, and to the quadrilateral

  construction.

The straight line may be regarded either as the class of points forming the

field of a relation R, or as this relation itself. For the sake of distinction, it

will be well to call the relation R a ray, since this word suggests a sense; Ř

will then be the opposite ray. In considering a number of lines all passing

through one point O, it will be well to give the name of ray also to the class

of points to which O has some relation R, i.e. to those points of a line through

O which lie on one side of O. Those on the other side of O will then be the

opposite ray. The context will show in which sense the word is used.

380. I come now to the plane. Easy as it is to define the plane in projective

  space, its definition when the line is not a closed series, or rather, when

we wish to call coplanar some pairs of lines which do not intersect, is a

  matter of some difficulty. Pasch* takes the plane, or rather a finite

  portion of the plane, as a new indefinable. It is, however, capable of

  definition, as, following Peano, I shall now show.

We need, to begin with, some new axioms. First, if ρ be any straight line,

there is at least one point not belonging to ρ. Next, if a, b, c be three points

not in one straight line, and d be a point of bc between b and c, e a point of ad

between a and d, then be will meet ac in a point f and e will be between b and

f, f between a and c. Again, a, b, c, d being as before, if f be a point between a

and c, then ad and bf will intersect in a point e between a and d and betweenb and f.† We now define what may be regarded as the product (in a

geometrical sense) of a point and a figure. If a be any point, and k any figure,

ak is to denote the points which lie on the various segments between a and

the points of k. That is, if p be any point of k, and x any point of the segment

ap, then x belongs to the class ak. This definition may be applied even when

a is a point of k, and k is a straight line or part of one. The figure ak will then

be the whole line or some continuous portion of it. Peano now proves, by

purely logical transformations, that, if a, b, c be distinct non-collinear points,

a (bc) = b (ac). This figure is called the triangle abc, and is thus wholly

determined by its three defining points. It is also shown that, if p, q be points

of the segments ab, ac respectively, the segment pq is wholly contained in the

triangle abc. After some more theorems, we come to a new definition. If a be

a point, and k any figure (i.e. class of points), a' k is to denote all the points

between which and a lies some point of k, that is, as Peano remarks, the

whole shadow of k if a be an illuminated point. Thus if a, b, c be non-

collinear points, a' (bc) will represent the class of points beyond bc and

bounded by ab, ac produced. This enables us to define the plane (abc) as

consisting of the straight lines bc, ca, ab, the triangle abc and the figures a'

bc, b' ca, c' ab, b' c' a, c' a' b, a' b' c.* It is then easy to show that any other

three points of the plane define the same plane, and that the line joining two

points of a plane lies wholly in the plane. But in place of the proposition that

any two lines in a plane intersect, we have a more complicated proposition,

namely: If a, b, c, d be coplanar points, no three of which are collinear, then

either the lines ab, cd intersect, or ac, bd do so, or ad, bc do so.

381. Having successfully defined the plane, we can now advance to solid

  Geometry. For this we need, to begin with, the axiom: Given any plane,

there is at least one point outside the plane. We can then define a

  tetrahedron exactly as we defined a triangle. But in order to know that

  two planes, which have a point in common, have a line in common, we

  need a new axiom, which shows that the space we are dealing with has

three dimensions. In projective space, this axiom was simply that a line

and a plane always have at least one point in common. But here, no such

  simple axiom holds. The following is given by Peano (loc. cit. p. 74): If p

be a plane, and a a point not on p, and b a point of a' p (i.e. a point such

that the segment ab contains a point of p, or, in common language, a

  point on the other side of the plane from a), then if x be any point, either

x lies on the plane, or the segment ax contains a point of the plane, or elsethe segment bx contains a point of the plane. By adding to this, finally, an

  axiom of continuity, we have all the apparatus of three-dimensional

  descriptive Geometry.†

382. Descriptive Geometry, as above defined, applies equally to Euclidean

and to hyperbolic space: none of the axioms mentioned discriminate

  between these two. Elliptic space, on the contrary, which was included in

  projective Geometry, is here excluded. It is impossible, or rather, it has

  hitherto proved so, to set up a general set of axioms which will lead to a

  general Geometry applying to all three spaces, for at some point our

  axioms must lead to either an open or a closed series of points on a line.

  Such a general Geometry can be constructed symbolically, but this

  results from giving different interpretations to our symbols, the

  indefinables in one interpretation being definable in another, and vice

  versá. This will become plain by examining the method in which

  projective Geometry is made applicable to the space above defined,

  which, for want of a better name, I shall call descriptive space.

383. When we try to apply projective Geometry to descriptive space, we are

met by the difficulty that some of the points required in a construction

may not exist. Thus in the quadrilateral construction, given three points

a, b, c, the fourth point d may not exist at all. We can prove as before

that, if it exists, it is unique, and so with other projective propositions:

they become hypothetical, since the construction indicated is not always

  possible. This has led to the introduction of what are called ideal

  elements (points, lines and planes), by means of which it becomes

  possible to state our projective theorems generally. These ideal elements

  have a certain analogy to complex numbers in Algebra—an analogy

  which in analytical Geometry becomes very close. Before explaining in

  detail how these elements are introduced, it may be well to state the

logical nature of the process. By means of the points, lines and planes of

  descriptive Geometry, we define a new set of entities, some of which

  correspond (i.e. have a one-one relation) to our points, lines and planes

  respectively, while others do not. These new entities we call ideal points,

  lines and planes; and we find that they have all the properties of

  projective points, lines and planes. Hence they constitute a projective

  space, and all projective propositions apply to them. Since our ideal

  elements are defined by means of the elements of descriptive space,

  projective propositions concerning these ideal elements are theorems  concerning descriptive space, though not concerning its actual points,

  lines and planes. Pasch, who has given the best account of the way in

  which ideal elements are to be defined,* has not perceived (or, at any

rate, does not state) that no ideal point is an actual point, even where it

has a one-one relation to an actual point, and that the same holds of lines

and planes. This is exactly the same remark as we have had to make

  concerning rationals, positive numbers, real numbers and complex

  numbers, all of which are supposed, by the mathematician, to contain the

  cardinals or the ordinals, whereas no one of them can ever be one of the

  cardinals or ordinals. So here, an ideal element is never identical with an

  actual point, line or plane. If this be borne in mind, the air of magic

  which surrounds the usual expositions disappears.

384. An ideal point is defined as follows. Consider first the class of all the

  lines passing through some point, called the vertex. This class of lines is

  called a sheaf of lines (Strahlenbündel). A sheaf so defined has certain

  properties which can be stated without reference to the vertex.† Such are,

for example, the following: Through any point (other than the vertex)

there is one and only one line of the sheaf; and any two lines of the sheaf

are coplanar. All the properties of a sheaf, which can be stated without

  reference to the vertex, are found to belong to certain classes of lines

having no vertex, and such that no two of the class intersect. For these a

  simple construction can be given, as follows.* Let l, m be any two lines

in one plane, A any point not in this plane. Then the planes Al, Am have a

line in common. The class of such lines, for all possible points A outside

the plane lm, has the properties above alluded to, and the word sheaf is

  extended to all classes of lines so defined. It is plain that if l, m intersect,

the sheaf has a vertex; if not, it has none. Thus, in Euclidean space, all

the lines parallel to a given line form a sheaf which has no vertex. When

our sheaf has no vertex, we define an ideal point by means of the sheaf.

But this must not be supposed to be really a point: it is merely another

  name for the sheaf itself, and so, when our sheaf has a vertex, if we are to

  make propositions in which ideal points occur, we must substitute the

  sheaf for its vertex. That is, an ideal point is simply a sheaf, and no sheaf

is an actual point. Concerning sheaves of lines we may observe the

  following points. Any two straight lines in one plane uniquely determine

a sheaf. Two sheaves both having a vertex always determine a line,

  namely that joining the vertices, which is common to both sheaves. Three  sheaves, of which one at least has a vertex, determine a plane, unless they

are collinear. A line and a plane always have a common sheaf, and so

  have three planes of which two at least have a common point.

385. Thus sheaves of lines have some projective properties, in relation to

  lines and planes, which are lacking to points. In order to obtain entities

with further projective properties, we must, to begin with, replace our

  lines by ideal lines. For this purpose we must first define pencils of

  planes (axial pencils, Ebenenbüschel). An axial pencil consists, in the

  first instance, of all the planes through a given straight line, called the

axis. But as in the case of sheaves, it is found that such a figure has many

  properties independent of the axis, and that these properties all belong to

certain other classes of planes, to which the name of pencil is therefore

  extended. These figures are defined as follows.† Let A, B be two sheaves

of lines. Let D be a point not on the line (if there be one) common to the

  two sheaves A, B. Then A, B, D determine uniquely a plane, which we

may call ABD, or P (say). This will be the plane containing those lines of

A and B that pass through D. Any other point E, not in the plane P, will

  determine a different plane ABE, or Q. The class of planes so obtained,

by varying D or E, is a pencil of planes, and has all the properties of a

  pencil having a real axis, except those in which the axis is explicitly

  mentioned. Any two planes P and Q belonging to the pencil completely

  determine it. Moreover, in place of A and B above, we may substitute any

  other sheaves of lines A' , B' , belonging to both P and Q. (A sheaf

  belongs to a plane when one of its lines lies in the plane.) Any two

  sheaves belonging to both P and Q will serve to define the pencil of

  planes, and will belong to every plane of the pencil. Hence if, in place of

  actual points, we substitute ideal points, i.e. sheaves of lines, every pencil

of planes has an axis, consisting of a certain collection of sheaves of

lines, any two of which define the pencil. This collection of sheaves is

  called an ideal line.*

386. Substituting ideal points and lines for actual ones, we find that we have

now made a further advance towards projective space. Two ideal points

  determine one and only one ideal line; a given plane is determined by any

three of its ideal points which do not belong to one ideal line, but three

ideal points do not always determine a plane. Two ideal lines in a plane

  always have a common ideal point, and so have a plane and an ideal line.

  Also two planes always have a common ideal line, and three planes  always have either a common ideal point or a common ideal line. The

only point where our space is not strictly projective is in regard to planes.

  There is a plane through any two ideal points and one actual point, or

  through an ideal point and an actual line. If there is a plane at all through

three non-collinear ideal points, or through an ideal line and an ideal

  point not on the line, then there is only one such plane; but in some cases

there is no such plane. To remedy this, we must introduce one more new

class of entities, namely ideal planes.

The definition of ideal planes† is comparatively simple. If A, B, C be any

three ideal points, D an ideal point on the ideal line AB, and E on AC, then

the ideal line DE has an ideal point in common with BC, whether there be an

actual plane determined by A, B, C or not. Thus if B, C, D be any three ideal

points, and E any other ideal point such that BD, CE intersect, then BC, DE

intersect, and so do BE, CD. Hence, if B, C, D be not collinear, we define the

ideal plane BCD as that class of ideal points E which are such that the ideal

lines BD, CE intersect.

For the sake of clearness, let us repeat this definition in terms of our

original points, lines and planes, without the use of the word ideal. Given

three sheaves of lines B, C, D, which are not all contained in a common

pencil of planes, let E be another sheaf of lines such that there is a sheaf of

lines common to the two pencils of planes BD, CE. Then the class of all

sheaves E satisfying this condition is called the ideal plane BCD.

The usual properties of planes are easily proved concerning our new ideal

planes, as that any three of their points determine them, that the ideal line

joining two of their ideal points is wholly contained in them, and so forth. In

fact, we find now that the new points, lines and planes constitute a projective

space, with all the properties described in the preceding chapter. The

elementary order of points on a line, with which we began, has disappeared,

and a new order has to be generated by means of the separation of couples.*

Thus all projective Geometry becomes available; and wherever our ideal

points, lines and planes correspond to actual ones, we have a corresponding

projective proposition concerning the latter.

387. I have explained this development at length, partly because it shows

the very wide applicability of projective Geometry, partly because it

  affords a good instance of the emphasis which mathematics lays upon

  relations. To the mathematician, it is wholly irrelevant what his entities

are, so long as they have relations of a specified type. It is plain, for  example, that an instant is a very different thing from a point; but to the

  mathematician as such there is no relevant distinction between the

  instants of time and the points on a line. So in our present instance, the

  highly complex notion of a sheaf of lines—an infinite class of infinite

  classes—is philosophically very widely dissimilar to the simple notion of

a point. But since classes of sheaves can be formed, having the same

  relations to their constituent sheaves that projective lines and planes have

to projective points, a sheaf of lines in descriptive space is, for

  mathematical purposes, a projective point. It is not, however, even for

  mathematical purposes, a point of descriptive space, and the above

  transformation clearly shows that descriptive space is not a species of

  projective space, but a radically distinct entity. And this is, for

  philosophy, the principal result of the present chapter.

It is a remarkable fact, which the above generation of a projective space

demonstrates, that if we remove from a projective space all the points of a

plane, or all the points on one side of a closed quadric,† the remaining points

form a descriptive space, Euclidean in the first case, hyperbolic in the second.

Yet, in ordinary metrical language, the projective space is finite, while the

part of it which is descriptive is infinite. This illustrates the comparatively

superficial nature of metrical notions.


* The present subject is admirably set forth by Pasch, Neuere Geometrie,

Leipzig, 1882, with whose empirical pseudo-philosophical reasons for

preferring it to projective Geometry, however, I by no means agree (see

Einleitung and § 1). It is carried further, especially as regards the definition of

the plane, by Peano, I Principii di Geometria logicamente esposti, Turin,

1889. For the definition of the whole line by means of its various segments,

see Peano’s note in Rivista di Matematica,ii, pp. 58–62. See also his article

“Sui fondamenti della Geometria”, ib. iv, p. 51 ff., and Vailati, “Sui Principi

fondamentali della Geometria della retta”, Riv. d. Mat., ii, pp. 71–75.

Whatever, in the following pages, is not controversial, will be found in the

above sources.

* Riv. di Mat. iv, p. 62.

† lb. iv, p. 55 ff.

‡ lb. p. 62.

* See Part IV, chap. 24.

* Op. cit. § 2.† Riv. di Mat., iv, p. 64.

* The figure b' (c' a), or b' c' a, represents the angle between ba and ca

both produced, as may be seen from the definition.

† I confine myself as a rule to three dimensions, since a further extension

has little theoretic interest. Three dimensions are far more interesting than

two, because, as we have seen, the greater part of projective Geometry—i.e.

everything dependent upon the quadrilateral construction—is impossible with

less than three dimensions, unless the uniqueness of the quadrilateral

construction be taken as an axiom.

* Op. cit. §§ 6–8.

† These are enumerated by Killing, Grundlagen der Geometrie, Vol. ii

(Paderborn, 1898), p. 82.

* Pasch, op. cit. § 5.

† Pasch, op. cit. § 7.

* For logical purposes, it is better to define the ideal line as the class of

ideal points associated with a sheaf of planes, than as the sheaf itself, for we

wish a line to be, as in projective Geometry, a class of points.

† Pasch, op. cit. § 8.

* See Pasch, op. cit. § 9.

† For the projective definition of a surface of the second order (quadric) in

a projective space cf. Reye, Geometrie der Lage (Hanover, 1868), Part ii,

Lecture v. A quadric is closed if there are points not on it such that all straight

lines through them cut the quadric. Such points are within the quadric.47


METRICAL GEOMETRY




388. The subject of the present chapter is elementary Geometry, as treated

by Euclid or by any other author prior to the nineteenth century. This

  subject includes the usual analytical Geometry, whether Euclidean or

  non-Euclidean; it is distinguished from projective and descriptive

  Geometry, not by any opposition corresponding to that of Euclid and

  non-Euclid, but by its method and its indefinables. The question whether

its indefinables can, or cannot, be defined in terms of those of projective

and descriptive Geometry, is a very difficult one, which I postpone to the

  following chapter. For the present, I shall develop the subject

    straightforwardly, in a manner as similar to Euclid’s as is consistent with

the requisite generality and with the avoidance of fallacies. Metrical

  Geometry is logically subsequent to the two kinds which we have

  examined, for it necessarily assumes one or other of these two kinds, to

  which it merely adds further specifications. I shall, as a rule, assume

  descriptive Geometry, mentioning projective Geometry only in

  connection with points in which it shows important metrical differences

from descriptive Geometry. In the former case, all the first twenty-six

  propositions of Euclid will hold. In the latter, the first, seventh, sixteenth

and seventeenth require modification; for these propositions assume, in

one form or another, that the straight line is not a closed series.

  Propositions after the twenty-sixth—or, with a suitable definition of

  parallels, after the twenty-eighth—depend, with few exceptions, upon the

  postulate of parallels, and are therefore not to be assumed generally.

389. Since Euclid still has popularly, and even with mathematicians, a

  reputation for rigour, in virtue of which his circumlocution and long-

  windedness are condoned, it may be worth while to point out, to begin

with, a few of the errors in his first twenty-six propositions.* To begin

with the first proposition. There is no evidence whatever that the circles  which we are told to construct intersect, and if they do not, the whole

  proposition fails. Euclid’s problems are often regarded as existence-

  theorems, and from this point of view, it is plain, the assumption that the

  circles in question intersect is precisely the same as the assumption that

there is an equilateral triangle on a given base. And in elliptic space,

  where the straight line is a closed series, the construction fails when the

  length of the base exceeds half the length of the whole straight line. As

  regards the second and third propositions, there is nothing to be said,

  except that they are not existence-theorems. The corresponding

    existence-theorem—i.e. on any straight line, in either direction from a

  given point on the line, there is a point whose distance from the given

  point is equal to a given distance—is equivalent to the postulate

  concerning the circle, and is thus prior to the second and third

  propositions. With regard to the fourth, there is a great deal to be said;

  indeed Euclid’s proof is so bad that he would have done better to assume

this proposition as an axiom.† As the issues raised by this proof are of

great importance, both to mathematics and to philosophy, I shall set forth

its fallacies at some length.

390. The fourth proposition is the first in which Euclid employs the method

of superposition—a method which, since he will make any détour to

  avoid it,‡ he evidently dislikes, and rightly, since it has no logical

  validity, and strikes every intelligent child as a juggle. In the first place,

to speak of motion implies that our triangles are not spatial, but material.

For a point of space is a position, and can no more change its position

than the leopard can change his spots. The motion of a point of space is a

  phantom directly contradictory to the law of identity: it is the supposition

that a given point can be now one point and now another. Hence motion,

in the ordinary sense, is only possible to matter, not to space. But in this

case superposition proves no geometrical property. Suppose that the

  triangle ABC is by the window, and the side AB consists of the column of

  mercury in a thermometer; suppose also that DEF is by the fire. Let us

  apply ABC to DEF as Euclid directs, and let AB just cover DE. Then we

are to conclude that ABC and DEF, before the motion, were equal in all

  respects. But if we had brought DEF to ABC, no such result would have

  followed. But how foolish! I shall be told; of course ABC and DEF are to

be both rigid bodies. Well and good. But two little difficulties remain. In

the first place—and for my opponent, who is an empirical philosopher,this point is serious—it is as certain as anything can be that there are no

  rigid bodies in the universe. In the second place—and if my opponent

were not an empiricist, he would find this objection far more fatal—the

  meaning of rigidity presupposes a purely spatial metrical equality,

  logically independent of matter. For what is meant by a rigid body? It is

one which, throughout a continuous portion of time, preserves all its

  metrical properties unchanged. Hence we incur a most fatally vicious

  circle if we attempt to define metrical properties by rigidity. If αβγ be a

  material triangle, which occupies at one time the space ABC, at another

the space A' B' C' , to say that αβγ is rigid means that, however the two

  times be chosen (within some assigned period), the triangles ABC, A' B'

C' are equal in all respects. If we are to avoid this conclusion, we must

define rigidity in some wholly non-geometrical manner. We may say, for

  example, that a rigid body means one which is made of steel, or of brass.

But then it becomes a logical error to regard brass eternal as slave to

  mortal rage; and if we define equal spaces as those which can be

  occupied by one and the same rigid body, the propositions of metrical

  Geometry will be one and all false.

The fact is that motion, as the word is used by geometers, has a meaning

entirely different from that which it has in daily life, just as a variable, in

mathematics, is not something which changes, but is usually, on the contrary,

something incapable of change. So it is with motion. Motion is a certain class

of one-one relations, each of which has every point of space for its extension,

and each of which has a converse also belonging to the class. That is, a

motion is a one-one relation, in which the referent and the relatum are both

points, and in which every point may appear as referent and again as relatum.

A motion is not this only: on the contrary, it has this further characteristic,

that the metrical properties of any class of referents are identical with those of

the corresponding class of relata. This characteristic, together with the other,

defines a motion as used in Geometry, or rather, it defines a motion or a

reflexion; but this point need not be elucidated at present. What is clear is,

that a motion presupposes the existence, in different parts of space, of figures

having the same metrical properties, and cannot be used to define those

properties. And it is this sense of the word motion, not the usual material

sense, which is relevant to Euclid’s use of superposition.

391. Returning now to Euclid’s fourth proposition, we see that the

  superposition of ABC on DEF involves the following assumptions. (1)On the line DE there is a point E, on either side of D, such that DE = AB.

This is provided for by the postulate about the circle. (2) On either side of

the ray DE, there is a ray DF such that the angle EDF is equal to the

  angle BAC. This is required for the possibility of a triangle DEF such as

the enunciation demands, but no axiom from which this follows can be

  found in Euclid. The problem, to construct an angle EDF equal to BAC,

does not occur till I. 23, and there I. 4 is used in the proof. Hence the

  present assumption must be added to Euclid’s axioms. It now follows

that on DF there is a point F such that DF = AC. Hence the possibility of

  two such triangles as the enunciation demands is established. But in order

to prove that DEF is equal in all respects to ABC, we need a further

  axiom, namely: With one angle at D, one side along the ray DE, and the

  other side of the right (or left) of DE, there exists a triangle which is

  equal in all respects to the triangle ABC.* This is, in fact, the exact

  assumption which is concealed in the method of superposition. With this

  assumption, it finally becomes possible to prove that DEF is the triangle

  satisfying the above conditions and equal in all respects to ABC.

The next remark concerns I. 6. Here Euclid first employs an axiom of

which he is wholly unconscious, though it is very essential to his system,

namely: If OA, OB, OC be three rays which meet a straight line not passing

through O in A, B, C respectively, and if B be between A and C, then the

angle AOB is less than the angle AOC. This axiom, it will be seen, is not

applicable in projective space, since it presupposes that the line is not a

closed series. In I. 7, if this proposition is to apply to hyperbolic space, we

require further the axiom: If three non-intersecting lines in one plane meet

two lines in A, B, C; A' , B' , C' , respectively; and if B be between A and C;

then B' is between A' and C' . Also it may be observed that Euclid gives no

definition of the two sides of a line, a notion which again presupposes that the

straight line is not a closed series. And with regard to angles, I. 7 requires

sufficient axioms to show that they are a series of the kind explained in Part

IV, Chapter 24; or else we must assume the descriptive axiom of the last

chapter, to the effect that, if A, B, C, D be coplanar points, no three of which

are collinear, there is a point common to the stretches AB, CD, or to AC, BD,

or to AD, BC. All these assumptions will be found implicit in I. 7, as may be

seen by attempting a symbolic proof in which no figure is used.

  Similar remarks apply to I. 16. In I. 12 it is assumed that a circle must meet

a line in two points, if at all. But enough has been said to show that Euclid isnot faultless, and that his explicit axioms are very insufficient. Let us, then,

make an independent examination of metrical Geometry.

392. Metrical Geometry is usually said to be distinguished by the

  introduction of quantity. It is sufficient for the characterization of

  metrical Geometry to observe that it introduces, between every pair of

  points, a relation having certain properties in virtue of which it is

  numerically measurable—i.e. such that numbers can be given a one-one

  correspondence with the various relations of the class in question. The

class of relations is called distance, and will be regarded, though this is

not strictly necessary, as a class of magnitudes. Some of the properties of

  distance are as follows.

    Every pair of points has one and only one distance.1. 

2. Distances are symmetrical relations.

3. On a given straight line through a given point, there are two and only

    two points at a given distance from the given point.

4. There is no maximum distance.

5. The distance of a point from itself is zero.*

6. There is no minimum to the distance between distinct points.

7. If d, δ be two given distances, and A, A, A, … A, … be distinct points
                                                012n

    on a straight line, whose distances one from the next are all δ, then for

    some value of n, AA is greater than d.
                          0n

8. If A, A be any two points, there exist n − 1 distinct points (whatever
        0n

    integer n may be) on the straight line AA, such that the distances of
                                                  0n

    each from the next, of A from the first, and of A from the last, are all
                                0n

    equal.†


393. It may be observed that, if we admit the axiom that the whole is greater

than the part, the properties (1), (4), (5) and (6) belong to stretches, while

(2) becomes admissible by abstracting from the sense of a stretch. With

  regard to the remaining properties, (3), (7) and (8), there is nothing in

  descriptive Geometry to show whether or not they belong to stretches.

  Hence we may, if we choose, regard these three properties as axioms

  regarding stretches, and drop the word distance altogether. I believe that

this represents the simplest course, and, as regards actual space, the most

  correct. At the same time, there is no contradiction in regarding distances

as new relations distinct from stretches.‡ If we identify distance and  stretch, what distinguishes metrical from descriptive Geometry is

  primarily the three additional axioms (3), (7) and (8), applied to a new

  indefinable, namely, the magnitude of divisibility of a stretch. This is not

  properly a notion of pure mathematics, since it cannot be derived from

our original apparatus of logical notions. On the other hand, distance is

not indefinable, being a class of one-one relations with certain assignable

  properties. On this point either course is logically permissible, but only

  distance can be introduced into pure mathematics in the strict sense in

  which the word is used in this work.

The above axioms are required for showing that all distances are

numerically measurable in terms of any standard distance.§ It is not

necessary that distances should be magnitudes, or even relations; all that is

essential is that distances should form a series with certain properties. If the

points of a line form a continuous series, then distances do so also, in virtue

of (3); thus all signless real numbers will be required for their measurement.

394. Assuming that distance and stretch are distinct, it may be asked

  whether distances do not suffice for generating order on the straight line,

  without the need of any asymmetrical transitive relation of points. This

  represents, I think, the usual view of philosophers; but it is by no means

easy to decide whether it represents a tenable view. It might perhaps be

  thought that (2) might be dropped, and distance regarded as an

  asymmetrical relation. So long as we confine our attention to one line,

this view seems unobjectionable. But as soon as we consider the fact that

  distances on different lines may be equal, we see that the difference of

  sense between AB and BA is not relevant to distance, since there is no

such difference between distances on different lines. Thus if CD be a

  distance on another line, CD may be equal both to AB and BA, and hence

AB and BA must be equal, not opposite, distances. And the same thing

may be made evident by considering a sphere. For this certainly consists

of points at a given distance from the centre; and thus points at opposite

ends of a diameter must have the same distance from the centre.

  Distance, then, is symmetrical; but it does not follow that the order on a

line cannot be generated by distance. Let A, B be given points on a line,

and let C, C' be two points on AB whose distances from A are equal, and

  less than AB. If we now set up the axiom that either BC or BC' is less

than AB, while the other, BC' or BC, is greater than AB, we shall, I think,

after some further axioms, be able to generate order without any other  relation than distance. If A, B, C be three collinear points such that the

  distances AC, CB are both less than AB, then we shall say that C is

  between A and B. If A, B, C' be points such that AC' , AB are both less

than BC' , then we shall say that A is between B and C' . If, finally, A, B,

C'' be points such that AB, BC'' are both less than AC'' , we shall say that

B is between A and C'' . It remains to see whether, as the generation of a

  series requires, one of these always happens. Let A, B, C be any three

  collinear points. First suppose, if possible, that the distances AB, BC, CA

are all equal. This case is not excluded by anything hitherto assumed; we

  require, therefore, the further axiom that, if AB, BC be equal, AC is not

  equal to either of them; and I think it will be prudent to assume that AC is

  greater than either. Thus the case of two equal distances and one less than

  either is excluded. Of the three distances AB, BC, AC, therefore, one must

be the greatest: let this be AC. Then in virtue of the definition, B will be

  between A and C. But our difficulties are not at an end. For we require

further that any point between A and B shall be between A and C; and

that, if A be between D and C, B shall be between D and C. With regard

to the first point, if E be between A and B, AE and EB are less than AB,

and therefore less than AC. But nothing assures us that EC is less than

AC. For this purpose we need a new axiom, which will be just what we

set out to prove, namely: If AE, EB be both less than AB, and AB, BC be

both less than AC, then EC is less than AC. Finally, to prove that, if A be

  between D and C, and B between A and C, then B is between D and C.

Here DA, AC are less than DC, and AB, BC are less than AC. Hence BC is

  less than DC; but nothing proves BD less than DC. For this we shall need

a new axiom, and then at last our order will be definite. But the process,

as is evident, is extremely complicated.

395. Moreover we still need a method of defining the straight line. Pieri has

  shown, in an admirable memoir,* how to deduce metrical geometry by

  taking point and motion as the only indefinables. In § 390, we objected to

the introduction of motion, as usually effected, on the ground that its

  definition presupposes metrical properties; but Pieri escapes this

  objection by not defining motion at all, except through the postulates

  assumed concerning it. The straight line joining two points is the class of

  points that are unchanged by a motion which leaves the two points fixed.

The sphere, the plane, per-pendicularity, the order of points on a line, etc.

are easily defined. This procedure is logically unimpeachable, and is  probably the simplest possible for elementary geometry. But we must

now return to the consideration of other suggested systems.

  There is a method, invented by Leibniz† and revived by Frischauf‡ and

Peano,§ in which distance alone is fundamental, and the straight line is

defined by its means. In this method distances are given to begin with as a

class of relations which are the field of a certain transitive asymmetrical

relation (greater and smaller); if we assume this relation to be continuous,

distances will be measurable; all distances have the same domain and the

same converse domain, namely all the points of the space in question; the

locus of points equidistant from two fixed points is called a plane, and the

intersection of two non-coincident planes, when it is not null, is called a

straight line. (The definition of the straight line given by Peano¶ is as

follows: The straight line ab is the class of points x such that any point y,

whose distances from a and b are respectively equal to the distances of x

from a and b, must be coincident with x.) Leibniz, who invented this method,

failed, according to Couturat, to prove that there are straight lines, or that a

straight line is determined by any two of its points. Peano has not, so far as I

am aware, succeeded in proving either of these propositions, but it is of

course possible to introduce them by means of axioms. Frischauf professes to

demonstrate them, but his proofs are very informal, and it is difficult to know

what axioms he is assuming. In any case, however, the definitions prove that,

by a sufficient use of axioms, it is possible to construct a geometry in which

distance is fundamental, and the straight line derivative. The method is so

complicated as to be not practically desirable; but its logical possibility is

nevertheless important.

396. It is thus plain that the straight line must be independent of distance,

  while distance may be independent of the straight line. Taking both as

  symmetrical relations, we can, by a very complicated series of axioms,

  succeed in generating order on the straight line and in explaining the

  addition and measurement of distances. But this complication, in most

  spaces,* is logically unnecessary, and is wholly avoided by deriving

  distances from stretches. We now start, as in descriptive Geometry, with

an asymmetrical transitive relation by which the straight line is both

  defined and shown to be a series. We define as the distance of two points

A and B the magnitude of divisibility of the stretch from A to B or B to A

  —for divisibility is a signless magnitude. Divisibility being a kind of

  magnitude, any two distances will be equal or unequal. As with all  divisibilities, the sum of the divisibilities of AB and EF is the divisibility

of the logical sum of the classes AB and EF, provided these classes have

no common part. If they have a common part, we substitute for EF a

  stretch E' F' equal to it and having no part in common with AB. The

  difference of the distances AB, EF (supposing AB the greater) is the

  divisibility of a stretch CD which, added logically to EF, and having no

part in common with EF, produces a stretch equal to AB. It follows at

  once that, if A, B, C be collinear, and B be between A and C, AB + BC =

AC and AC − AB = BC. No further axiom is required for these

  propositions. For the proposition that, if AB = A' B' , and CD = C' D' ,

then AB + CD = A' B' + C' D' , we require only the general axiom,

  applicable to all divisibilities, that the sums of equals are equal. Thus by

the help of the axioms (3), (7), (8) above, we have everything that is

  required for the numerical measurement (theoretically speaking) of all

  distances in terms of any given distance, and for the proof that change of

unit involves multiplication throughout by a common factor.

397. With regard to magnitude of divisibility, in the sense in which this is

  relevant to metrical Geometry, it is important to realize that it is an

  ordinal notion, expressing a property of relations, not of their fields. We

  wish to say that a stretch of two inches has twice as much divisibility as a

  stretch of one inch, and that an area is infinitely more divisible than a

  stretch. Now, if we are dealing (as will be assumed in this discussion)
                                                                                  α
with a continuous space, every stretch, area or volume is a class of 2
                                                                                    0

  terms; and considered as a class, it is the field of an infinite number of

  relations beside that (or those) belonging to it in respect of the space we

are considering. The habit of allowing the imagination to dwell upon

  actual space has made the order of points appear in some way intrinsic or

  essential, and not merely relative to one of many possible ordering

  relations. But this point of view is not logical: it arises, in regard to actual

  space, only from the fact that the generating relations of actual space

  have a quite peculiar connection with our perceptions, and, through the

  continuity of motion, with time. From the standpoint of logic, no one of

the relations having a given field has any preeminence, and the points of
                                              α
  actual space, like any other class of 2 terms, form, with regard to other
                                              0

  sets of generating relations, other sorts of continuous spaces—indeed any

  other continuous space, having any finite number of dimensions, or even

ω dimensions, can be formed of the points of a Euclidean space by  attending to other generating relations.

  From this it follows that magnitude of divisibility, if it is to distinguish a

long stretch from a short one, or an area from a stretch, must be a property of

the relations involved, not of the class of points composing the area or the

stretch. It is not quite easy to define the exact property which is required; for

any two stretches are ordinally similar. We require some sense for the

equality or inequality of the relations whose fields are the given stretches.

Where coordinates (i.e. a correlation of the points of a line with the real

numbers) have been already introduced, we may define the magnitude of a

stretch as the difference of the coordinates of its end-points or its limits

(according as the stretch has ends or not); but if this is done, the magnitudes

of stretches will depend upon the necessarily more or less arbitrary plan upon

which we have introduced our coordinates. This is the course adopted in the

projective theory of distance—a course which has the merit of making

metrical Geometry a logical development from projective axioms alone (see

next chapter). The other course that may be adopted is, to assume that the

generating relations of any two stretches have either a symmetrical transitive

relation (equality), or an asymmetrical transitive relation or its converse

(greater or less). Certain axioms will be required, as, for example, that if the

points A, B, C, D are collinear, and AC is greater than AD, then BC is greater

than BD.* The relations of equal, greater and less may be regarded as defined

by these axioms, and the common property of the generating relations of

those stretches that are equal to a given stretch may be defined as the

magnitude of divisibility of the said generating relations. The sense in which

an area has infinitely more divisibility than a stretch is that, if n be any finite

integer, and n stretches equal to a given stretch be removed from an area,

there always remains an area, however great n may be. What is important to

observe, in the above discussion, is that the logical parity of all the orders of

which a class of terms is capable makes it necessary to regard the magnitudes

with which metrical Geometry deals as belonging to relations or classes of

relations, not, as is commonly supposed, to the class of points forming their

fields.

398. In elliptic space, where the straight line is a closed series, the attempt

to make distance independent of stretch leads to still further

  complications. We now no longer have the axiom that, if A, B, C be

  collinear, we cannot have AB = BC = CA; and we have to recognize two

  distances between every pair of points, which, when distance is taken as  fundamental, becomes extremely awkward. We may however avoid

  admitting two distances by refusing to regard the greater of the two as

  properly a distance. This will then be only a stretch. If two distances are

  admitted, one is always greater than the other, except in a limiting case,

  when both are the lower limit of the greater distances and the upper limit

of the lesser distances. Further if a, b, c, d be any four distinct points, the

  greater of the two distances ab is always greater than the lesser of the two

  distances cd. Thus the whole class of greater distances may be banished,

and only greater stretches be admitted.

We must now proceed as follows. Distances are a class of symmetrical

relations, which are magnitudes of one kind, having a maximum, which is a

one-one relation whose field is all points, and a minimum, which is the

distance of any point from itself. Every point on a given line has a given

distance other than the maximum or minimum from two and only two other

points on the line. If a, b, c, d be four distinct points on one line, we shall say

that a and c are separated by b and d in the following four cases, of which (1)

and (2) and also (3) and (4) are not mutually exclusive:


(1) If ab < ac . bc < ac . ad > ac.

(2) If ab < ac . bc < ac . dc > ac.

(3) If ab > ac . ad < ac . dc < ac.

(4) If bc > ac . ad < ac . dc < ac.


We then need Vailati’s five axioms enumerated in Part IV, Chap. 24, in

order to generate a closed series from the separation of couples so defined.

Thus it is possible, though by a somewhat complicated process, to generate a

closed series of points on a line by means of the symmetrical relation of

distance.

I shall not work out in further detail the consequences of this hypothesis in

elliptic space, but proceed at once to the hypothesis that distances are the

magnitudes of stretches. When the number of dimensions exceeds two, the

polar form of elliptic space is merely projective space together with the

necessary metrical axioms; the antipodal form is a space in which two

antipodal points together have the properties of a single projective point.

Neglecting the latter, to which similar remarks will apply, I shall confine

myself to the polar form. Since this is a projective space, every pair of pointsdetermines two segments on the line joining the points. The sum of these two

segments, together with the two points, is the whole line, and therefore

constant. It is an axiom that all complete straight lines have the same

divisibility. The divisibility of either segment is a distance between the two

points: when the two distances are equal, either may be called the distance;

when they are unequal, it will be convenient to call the smaller the distance,

except in special problems. The whole theory then proceeds as in the case of

descriptive space. But it is important to observe that, in elliptic space, the

quadrilateral construction and the generation of order, being prior to

stretches, are prior to distances, and are presupposed in metrical Geometry.

399. So far, therefore, metrical Geometry introduces three new axioms, and

one new indefinable. The stretch in every series is a quantity, and

  metrical Geometry merely introduces such axioms as make all stretches

of points measurable. A few words may be useful as to the sense in

  which, in a theoretical discussion, the word measurement is to be

  understood. The actual application of the foot-rule is here not in question,

but only those properties of pure space which are presupposed in the use

of the foot-rule. A set of magnitudes is theoretically measurable when

there is a one-one relation between them and some or all numbers; it is

  practically measurable when, given any magnitude, we can discover,

with a certain margin of error, what the number is to which our

  magnitude has the relation in question. But how we are to discover this is

a subsequent question, presupposing that there is such a proposition to be

  discovered, and soluble, if at all, by empirical means to be invented in the

  laboratory. With practical measurement, then, we are not at all concerned

in the present discussion.

400. I come now to a more difficult question than distance, namely the

  question as to the definition of angle. Here, to begin with, we must deal

with rays, not with whole straight lines. The ray may be taken either as

an asymmetrical relation, or as the half-line on one side of a given point

on a line. The latter usage is very convenient, and I shall frequently

  employ it. Elementary Geometry assumes that two rays starting from the

  same point determine a certain magnitude, called the angle between

  them. This magnitude may, however, be defined in various ways. In the

  first place, we must observe that, since the rays in a plane through a point

form a closed series, every pair of rays through a point defines two

  stretches of rays. Of these, however, one stretch contains the opposites ofboth rays, while the other stretch contains the opposites of neither—

  except, indeed, in the one case where the two rays are each other’s

  opposites. This case is met by Euclid’s postulate that all right angles are

  equal—a postulate, however, which is now known to be demonstrable.*

  Omitting this case, the angle between two rays may be defined as that

  stretch of rays through their intersection which is bounded by the two

rays and does not contain the opposite of either, i.e. if A, B be the rays, and

Ă,  their opposites, the angle is the class of rays C which are separated

from Ă or  by A and B. We might also, but for an objection to be

  mentioned shortly, define the angle as all the points on such rays. A

  definition equivalent to this last, but simpler in form, and avoiding the

  mention of the opposite rays, is the following.* Let a, b be any two

  points of the rays A, B, and let c be any point of the stretch ab. Then the

class of points c, for all possible positions of a and b on their respective

  rays, is the angle between A and B. That is, every pair of intersecting rays

  divides the plane of the rays into two parts: the part defined as above is

the angle. Or rather, the part so defined is the angle as a quantity: the

  angle as a magnitude is the divisibility of this part. But to these latter

  definitions we shall find fatal objections, and we shall find it necessary to

  adhere to the definition as a stretch of rays.

401. Thus angle, like distance, is not a new indefinable, but like distance, it

  requires some new axioms. The angle between a ray A and its opposite A'

  cannot be defined as above, but may be defined as the logical sum of the

  angles between A and B, B and A' respectively. This limiting angle is

  greater than any other at the point, being in fact the whole half of the

  plane on one side of the straight line AA' . If the angles between A and B,

B and A' are equal, each is called a right angle. (That there are such

  angles, can be proved if we assume continuity.) Two intersecting straight

  lines make four angles, which are equal in pairs. The order of a collection

of rays through a point in a plane may be obtained by correlation with the

  points where these rays intersect a given straight line, provided there is

any straight line which all of them intersect. But since rays through a

  point in a plane form a closed series, while the points on a line do not, we

  require a four-term relation for the former order. The following definition

  seems adequate. Given four rays OA, OB, OC, OD through a point O and

in one plane, if these all meet a certain straight line in A, B, C, D

  respectively, and A and C are separated by B and D, then OA and OC are  said to be separated by OB and OD. In projective space this suffices. But

in descriptive space we must provide for other cases. Thus if OA, OB,

OC meet the given line, and B is between OA and OC, while OD does not

meet the given line, then OA and OC are again said to be separated by

OB and OD. If, finally, OA' and OB' be the opposites of OA and OB, then

OA and OA' are separated by OB and OB' . In virtue of the descriptive

  axioms of the preceding chapter, the order among the rays so obtained

will be unambiguous, i.e. independent of our choice of the line ABC, and

will cover all cases.

But now we need axioms analogous to those which, in the case of distance,

were numbered (3), (7) and (8). At any given point in a given ray, there must

be, in a given plane, two and only two rays, on opposite sides of the given ray

(i.e. separated from each other by the given ray and its opposite), which make

a given angle with the given ray; and angles must obey the axioms of

Archimedes and of linearity. But in addition to these axioms, which insure

that angles shall be numerically measurable, we must have some method of

connecting the measure of angles with that of distances, such as is required

for the solution of triangles. Does this require a new axiom? Euclid appears

to obtain this, by means of I. 47, II. 12 and II. 13, without any fresh axiom.

For this result we depend upon the propositions on the congruence of

triangles (I. 4, 8, 26), which demand only, as we saw, the axiom that, with

one angle at a given point, and one side along a given ray through that point,

there exist two and only two triangles in a given plane through the ray (one

on each side of the given ray), which are equal in all respects to a given

triangle. Thus it would seem that no fresh axioms are required for angles in a

plane.

402. With regard to the definition of an angle as a portion of a plane, it is

  necessary (as in many other cases), if we retain this definition, somewhat

to restrict the axiom that the whole is greater than the part. If a whole A

has two parts B, C, which together constitute A, and if C be infinitesimal

with respect to A, then B will be equal to A. This case occurs in a plane

  under the following circumstances. Let O, O' be any two points, OP, O'

P' lines in one plane and making equal angles with the ray OO' .* Then in

  Euclidean or hyperbolic space these lines OP, O' P' will not intersect;

  thus the angle between OO' and O' P' will be part of the angle O' OP.

  Hence the above restriction is necessary as regards the axiom that the

  whole is greater than the part.In Euclidean space this answer is sufficient, since, if OP makes with OO' a

less angle than O' P' does, OP and O' P' will intersect. But in hyperbolic

space, OP and O' P' may not intersect even then. Hence if we adhere to the

above definition of angle, we shall have to hold that the whole may be less

than the part. This, however, is intolerable, and shows that the definition in

question must be rejected. We may, however, still regard angle as the stretch

of rays; for the rays in the angle at O' are not part of the rays in the angle at

O. Hence it is only as a stretch of rays, or as the magnitude of such a stretch,

that an angle can be properly defined.

As showing, in a curious manner, the increased power of deduction which

results from the above axioms concerning distances and angles, we may

remark that the uniqueness of the quadrilateral construction, which before

could not be proved without three dimensions, can now be proved, as regards

all constructions in one plane, without any assumption of points outside that

plane. Nothing is easier than to prove this proposition by the methods of

elementary coordinate Geometry. Thus although projective Geometry, as an

independent science, requires three dimensions, any projective proposition

concerning plane figures can be metrically proved, if the above axioms hold,

for a two-dimensional space.

403. As regards figures of three dimensions, angles between planes and

solid angles can be defined exactly as rectilinear angles were defined.

  Moreover fresh axioms will not be required, for the measurement of such

  angles can be deduced from the data we already possess.

  With regard to areas and volumes some remarks seem necessary. Areas

and volumes, like angles, are classes of points when taken as quantities, and

divisibilities when taken as magnitudes. For areas and volumes we do not

require afresh the axioms of Archimedes and of linearity, but we require one

axiom apiece to give a criterion of equal areas and volumes, i.e. to connect

their equality with that of distances and angles. Such an axiom is supplied, as

regards areas, by the axiom that two congruent triangles have the same area,

and as regards volumes, by the corresponding axiom concerning tetrahedra.

But the existence of congruent tetrahedra, like that of congruent triangles,

demands an axiom. For this purpose, Pasch* gives the following general

axiom: If two figures are congruent, and a new point be added to one of them,

a new point can be added to the other so that the two new figures are

congruent. This axiom allows us to infer congruent tetrahedra from congruent

triangles; and hence the measurement of volumes proceeds smoothly.404. In three dimensions, a curious fact has to be taken account of, namely,

the disjunction of right and left-handedness, or of clockwise and counter-

  clockwise. This fact is itself of a descriptive nature, and may be defined

as follows. Between two non-coplanar rays, or between four non-

  coplanar points taken in an assigned order, there is always one of two

  opposite relations, which may be called right and left. The formal

  properties of these relations have been explained in Part IV (§ 222); for

the present I am concerned with their geometrical consequences. In the

  first place, they cause volumes to become magnitudes with sign, in

  exactly the way in which distances on a straight line have sign when

  compounded with their sense. But in the case of distances, since not all

are on one straight line, we could not thus compound distance and sense

  generally: we should require, for a compound, some more general notion

than sense, such as vectors supply. Here, on the contrary, since, in a

    three-dimensional space, all volumes have one or other of two senses, the

  compound can be made for all volumes. Thus if the volume of the

  tetrahedron abcd has one sign, that of bacd will have the opposite sign.

This is the familiar geometrical fact that the determinant giving the

  volume of a tetrahedron abcd has one or other sign according as the sense

of abcd is the same as or different from that of OXYZ, where O is the

  origin and X, Y, Z any positive points on the axes. It is this fact, also,

  which gives signs to angular momentum in Dynamics. The importance of

the fact (which itself seems to be an independent axiom) is this, that it

  makes a distinction between two figures whose metrical properties are all

  identical. It is this distinction which puzzled Kant, who, like most of his

  contemporaries, supposed all geometrical facts to be metrical. In itself,

the fact would be no more puzzling than the distinction between the

  stretches AB and BA, which are metrically indistinguishable. But it

  becomes puzzling when metrical equality is supposed to result from

  motion and superposition. In our former definition of motion (§ 390) we

  omitted (as was then observed) a condition essential to its definition. Not

only must two congruent figures be metrically equal, but there must be a

  continuous series of equal figures leading from the one to the other. Or,

what amounts to the same thing, if a, b, c, d and a' , b' , c' , d' be

  homologous non-coplanar points in the two figures, the tetrahedra abcd,

a' b' c' d' must have the same sense. In the case of equal and opposite

  tetrahedra, these conditions fail. For there is no gradual transition from  clockwise to counter-clockwise; thus at some point in the series a sudden

  jump would be necessary. No motion will transform abcd into a

  tetrahedron metrically equal in all respects, but with the opposite sense.

In this fact, however, there seems, to my mind, to be nothing mysterious,

but merely a result of confining ourselves to three dimensions. In one

  dimension, the same would hold of distances with opposite sense; in two

  dimensions, of areas. It is only to those who regard motion as essential to

the notion of metrical equality that right and left-handedness form a

  difficulty; in our theory, they are rather a confirmation than a stumbling-

  block.

  With this we may end our brief review of metrical Geometry, leaving it to

the next chapter to discuss its relation to projective Geometry and the

projective theory of distance and angle.


* Cf. Killing, op. cit. Vol. ii, Section 5.

† This course is actually adopted, as regards the equality of the remaining

angles, by Hilbert, Grundlagen der Geometrie (Festschrift zur Feier der

Enthüllung des Gauss-Weber Denkmals, Leipzig, 1899), p. 12.

‡ Cf. Killing, loc. cit. § 2.

* See Pasch, op. cit. § 13, Grundsatz ix. The whole § is excellent.

* See Part III, Chap. 22.

† Further properties of distance will be added later on.

‡ Stretches are, of course, not properly relations; but this point is irrelevant

in the present discussion.

§ See Part IV, Chap. 31.

* Della geometria elementare como sistema ipotetico deduttico, Turin,

1899.

† Cf. Couturat, La Logique de Leibniz, Paris, 1901, Chap. ix, esp. p. 420.

‡ Absolute Geometrie nach Johann Bolyai, Anhang.

§ Accademia Reale delle Scienze di Torino, 1902–3, “La Geometria basata

sulle idee di punto e distanza”.

¶ loc. cit.

* The only exceptions known to me are finite spaces of two dimensions.

See Chap. 49.

* Stretches are here regarded as having sign, so that, if AC is greater than

AD, CA is less than DA.

* See e.g. Killing, op. cit. Vol. ii, p. 171. A strict proof will be found inHilbert, op. cit. p. 16.

* Killing, op. cit. ii, p. 169.

* The angle between the rays OO' , O' P' is what Euclid would call the

angle between OO' produced and O' P' .

* Op. cit. p. 109.48


RELATION OF METRICAL TO


PROJECTIVE AND


DESCRIPTIVE GEOMETRY




405. In the present chapter I wish to discuss two questions. First, can

  projective and descriptive Geometry be established without any metrical

  presuppositions, or even without implying metrical properties? Secondly,

can metrical Geometry be deduced from either of the others, or, if not,

what unavoidable novelties does it introduce? The previous exposition

has already dogmatically assumed certain answers to these questions, but

we are now to examine critically the various possible answers.

The distinction between projective and descriptive Geometry is very

recent, and is of an essentially ordinal nature. If we adopt the view—which,

as we saw, is the simpler of two legitimate views—that the straight line is

defined by a certain relation between any two of its points, then in projective

Geometry this relation is symmetrical, while in descriptive Geometry it is

asymmetrical. Beyond this we have the difference that, in projective

Geometry, a line and a plane, two planes, or two lines in a plane, always

intersect, while in descriptive Geometry the question whether this is the case

or not is left open. But these differences are not very important for our

present purpose, and it will therefore be convenient to speak of projective and

descriptive Geometry together as non-quantitative Geometry.

The logical independence of non-quantitative Geometry is now scarcely

open to question. We have seen, in Chapters 45 and 46, how it may be built

up without any reference whatever to quantitative considerations. Quantity, in

fact, though philosophers appear still to regard it as very essential to

mathematics, does not occur in pure mathematics, and does occur in many

cases not at present amenable to mathematical treatment. The notion whichdoes occupy the place traditionally assigned to quantity is order; and this

notion, we saw, is present in both kinds of non-quantitative Geometry. But

the purity of the notion of order has been much obscured by the belief that all

order depends upon distance—a belief which, though it is entertained by so

excellent a writer as Meinong, we have seen to be false. Distance being

essentially quantitative, to admit that series depend upon distance is to admit

that order depends upon quantity. But this view leads at once to an endless

regress, since distances have an order of magnitude, which would have to be

derived from new distances of distances, and so on. And positively, an

asymmetrical transitive relation suffices to generate a series, but does not

imply distance. Hence the fact that the points of a line form a series does not

show that Geometry must have metrical presuppositions, and no such

presuppositions appear in the detail of projective or descriptive Geometry.

406. But although non-quantitative Geometry, as it now exists, is plainly

  independent of everything metrical, the historical development of the

  subject has tended greatly to obscure this independence. A brief historical

review of the subject may be useful in showing the relation of the more

  modern to the more traditional methods.

In Euclid, and in Greek geometers generally, hardly any descriptive

theorems are to be found. One of the earliest discoveries of an important

descriptive theorem was the one named after Pascal.* Gradually it was found

that propositions which assert points to be collinear or lines to be concurrent,

or propositions concerning tangents, poles and polars, and similar matters,

were unaltered by projection; that is, any such property belonging to a plane

figure would belong also to the projection or shadow of this figure from any

point on to any plane. All such properties (as, for instance, those common to

all conies) were called projective or descriptive. Among these properties was

anharmonic ratio, which was defined as follows. If A, B, C, D be four points


on one straight line, their anharmonic ratio is ; if OA, OB, OC, OD be


four lines through a point, their anharmonic ratio is . In

Chasles’s great work on descriptive Geometry, and even in most recent

works (such as Cremona’s projective Geometry), this definition will be found

at a very early stage in the development of the subject, together with a proof

that anharmonic ratio is unaltered by projection. But such a definition is itself

metrical, and cannot therefore be used to found a subject independent ofmetrical Geometry. With other portions of what used to be called descriptive

or projective Geometry, the same lack of independence will be found.

Consider, for example, the definition of a conic. To define it as a curve of the

second degree would require projective coordinates, which there was no

known method of introducing. To define it as a curve meeting any straight

line in not more than two points would require the distinction of real and

imaginary points, for if we confine ourselves to real points there are

innumerable curves other than conics which satisfy the definition. But

imaginary points are, in ordinary metrical Geometry, imaginary coordinates,

for which there is no purely geometrical interpretation; thus without

projective coordinates, our definition again fails. To define a conic as the

locus of points P for which the anharmonic ratio of PA, PB, PC, PD (where

A, B, C, D are fixed points) is constant, again involves metrical

considerations, so long as we have no projective definition of anharmonic

ratio. And the same dependence upon metrical Geometry appears as regards

any other projective or descriptive theorem, so long as the traditional order of

ideas is adhered to.

The true founder of non-quantitative Geometry is von Staudt.* It was he

who introduced the definition of a harmonic range by means of the

quadrilateral construction, and who rendered it possible, by repetitions of this

construction, to give projective definitions of all rational anharmonic ratios.†

These definitions indicate the succession of quadrilateral constructions

required in order to obtain a fourth point from three given points; thus,

though they are essentially numerical, they have no reference whatever to

quantity. But there remained one further step, before projective Geometry

could be considered complete, and this step was taken by Pieri. In Klein’s

account, it remains doubtful whether all sets of four collinear points have an

anharmonic ratio, and whether any meaning can be assigned to irrational

anharmonic ratios. For this purpose, we require a method of generating order

among all the points of a line. For, if there be no order but that obtained from

Klein’s method, there is no sense in which we can regard a point not obtained

by that method as the limit of a series of points which are so obtained, since

the limit and the series which it limits must always both belong to some one

series. Hence there will be no way of assigning irrational coordinates to the

points which do not have rational coordinates. There is, of course, no

projective reason for supposing that there are such points; but there are

metrical reasons, and in any case it is well, if possible, to be able to dealprojectively with a continuous space. This is effected by Pieri, with the help

of certain new axioms, but without any new indefinables. Thus at last the

long process by which projective Geometry has purified itself from every

metrical taint is completed.

407. Projective Geometry, having achieved its own independence, has,

  however, embarked upon a career of foreign aggrandisement; and in this

we shall, I think, though on the whole favourable, be obliged to make

  some slight reservations. The so-called projective theory of distance aims

at proving that metrical is merely a branch of projective Geometry, and

that distances are merely logarithms of certain anharmonic ratios. If this

  theory be correct, there is not a special subject of metrical Geometry, and

the axioms by which, in the preceding chapter, we distinguished this

  subject, must be consequences of projective axioms. Let us examine the

  manner in which this result is obtained.*

We have already seen how to assign coordinates to every point of a line in

projective space, and how to define the anharmonic ratio of any four points.

We have seen also how to obtain a projective from a descriptive space. In a

descriptive space, when an ideal point has a real correlative (i.e. when it is a

sheaf of lines which has a vertex), we assign to the real point the coordinate

which belongs to the ideal point considered as belonging to a projective

space. In this way, the coordinate Geometry of the two spaces becomes very

similar, the difference being that, in projective space, every real set of

coordinates gives a real point, whereas, in descriptive space, this holds of

each coordinate only within certain limits (both of which limits are excluded).

In what follows, therefore, remarks concerning projective space will apply

also to descriptive space except when the contrary is expressly stated.

Let us consider the anharmonic ratios of all ranges axby, where a, b are

fixed points and x, y variable points on our line. Let α, ξ, β, η be the


coordinates of these points. Then  will be the anharmonic ratio of

the four points, which since α, β are constants, may be conveniently denoted

by (ξη). If now ζ be the coordinate of any other point z, we have


        (ζη)(ηζ) = (ξζ).

 


  Hence      log (ξη) + log (ηζ) = log (ξζ).

 


  Thus the logarithm of the anharmonic ratio in question has one of the

essential properties of distance, namely additiveness. If xy, yz, xz be the

distances of x, y, z taken as having sign, we must have


      xy + yz = xz.

 


We have also log (ξξ) = 0 and log (ξη) =− log (ηξ), which are two further

properties of distance. From these properties (of which the third follows from

the other two) it is easy to show that all properties of distances which have no

reference to the fixed points a, b belong to the logarithm in question. Hence,

if the distances of points from a and b can also be made, by a suitable choice

of a and b, to agree with those derived from the logarithm, we shall be able to

identify distance with this logarithm. In this way—so it is contended—

metrical Geometry may be wholly brought under the projective sway; for a

similar theory applies to angles between lines or planes.

408. Let us consider first the case where our projective points are the ideal

  points of a descriptive space. Let x be considered fixed, and distinct from

a and b. Let y be moved so that η becomes more and more nearly equal to

β. Then as η approaches β, log (ξη) will be always finite, but will assume

  values exceeding any that may be assigned. This is mathematically

  expressed by saying that, if ξ be any number other than α and β, then log

(ξβ) is infinite. (If ξ be equal to α or β, log (ξα) and log (ξβ) are

  indeterminate; this case will therefore be supposed excluded in what

  follows.) Hence a and b must be at an infinite distance from every point

  except each other; and their distance from each other is indeterminate.

  Again x and y must not be separated by a and b, i.e. y must belong to the

  segment axb, if we wish the distance to be real; for if ξ − α and ξ − β

  have the same sign, η − α and η − β must also have the same sign, but if ξ

− α and ξ − β have different signs, η − α and η − β must also have

  different signs; and these conditions amount to the same as the condition

that y must belong to the segment axb. Hence if we insist that any two

real points (i.e. points which are not merely ideal) are to have a real

  distance (i.e. a distance measured by a number which is not complex or  purely imaginary), we shall require a and b to fulfil the following

  conditions: (1) they must be ideal points to which no real ones

  correspond; (2) they must be the two limits of the series of those ideal

  points to which real points do correspond. These two conditions include

all that has been said. For, in the first place, there is no real distance of

any point from α or β; hence α and β must not be coordinates of real

  points. In the second place, on one of the two segments defined by a and

b, there is a real distance xy however near ξ or η may approach to α or β;

  hence a and b are the limits of the ideal points to which real ones

  correspond. In the third place, it follows from the last proposition that all

ideal points to which real ones correspond belong to one of the two

  segments ab, and all ideal points to which no real ones correspond

  (except a and b themselves) belong to the other of the two segments ab.

  When these conditions are satisfied, the function log (ξη) will have all the

  properties which are required for a measure of distance.

The above theory is only applicable to descriptive space, for it is only there

that we have a distinction between ideal and actual points. And in descriptive

space we begin with an asymmetrical transitive relation by which order is

generated on the straight line. Before developing a theory which is applicable

to pure projective space, let us examine a little further the above theory,

which may be called the descriptive theory of distance.

In the first place, the ideal points to which real ones correspond, which for

shortness I shall call proper points, form part of the whole series of ideal

points, which is closed. The proper points are a semi-continuous portion of

this closed series, i.e. they have all the properties of a continuum except that

of having two ends. It may happen that there is only one ideal point which is

not proper, or it may happen that there are many. In the former case, the one

purely ideal point will be the limit of the proper points in both directions.

This is the case of Euclidean space, for in Euclidean space there is only one

sheaf of lines to which a given line belongs and which has no vertex, namely

the sheaf of lines parallel to the given line. Hence in this case the points a and

b must be taken to be identical. The function log (ξη) is then zero for all

values of ξ and η, and is therefore useless as a measure of distance. But by a

familiar process of proceeding to the limit, we can, in this case, obtain the

value ξ − η for the distance.* This is the usual measure of elementary

Geometry; and for the distance of two points in a plane or in space we should

similarly obtain the usual formula in this case. We see here the exact meaningof the common phrase that, in Euclidean space, + ∞ is the same as − ∞, or

that the two ends of a line coincide. The fact is, of course, that the line has no

ends, but that it determines only one ideal point which is not proper, and that

this is the limit of proper ideal points in both directions: when it is added to

the proper ideal points, we obtain a closed continuous series of sheaves to

which the line in question belongs. In this way, a somewhat cryptic

expression is found to have a very simple interpretation.

But it may happen also—and this is the case of hyperbolic space—that

there are many improper ideal points on a line. In this case, the proper ideal

points will have two different limits; these will be the sheaves of Lobatchew-

sky’s parallels in the two directions. In this case, our function log (ξη)

requires no modification, but expresses distance as it stands. The ideal points

a and b are distinct, which is commonly expressed by saying that our line has

two real and distinct points at infinity.

  Thus in descriptive space, in which our coordinates are obtained by

correlation with those of the derived projective space, it is always possible to

define a certain function of our projective coordinates which will fulfil the

conditions required for a measure of distance. These conditions may be

enumerated as follows.* (1) Every pair of real points is to have a distance

whose measure is real and finite, and vanishes only when the two points

coincide. (2) If x, y, z are collinear, and y lies between x and z, the sum of the

measures of xy and yz is to be the measure of xz. (3) As the ideal point

corresponding to y approaches the ideal point which is the limit of proper

ideal points, while x remains fixed, the absolute value of the measure of xy is

to grow without limit.

It may well be asked, however, why we should desire to define a function

of two variable points possessing these properties. If the mathematician

replies that his only object is amusement, his procedure will be logically

irreproachable, but extremely frivolous. He will, however, scarcely make this

reply. We have, as a matter of fact, the notion of a stretch, and, in virtue of

the general axiom that every class has some magnitude of divisibility, we

know that the stretch has magnitude. But we do not know, without a special

assumption to that effect, that the stretch fulfils the axioms of Archimedes

and of linearity. When once these are assumed, the above properties of the

measure of distance become properties which must belong to the measure of

stretch. But if these two axioms are not assumed, there is no reason why there

should be any magnitude having a measure possessing the above fourcharacteristics. Thus the descriptive theory of distance, unless we regard it as

purely frivolous, does not dispense with the need of the above axioms. What

it does show—and this fact is extremely remarkable—is that, if stretches are

numerically measurable, then they are measured by a constant multiple of the

logarithm of the anharmonic ratio of the two ideal points associated with the

ends of the stretch together with the two ideal points which limit the series of

proper ideal points; or, in case the latter pair are identical, the stretch is

measured by a function obtained as the limit of the above when the said pair

approach to identity and the constant factor increases without limit. This is a

most curious result, but it does not obviate the need for the axioms which

distinguish metrical Geometry. The same conclusion follows as regards

metrical Geometry in a plane or in three dimensions; but here new

complications are introduced, which are irrelevant to the present issue, and

will therefore not be discussed.

It is important to realize that the reference to two fixed ideal points,

introduced by the descriptive theory of distance, has no analogue in the

nature of distance or stretch itself. This reference is, in fact, a convenient

device, but nothing more. The stretch, in descriptive space, is completely

defined by its end-points, and in no way requires a reference to two further

ideal points. And as descriptive Geometry starts with the stretch, it would be

a needless complication to endeavour subsequently to obtain a definition of

stretch in terms of four points. In short, even if we had a projective theory of

distance in descriptive space, this would still be not purely projective, since

the whole projective space composed of ideal elements is derived from

axioms which do not hold in projective space.

409. It remains to examine the projective theory of distance in projective

  space. The theory we have hitherto examined, since it used the distinction

of real and ideal elements, was descriptive, not projective; we have now

to examine the corresponding theory for pure projective Geometry. Here

there are no ideal elements of the above sort associated with our line; if,

  therefore, α and β be real and distinct numbers, they will be the

  coordinates of real and distinct points. Hence there will be real points x, y

  which will be separated by a and b, and will have an imaginary measure

of distance. To this there could be no objection, but for the fact that we

  wish our measure to be the measure of a stretch. This is the reason why it

is desired that any two real points should have a real measure of distance.

In order to insure this result in a pure projective space, it is necessary thatα and β should not be the coordinates of points at all, but should be

  conjugate complex numbers. It is further necessary that the constant

  multiple of the logarithm should be a pure imaginary. We then find that

the distance of two real points always has a real measure, which is an

  inverse cosine.* In a projective space, the condition (2) of p. 424

  introduces complications, since between has not, as in descriptive space,

a simple meaning. The definition of between in this case is dealt with

  fully by Mr Whitehead in his Universal Algebra (§ 206).

410. But if such a function is to be properly geometrical, and to give a truly

  projective theory of distance, it will be necessary to find some

  geometrical entity to which our conjugate complex numbers α and β

  correspond. This can be done by means of involutions. Although, in a

  projective space, there are no ideal points, yet there are what may be

  called ideal point-pairs. In Chapter 14 we considered involutions with

real double points: if a, b be two points on a line, all point-pairs x, x' such

that x, x' are harmonic conjugates with respect to a, b form an involution.

In this case, x and x' are said to be conjugate; a and b are each self-

  conjugate, and are called the double points of the involution. But there

are also involutions without real double points. The general definition of

an involution may be given as follows (substituting the relation of x to x'

for the pair x, x' ): An involution of points is a symmetrical one-one

  relation, other than identity, whose domain and converse domain are the

  same straight line, and which is such that any class of referents is

  projectively similar to the corresponding class of relata. Such a relation is

  either strictly an aliorelative, or is a self-relative as regards two and only

  two points, namely the double points of the involution. For every pair of

  distinct points on the line as double points there will be one and only one

  involution: all point-pairs (using this expression so as to exclude the

  identity of the two points of the pair) have a one-one correlation with

  some involutions. Thus involutions may be called ideal point-pairs: those

that correspond to an actual point-pair are called hyperbolic, the others

  elliptic. Thus an ideal point-pair is one and indivisible, being in fact a

  one-one relation. Two proper ideal point-pairs have an anharmonic ratio

  defined by their respective double points: two improper ideal point-pairs,

or a proper and an improper ideal point-pair, have an analogous

  projective relation, which is measured by the function obtained as above

from the supposition that α and β are conjugate complex numbers. This  function may be called the anharmonic ratio of the two ideal point-pairs.

If one be fixed and improper, the other variable and proper, an imaginary

  multiple of the logarithm of the resulting anharmonic ratio has the

  properties required for a measure of the distance of the actual point-pair

  corresponding to the proper ideal point-pair. This gives the pure

  projective theory of distance. But to this theory, as anything more than a

  technical development, there are the same objections as in the case of

  descriptive space; i.e. unless there be some magnitude determined by

  every actual point-pair, there is no reason for the process by which we

  obtain the above measure of distance; and if there is such a magnitude,

then the above process gives merely the measure, not the definition, of

the magnitude in question. Thus stretch or distance remains a

  fundamental entity, of which the properties are such that the above

  method gives a measure of it, but not a definition.*

411. There is however another and a simpler way of introducing metrical

  notions into a projective space, and in this way distance becomes a

  natural accompaniment of the introduction of coordinates. Let p, q, r be

three fixed points, abc a line not passing through p or q or r but in the

  plane pqr. Let qr pass through a, rp through b, pq through c. Let R be
                                                                                1

the relation which holds between x and y when these are points on abc,

and xr, yq meet on ap; and let R, R be similarly defined. Then a Möbius
                                        23

net may be regarded as constructed by repetitions of the relations R, R,
                                                                                  12

R. We shall have, if xRy, yRz, then xHz. We can define the square
    311ay

  root of R, or any power of R whose index is a positive or negative
            11

power of 2. Further, if s is any point of qr, and xR' y means that x and y
                                                            1

are on abc and xr, ys meet on ap, then RR' = R' R. From these
                                                  1111

  propositions, which are proved by pure projective methods, it follows
                                                        ααβ
that if α and β be numbers, we may define R+β to mean R R,
                                                      111
                αβn
  provided R and R have been already defined; whence, since R2 can
              111

be defined if n is a positive or negative integer, all rational powers of R
                                                                                      1

can be defined, and irrational powers can be defined as limits. Hence, if x
                                                                      x
be any real number, positive or negative, we can define R, for we may
                                                                      1
                xxx
  identify R−  with RŘ. We may now take this relation R as the
            111

  distance of any two points between which it holds, and regard x as the

  measure of the distance. We shall find that distances so defined have the  usual properties of Euclidean distances, except that the distance of a from

any other point is infinite. Thus on a projective line any two points do

  actually have a relation which may be called distance, and in this sense a

  projective theory of metrical properties can be justified. But I do not

  know whether this method can be extended to a plane or to space.

To sum up: Although the usual so-called projective theory of distance,

both in descriptive and in projective space, is purely technical, yet such

spaces do necessarily possess metrical properties, which can be defined and

deduced without new indefinables or indemonstrables. But metrical

Geometry, as an independent subject, requires the new idea of the magnitude

of divisibility of a series, which is indefinable, and does not belong, properly

speaking, to pure mathematics. This idea is applied to stretches, angles, areas,

etc., and it is assumed that all the magnitudes dealt with obey the axioms of

Archimedes and linearity. Without these axioms, many of the usual metrical

propositions cannot be proved in the usual metrical manner; with these

axioms, the usual kind of elementary Geometry becomes possible, and such

results as the uniqueness of the quadrilateral construction can be proved

without three dimensions. Thus there is a genuinely distinct science of

metrical Geometry, but, since it introduces a new indefinable, it does not

belong to pure mathematics in the sense in which we have used the word in

this work. It does not, as is often supposed, require distances and angles as

new relations between points or lines or planes, but stretches and magnitudes

of divisibility suffice throughout. On the other hand, projective and

descriptive Geometry are both independent of all metrical assumptions, and

allow the development of metrical properties out of themselves; hence, since

these subjects belong to pure mathematics, the pure mathematician should

adopt their theory of metrical matters. There is, it is true, another metrical

Geometry, which does work with distances, defined as one-one relations

having certain properties, and this subject is part of pure mathematics; but it

is terribly complicated, and requires a bewildering number of axioms. Hence

the deduction of metrical properties from the definition of a projective or

descriptive space has real importance, and, in spite of appearances to the

contrary, it affords, from the point of view of pure mathematics, a genuine

simplification and unification of method.


* If a hexagon be inscribed in a conic, the three pairs of opposite sides

intersect in collinear points.* Geometrie der Lage, Nürnberg, 1847; Beiträge zur Geometrie der Lage,

ib. 1856, 1857, 1860.

† This step, I believe, is due to Klein. See Math. Annalen, Vols. iv, vi,

xxxvii.

* The projective theory of distance and angle is due to Cayley (Sixth

Memoir upon Quantics, 1859) and to Klein (Math. Annalen, Vols. iv, vi, vii,

xxxvii). A fuller discussion than the following will be found in my

Foundations of Geometry, Cambridge, 1897, §§ 30–38.

* See e.g. Klein, Vorlesungen über nicht Euklidische Geometrie,

Göttingen, 1893, Vol. i, pp. 151 ff.

* Cf. Whitehead, Universal Algebra, Bk. vi, Chap. i. I confine myself in

the text to distances on one straight line.

* This is the form originally given by Cayley in the Sixth Memoir upon

Quantics. The simpler logarithmic form is due to Klein.

* On the above method of introducing imaginaries in projective Geometry,

see von Staudt, Beiträge zur Geometrie der Lage, i,§ 7.49


DEFINITIONS OF VARIOUS


SPACES




412. In the preceding discussions of different Geometries, I have usually,

for the sake of convenience, adhered to the distinction between

  definitions and indefinables on the one hand, and axioms or postulates on

the other. But this distinction, in pure mathematics, has no validity except

as regards the ideas and propositions of Logic. In pure mathematics, all

the propositions state logical implications containing a variable. This is,

in fact, the definition, or part of the definition, of pure mathematics. The

  implications stated must flow wholly from the propositions of Logic,

  which are prior to those of other branches of mathematics. Logic and the

rest of pure mathematics are distinguished from applied mathematics by

the fact that, in it, all the constants are definable in terms of some eight

  fundamental notions, which we agreed to call logical constants. What

  distinguishes other branches of mathematics from Logic is merely

  complication, which usually takes the form of a hypothesis that the

  variable belongs to some rather complicated class. Such a class will

  usually be denoted by a single symbol; and the statement that the class in

  question is to be represented by such and such a symbol is what

  mathematicians call a definition. That is to say, a definition is no part of

  mathematics at all, and does not make any statement concerning the

  entities dealt with by mathematics, but is simply and solely a statement of

a symbolic abbreviation: it is a proposition concerning symbols, not

  concerning what is symbolized. I do not mean, of course, to affirm that

the word definition has no other meaning, but only that this is its true

  mathematical meaning. All mathematics is built up by combinations of a

certain number of primitive ideas, and all its propositions can, but for the

  length of the resulting formulae, be explicitly stated in terms of these  primitive ideas; hence all definitions are theoretically superfluous. But

  further, when Logic is extended, as it should be, so as to include the

  general theory of relations, there are, I believe, no primitive ideas in

  mathematics except such as belong to the domain of Logic. In the

  previous chapters of this Part, I have spoken, as most authors do, of

certain indefinables in Geometry. But this was a concession, and must

now be rectified. In mathematics, two classes of entities which have

  internal relations of the same logical type are equivalent. Hence we are

  never dealing with one particular class of entities, but with a whole class

of classes, namely, with all classes having internal relations of some

  specified type. And by the type of a relation I mean its purely logical

  properties, such as are denoted by the words one-one, transitive,

  symmetrical, and so on. Thus for example we defined the class of classes

  called progression by certain logical characteristics of the internal

  relations of terms of any class which is a progression, and we found that

  finite Arithmetic, in so far as it deals with numbers, and not with the

  terms or classes of which numbers can be asserted, applies equally to all

  progressions. And when it is realized that all mathematical ideas, except

  those of Logic, can be defined, it is seen also that there are no primitive

  propositions in mathematics except those of Logic. The so-called axioms

of Geometry, for example, when Geometry is considered as a branch of

pure mathematics, are merely the protasis in the hypotheticals which

  constitute the science. They would be primitive propositions if, as in

  applied mathematics, they were themselves asserted; but so long as we

only assert hypotheticals (i.e. propositions of the form “A implies B”) in

  which the supposed axioms appear as protasis, there is no reason to assert

the protasis, nor, consequently, to admit genuine axioms. My object in

the present chapter is to execute the purely formal task imposed by these

  considerations, and to set forth the strict definitions of various spaces,

from which, without indefinables and without primitive propositions, the

  various Geometries will follow. I shall content myself with the definition

of some of the more important spaces, since my object is chiefly to show

that such definitions are possible.

413. (1) Projective Space of three dimensions. A projective space of three

  dimensions is any class of entities such that there are at least two

  members of the class; between any two distinct members there is one and

only one symmetrical aliorelative, which is connected, and is transitiveso far as its being an aliorelative will permit, and has further properties to

be enumerated shortly; whatever such aliorelative may be taken, there is

a term of the projective space not belonging to the field of the said

  aliorelative, which field is wholly contained in the projective space, and

is called, for shortness, a straight line, and is denoted by ab, if a, b be any

  two of its terms; every straight line which contains two terms contains at

least one other term; if a, b, c be any three terms of the projective space,

such that c does not belong to the class ab, then there is at least one term

of the projective space not belonging to any class cx, where x is any term

of ab; under the same circumstances, if a' be a term of bc, b' a term of ac,

the classes aa' , bb' have a common part; if d be any term, other than a

and b, of the class ab, and u, v any two terms such that d belongs to the

class uv, but neither u nor v belongs to the class ab, and if y be the only

term of the common part of au and bv, z the only term of the common

part of av and bu, x the only term of the common part of yz and ab, then x

is not identical with d (under these circumstances it may be proved that

the term x is independent of u and v, and is uniquely determined by a, b,

d; hence x and d have a symmetrical one-one relation which may be

  denoted, for brevity, by xHd; if y, e be two further terms of the
                                  ab

  projective space, belonging to the class xd, and such that there are two

  terms g, h of the class xd for which we have gHh and gHh, then we
                                                          xdye

  write for shortness yQe to express this relation of the four terms x, d, y,
                            xd

e); a projective space is such that the relation Q, whatever terms of the
                                                          xd

  space x and d may be, is transitive; also that, if a, b, c, d be any four

  distinct terms of one straight line, two and only two of the propositions

  aQd, aQc, aQb will hold; from these properties of projective space
    bcbdcd

it results that the terms of a line form a series; this series is continuous in

the sense defined in § 277; finally, if a, b, c, d, e be any five terms of a

  projective space, there will be in the class ae at least one term x, and in

the class cd at least one term y, such that x belongs to the class by.

This is a formal definition of a projective space of three dimensions.

Whatever class of entities fulfils this definition is a projective space. I have

enclosed in brackets a passage in which no new properties of projective space

are introduced, which serves only the purpose of convenience of language.

There is a whole class of projective spaces, and this class has an infinite

number of members. The existence-theorem may be proved to begin with, byconstructing a projective space out of complex numbers in the purely

arithmetical sense defined in § 360. We then know that the class of projective

spaces has at least four members, since we know of four sub-classes

contained under it, each of which has at least one member. In the first place,

we have the above arithmetical space. In the second place, we have the

projective space of descriptive Geometry, in which the terms of the projective

space are sheaves of lines in the descriptive space. In the third place, we have

the polar form of elliptic space, which is distinguished by the addition of

certain metrical properties of stretches, consistent with, but not implied by,

the definition of projective space; in the fourth place, we have the antipodal

form of elliptic Geometry, in which the terms of the projective space are pairs

of terms of the said elliptic space. And any number of varieties of projective

space may be obtained by adding properties not inconsistent with the

definition—for example, by insisting that all planes are to be red or blue. In
                      α
fact, every class of 2 terms (i.e. of the number of terms in a continuous
                        0

series) is a projective space; for when two classes are similar, if one is the

field of a certain relation, the other will be the field of a like relation. Hence
                                                            α
by correlation with a projective space, any class of 2 terms becomes itself a
                                                              0

projective space. The fact is, that the standpoint of line-Geometry is more

fundamental where definition is concerned: a projective space would be best

defined as a class K of relations whose fields are straight lines satisfying the

above conditions. This point is strictly analogous to the substitution of serial

relations for series which we found desirable in Part IV. When a set of terms

are to be regarded as the field of a class of relations, it is convenient to drop

the terms and mention only the class of relations, since the latter involve the

former, but not the former the latter.

It is important to observe that the definition of a space, as of most other

entities of a certain complexity, is arbitrary within certain limits. For if there

be any property which implies and is implied by one or more of the

properties used in the definition, we may make a substitution of the new

property in place of the one or more in question. For example, in place of

defining the line by a relation between points, it is possible to define the line

as a class having a certain relation to a couple of points. In such cases, we can

only be guided by motives of simplicity.

It seems scarcely necessary to give a formal definition of descriptive or

metrical space, since the above model serves to show how such a definition

might be constructed. I shall instead give a definition of Euclidean space.This I shall give in a form which is inappropriate when Euclidean space is

considered as the limit of certain non-Euclidean spaces, but is very

appropriate to quaternions and the vector Calculus. This form has been

adopted by Peano,* and leads to a very simple account of the Euclidean

axioms. I shall not strictly follow Peano, but my account will be very similar

to his.

414. (2) Euclidean space of three dimensions. A Euclidean space of three

  dimensions is a class of terms containing at least two members, and such

that any two of them have one and only one asymmetrical one-one

  relation of a class, which will be called the class of vectors, defined by

the following characteristics:† the converse of a vector, or the relative

  product of two vectors, is a vector; if a given vector holds between a and

b, c and d, then the vector which holds between a and c is the same as

that which holds between b and d; any term of the space has any assigned

  relation of the class to at least one term of the space; if the nth power

  (where n is any integer) of any vector of the class is identity, then the

vector itself is identity; there is a vector whose nth power is a given

  vector; any two vectors have one and only one symmetrical relation of a

certain class having the following properties: the relation of any two

  vectors is measured by a real number, positive or negative, and is such

that the relation of a vector to itself is always measured by a positive

  number, and that the measure of the relation of the relative product of

  two vectors to a third vector is the sum of the measures of their several

  relations to the third vector; there is a vector satisfying the definition of

an irrational power of a vector given below; there are vectors which are

not relative products of powers of two given vectors; if i, j, k be three

  vectors, no one of which is a relative product of powers of one or both of

the others, then all vectors are relative products of powers of i, j, k.

The only points calling for explanation here are the notion of an irrational

power of a vector and the measurable relation of two vectors. All rational

powers are definite; for every vector has an nth root, and the nth root has an

mth power, which is the m/nth power of the original vector. But it does not

follow that real powers which are not rational can be defined. The definition

of limits of classes of vectors given by Peano* is, when translated into

relational language, the following. Let u be a class of real numbers, x a
                                                                                0

number belonging to the derivative of u. Let some one-one relation subsist

between all u’s and some or all vectors; and let v be the class of vectorscorrelative to u. Then the vector a is said to be the limit of the class v as x

approaches x in the class u, when the limit of the measure of the relation to
              0

itself of the vector which, multiplied relatively into a, will give the correlate

to x in the class v, is zero. The point of this definition is the use of the order

obtained among vectors by means of the measurable relation which each has

to itself. Thus suppose we have a progression x, x, … x, … of rational
                                                      12n

numbers, and suppose these to be respectively the measures of the relations to

themselves of the vectors a, a, … a, …. Then if x be the limit of x, x, …
                                12n12

x, …, there is to be a vector whose relation to itself is measured by x, and
n

this is to be the limit of the vectors a, a, … a, …; and thus irrational
                                          12n

powers of a vector become definable. The other point to be examined is the

measurable relation between two vectors. This relation measures, in terms of

elementary Geometry, the product of the two stretches represented by the

vectors into the cosine of the angle between them; it is, in the language of the

calculus of extension, the internal product of the two vectors. To say that the

relation is measurable in terms of real numbers means, in the sense in which

this statement is employed, that all such relations have a one-one relation to

some or all of the real numbers; hence, from the existence of irrational

powers, it follows that all such relations form a continuous series; to say that

the relation of a vector to itself is always measured by a positive number

means that there exists a section (in Dedekind’s sense) of the continuous

series of relations, such that all those relations that vectors can have to

themselves appear on one side of the section; while it can be proved that the

relation which defines the section is that which the vector identity has to

itself.

This definition is, of course, by no means the only one which can be given

of Euclidean space, but it is, I think, the simplest. For this reason, and also

because it belongs to an order of ideas which, being essentially Euclidean, is

foreign to the methods of previous chapters, I have thought it worth while to

insert it here.

415. As another example which may serve to enlarge our ideas, I shall take

the space invented by Clifford, or rather the space which is formally

  analogous to his surface of zero curvature and finite extent.* I shall first

  briefly explain the nature of this space, and then proceed to a formal

  definition. Spaces of the type in question may have any number of

  dimensions, but for the sake of simplicity I shall confine myself to two  dimensions. In this space, most of the usual Euclidean properties hold as

  regards figures not exceeding a certain size; that is to say, the sum of the

  angles of a triangle is two right angles, and there are motions, which may

be called translations, in which all points travel along straight lines. But

in other respects, the space is very different from Euclidean space. To

  begin with, the straight line is a closed series, and the whole space has a

  finite area. In the second place, every motion is a translation; a circular

  transformation (i.e. one which preserves distances from a certain fixed

  point unaltered) is never a motion, i.e. never leaves every distance

  unaltered; but all translations can, as in Euclidean space, be compounded

out of translations in two fixed directions. In this space, as in Euclid, we

  have parallels, i.e. straight lines which remain at a constant distance

apart, and can be simultaneously described in a motion; also straight lines

can be represented by linear equations. But the formula for distance is

  quite unlike the Euclidean formula. Thus if πk be the length of the whole

  straight line, and (x, y), (x' , y' ) be the coordinates of any two points

  (choosing a system in which the straight line has a linear equation), then

if ω be the angle between the lines x = 0, y = 0, the distance of the two

  points in question is d, where and the formula for the angle between two

  lines is similarly complicated. We may, in order to lead to these results,

set up the following definition.



 


(3) Clifford’s space of two dimensions. A Clifford’s space of two

dimensions is a class of at least two terms, between any two of which there

are two relations of different classes, called respectively distance and

direction, and possessing the following properties: a direction is a

symmetrical aliorelative, transitive so far as its being an aliorelative will

permit, but not connected; a term of the space together with all the terms to

which the said term has a given relation of direction form what is called a

straight line; no straight line contains all the terms of the space; every term of

the space has any assigned relation of direction to some but not all other

terms of the space; no pair of terms has more than one relation of direction;

distances are a class of symmetrical relations forming a continuous series,

having two ends, one of which is identity; all distances except identity are

intransitive aliorelatives; every term of the space has any assigned relation ofdistance to some but not all of the terms of the space; any given term of the

space has any given distance and direction from two and only two other terms

of the space, unless the given distance be either end of the series of distances;

in this case, if the given distance be identity, there is no term having this

distance and also the given direction from the given term, but if the distance

be the other end of the series, there is one and only one term having the given

distance and the given direction from the given term; distances in one straight

line have the properties, mentioned in Chapter 47, required for generating an

order among the terms of one straight line; the only motions, i.e. one-one

relations whose domain and converse domain are each the space in question

and which leave all distances among the relata the same as those among the

corresponding referents, are such as consist in combining a given distance, a

given direction and one of the two senses of the series constituting a straight

line; and every such combination is equivalent to the relative product of some

distance in one fixed direction with some distance in another fixed direction,

both taken with a suitable sense; finally all possible directions form a single

closed continuous series in virtue of mutual relations.

This completes, I think, the definition of a Clifford’s space of two

dimensions. It is to be observed that, in this space, distance cannot be

identified with stretch, because (1) we have only two dimensions, so that we

cannot generate a closed series of terms on a line by means of projective

methods,* (2) the line is to be closed, so that we cannot generate order on the

straight line by the descriptive method. It is for similar reasons that both

directions and distances have to be taken as symmetrical relations; thus it is

only after an order has been generated on a line that we can distinguish two

senses, which may be associated with direction to render it asymmetrical, and

with distances in a given direction to give them signs. It is important to

observe that, when distance is taken as independent of the straight line, it

becomes necessary, in order to distinguish different spaces, to assign some

property or properties of the one-one relations or transformations which leave

distances unchanged. This method has been adopted by Lie in applying to

Geometry the theory of continuous groups,* and has produced, in his hands

and those of Klein, results of the greatest interest to non-Euclidean Geometry.

But since, in most spaces, it is unnecessary to take distance as indefinable, I

have been able, except in this instance of Clifford’s space,† to adopt a

simpler method of specifying spaces. For this reason, it was important to

consider briefly some such space as Clifford’s, in order to give an instance ofthe use of distance, and of what geometers call motion, in the definition of a

space.

  Enough has now been said, I hope, to show that the definition of a kind of

space is always possible in purely logical terms, and that new indefinables are

not required. Not only are the actual terms composing a space irrelevant, and

only their relations important, but even the relations do not require individual

determination, but only specification as members of certain logical classes of

relations. These logical classes are the elements used in geometrical

definitions, and these are definable in terms of the small collection of

indefinables out of which the logical calculus (including that of relations) is

built up. This result, which holds throughout pure mathematics, was the

principal object of the present chapter.


* “Analisi della Teoria dei vettori”, Turin, 1898 (Accademia Reale delle

Scienze di Torino).

† For the convenience of the reader, it may be well to observe that this

relation corresponds to that of having a given distance in a given direction—

direction being taken in the sense in which all parallel lines have the same

direction.

* Op. cit. p. 22.

* On the general subject of the spaces of which this is the simplest

example, see Klein, Math. Annalen, xxxvii, pp. 554–565, and Killing,

Grundlagen der Geometrie, Vol. i, Chap. iv.

* Mr W. E. Johnson has pointed out to me that this difficulty might be

overcome by introducing the uniqueness of the quadrilateral construction by

a special axiom—a method which would perhaps be simpler than the above.

* Leipziger Berichte, 1890.

† If I had defined an elliptic space of two dimensions, I should have had to

take distance as distinct from stretch, because the projective generation of

order fails in two dimensions.50


THE CONTINUITY OF SPACE




416. It has been commonly supposed by philosophers that the continuity of

  space was something incapable of further analysis, to be regarded as a

  mystery, not critically inspected by the profane intellect. In Part V, I

  asserted that Cantor’s continuity is all that we require in dealing with

  space. In the present chapter, I wish to make good this assertion, in so far

as is possible without raising the question of absolute and relative

  position, which I reserve for the next chapter.

Let us begin with the continuity of projective space. We have seen that the

points of descriptive space are ordinally similar to those of a semi-continuous

portion of a projective space, namely to the ideal points which have real

correlatives. Hence the continuity of descriptive space is of the same kind as

that of projective space, and need not, therefore, be separately considered.

But metrical space will require a new discussion.

It is to be observed that Geometries, as they are treated now-a-days, do not

begin by assuming spaces with an infinite number of points; in fact, space is,

as Peano remarks,* a word with which Geometry can very easily dispense.

Geometries begin by assuming a class-concept point, together with certain

axioms from which conclusions can be drawn as to the number of points. So,

in projective Geometry, we begin with the assumption that there are at least

two points, and that any two points determine a class of points, the straight

line, to which they and at least one other point belong. Hence we have three

points. We now introduce the new assumption that there is at least one point

not on any given straight line. This gives us a fourth point, and since there

must be points on the lines joining it to our previous points, we obtain three

more points—seven in all. Hence we can obtain an infinite denumerable

series of points and lines, but we cannot, without a further assumption, prove

that there are more than three points on any one line. Four points on a line

result from the assumption that, if b and d be harmonic with respect to a andc, then b and d are distinct. But in order to obtain an infinite number of points

on a line, we need the further assumptions from which the projective order

results.* These assumptions necessitate a denumerable series of points on our

line. With these, if we chose, we might be content. Such a series of points is

obtained by successive quadrilateral constructions; and if we chose to define

a space in which all points on a line could be obtained by successive

quadrilateral constructions starting with any three points of the line, no

contradiction would emerge. Such a space would have the ordinal type of the

positive rationals and zero: the points on a line would form a compact

denumerable series with one end. The extension, introduced by assuming that

the series of points is continuous, is only necessary if our projective space is

to possess the usual metrical properties—if, that is to say, there is to be a

stretch, with one end and its straight line given, which is to be equal to any

given stretch. With only rational points, this property (which is Euclid’s

postulate of the existence of the circle) cannot hold universally. But for pure

projective purposes, it is irrelevant whether our space possesses or does not

possess this property. The axiom of continuity itself may be stated in either of

the two following forms. (1) All points on a line are limits of series of

rational points, and all infinite series of rational points have limits; (2) if all

points of a line be divided into two classes, of which one wholly precedes the

other, then either the first class has a last term, or the last has a first term, but

both do not happen. In the first of these ways, the continuity which results is

exactly Cantor’s, but the second, which is Dedekind’s definition, is a

necessary, not a sufficient, condition for Cantor’s continuity. Adopting this

first definition, the rational points, omitting their first term, form an endless

compact denumerable series; all points form a perfect series; and between

any two points there is a rational point, which is precisely the ordinal

definition of continuity.† Thus if a projective space is to have continuity at

all, it must have the kind of continuity which belongs to the real numbers.

417. Let us consider next the continuity of a metrical space; and, for the

sake of definiteness, let us take Euclidean space. The question is here

  more difficult, for continuity is not usually introduced by an axiom ad

hoc, but appears to result, in some sense, from the axioms of distance. It

was already known to Plato that not all lengths are commensurable, and a

  strict proof of this fact is contained in the tenth book of Euclid. But this

does not take us very far in the direction of Cantor’s continuity. The gist

of the assertion that not all lengths are commensurable, together with the  postulate of the circle, may be expressed as follows. If AB, AC be two

  lengths along the same straight line, it may happen that, if AB be divided

into m equal parts, and AC into n equal parts, then, however m and n may

be chosen, one of the parts of AB will not be equal to one of the parts of

AC, but will be greater for some values of m and n, and less for others;

  also lengths equal to either may be taken along any given line and with

any given end-points.* But this fact by no means proves that the points

on a line are not denumerable, since all algebraic numbers are

  denumerable. Let us see, then, what our axioms allow us to infer.

In Greek Geometry there were two great sources of irrationals, namely, the

diagonal of a square and the circumference of a circle. But there could be no

knowledge that these are irrationals of different kinds, the one being

measured by an algebraic number, the other by a transcendent number. No

general method was known for constructing any assigned algebraic number,†

still less for constructing an assigned transcendent number. And so far as I

know, such methods, except by means of limits, are still wanting. Some

algebraic and some transcendent numbers can be constructed geometrically

without the use of limits, but the constructions are isolated, and do not follow

any general plan. Hence, for the present, it cannot be inferred from Euclid’s

axioms that space has continuity in Cantor’s sense, or that the points of space

are not denumerable. Since the introduction of analytic Geometry, some

equivalent assumption has been always tacitly made. For example, it has been

assumed that any equation which is satisfied by real values of the variables

will represent a figure in space; and it seems even to be universally supposed

that to every set of real Cartesian coordinates a point must correspond. These

assumptions were made, until quite recent times, without any discussion at

all, and apparently without any consciousness that they were assumptions.

  When once these assumptions are recognized as such, it becomes apparent

that, here as in projective space, continuity must be introduced by an axiom

ad hoc. But as against the philosophers, we may make the following remark.

Cantor’s continuity is indubitably sufficient to satisfy all metrical axioms, and

the only question is, whether existent space need have continuity of so high

an order. In any case, if measurement is to be theoretically possible, space

must not have a greater continuity than that of the real numbers.

The axiom that the points on a line form a continuous series may be put in

the form which results from amending Dedekind, or in the form that a line is

a perfect series. In the first form, every section of the line is definable by asingle point, which is at one end of one of the parts produced by the section,

while the other part has no end. In the second form, which is preferable

because, unlike the first, it completely defines the ordinal type, every infinite

series of points has a limit, and every point is a limiting point. It is not

necessary to add that the line has cohesion,* for this results from the axioms

of Archimedes and of linearity, which are in any case essential to

measurement. Whether the axiom of continuity be true as regards our actual

space, is a question which I see no means of deciding. For any such question

must be empirical, and it would be quite impossible to distinguish empirically

what may be called a rational space from a continuous space. But in any case

there is no reason to think that space has a higher power than that of the

continuum.

418. The axiom of continuity enables us to dispense with the postulate of

the circle, and to substitute for it the following pair. (1) On any straight

line there is a point whose distance from a given point on the line is less

than a given distance. (2) On any straight line there is a point whose

  distance from a given point on or off the line is greater than a given

  distance. From these two assumptions, together with continuity, the

  existence of the circle can be proved. Since it is not possible, conversely,

to deduce continuity from the circle, and since much of analytic

  Geometry might be false in a discontinuous space, it seems a distinct

  advance to banish the circle from our initial assumptions, and substitute

  continuity with the above pair of axioms.

419. There is thus no mystery in the continuity of space, and no need of any

  notions not definable in Arithmetic. There is, however, among most

  philosophers, a notion that, in space, the whole is prior to the parts;† that

  although every length, area, or volume can be divided into lengths, areas,

or volumes, yet there are no indivisibles of which such entities are

  composed. According to this view, points are mere fictions, and only

  volumes are genuine entities. Volumes are not to be regarded as classes

of points, but as wholes containing parts which are never simple. Some

such view as this is, indeed, often put forward as giving the very essence

of what should be called continuity. This question is distinct from the

  question of absolute and relative position, which I shall discuss in the

  following chapter. For, if we regard position as relative, our present

  question will arise again concerning continuous portions of matter. This

  present question is, in fact, essentially concerned with continuity, andmay therefore be appropriately discussed here.

The series which arise in Arithmetic, whether continuous or not, are

essentially composed of terms—integers, rationals, real numbers, etc. And

where we come near to the continuity of space, as in the case of the real

numbers, each real number is a segment or infinite class of rationals, and no

denial that a segment is composed of elements is possible. In this case, we

start from the elements and gradually construct various infinite wholes. But

in the case of space, we are told, it is infinite wholes that are given to begin

with; the elements are only inferred, and the inference, we are assured, is very

rash. This question is in the main one of Logic. Let us see how the above

view is supported.

  Those who deny indivisible points as constituents of space have had, in the

past, two lines of argument by which to maintain their denial. They had the

difficulties of continuity and infinity, and they had the way in which space is

presented in what, according to their school, they called intuition or sensation

or perception. The difficulties of continuity and infinity, as we saw in Part V,

are a thing of the past; hence this line of argument is no longer open to those

who deny points. As regards the other argument, it is extremely difficult to

give it a precise form—indeed I suspect that it is impossible. We may take it

as agreed that everything spatial, of whose existence we become immediately

aware in sensation or intuition, is complex and divisible. Thus the empirical

premiss, in the investigation of space, is the existence of divisible entities

with certain properties. But here it may be well to make a little digression

into the meaning of an empirical premiss.

420. An empirical premiss is a proposition which, for some reason or for no

  reason, I believe, and which, we may add, is existential. Having agreed to

  accept this proposition, we shall usually find, on examination, that it is

  complex, and that there are one or more sets of simpler propositions from

  which it may be deduced. If P be the empirical premiss, let A be the class

of sets of propositions (in their simplest form) from which P may be

  deduced; and let two members of the class A be considered equivalent

  when they imply one another. From the truth of P we infer the truth of

one set of the class A. If A has only one member, that member must be

  true. But if there are many members of the class A, not all equivalent, we

  endeavour to find some other empirical premiss P' , implied by all sets of

  simple propositions of the class A' . If now it should happen that the

  classes A and A' have only one common member, and the other membersof A are inconsistent with the other members of A' , the common member

must be true. If not, we seek a new empirical premiss P'' , and so on. This

is the essence of induction.* The empirical premiss is not in any essential

  sense a premiss, but is a proposition which we wish our deduction to

  arrive at. In choosing the premisses of our deduction, we are only guided

by logical simplicity and the deducibility of our empirical premiss.

421. Applying these remarks to Geometry, we see that the common desire

for self-evident axioms is entirely mistaken. This desire is due to the

  belief that the Geometry of our actual space is an à priori science, based

on intuition. If this were the case, it would be properly deducible from

  self-evident axioms, as Kant believed. But if we place it along with other

  sciences concerning what exists, as an empirical study based upon

  observation, we see that all that can be legitimately demanded is that

  observed facts should follow from our premisses, and, if possible, from

no set of premisses not equivalent to those which we assume. No one

  objects to the law of gravitation as being not self-evident, and similarly,

  when Geometry is taken as empirical, no one can legitimately object to

the axiom of parallels—except, of course, on the ground that, like the law

of gravitation, it need only be approximately true in order to yield

  observed facts. It cannot be maintained that no premisses except those of

  Euclidean Geometry will yield observed results; but others which are

  permissible must closely approximate to the Euclidean premisses. And so

it is with continuity: we cannot prove that our actual space must be

  continuous, but we cannot prove that it is not so, and we can prove that a

  continuous space would not differ in any discoverable manner from that

in which we live.

422. To return from this digression: we agreed that the empirical premisses,

as regards the continuity of space, are concerned always with divisible

  entities which have divisible parts. The question before us is whether we

are to infer from this that the logical premisses for the science of existing

  space (i.e. the definition of existing space) may or must be concerned

with divisible entities. The question whether our premisses must be

  concerned with divisible entities is fully answered, in the negative, by

  actual Geometry, where, by means of indivisible points, a space

  empirically indistinguishable from that in which we live is constructed.

The only reasons hitherto alleged by philosophers against regarding this

  answer as satisfactory, are either such as were derived from the  difficulties of infinity and continuity, or such as were based upon a

certain logical theory of relations. The former have been already

  disproved; the latter will be discussed in the next chapter. The question

  whether our premisses may be concerned with divisible entities is far

  more difficult, and can be answered only by means of the logical

  discussions of Part II. Whatever is complex, we then decided (§ 143),

must be composed of simple elements; and this conclusion carries us a

long way towards the decision of our present question. But it does not

  quite end our doubts. We distinguished, in Part II, two kinds of wholes,

  namely aggregates and unities. The former may be identified, at any rate

for present purposes, with classes, while the latter seem to be

  indistinguishable from propositions. Aggregates consist of units from

  whose addition (in the sense presupposed in Arithmetic) they result;

  unities, on the contrary, are not reconstituted by the addition of their

  constituents. In all unities, one term at least is either a predicated

  predicate or a relating relation; in aggregates, there is no such term. Now

what is really maintained by those who deny that space is composed of

  points is, I imagine, the view that space is a unity, whose constituents do

not reconstitute it. I do not mean to say that this view is consciously held

by all who make the denial in question, but that it seems the only view

  which renders the said denial reasonable.

Before discussing this opinion, it is necessary to make a distinction. An

aggregate may be an aggregate of unities, and need by no means be an

aggregate of simple terms. The question whether a space is an aggregate of

unities or of simple terms is mathematically, though not philosophically,

irrelevant; the difference of the two cases is illustrated by the difference

between an independent projective space and the projective space defined in

terms of the elements of a descriptive space. For the present, I do not wish to

discuss whether points are unities or simple terms, but whether space is or is

not an aggregate of points.

This question is one in which confusions are very liable to occur, and have,

I think, actually occurred among those who have denied that a space is an

aggregate. Relations are, of course, quite essential to a space, and this has led

to the belief that a space is, not only its terms, but also the relations relating

them. Here, however, it is easy to see that, if a space be the field of a certain

class of relations, then a space is an aggregate; and if relations are essential to

the definition of a space, there must be some class of relations having a fieldwhich is the space. The relations essential to Geometry will not hold between

two spatially divisible terms: there is no straight line joining two volumes,

and no distance between two surfaces. Thus, if a space is to be defined by

means of a class of relations, it does not follow, as is suggested, that a space

is a unity, but rather, on the contrary, that it is an aggregate, namely the field

of the said class of relations. And against any view which starts from

volumes or surfaces, or indeed anything except points and straight lines, we

may urge, with Peano,* that the distinction between curves, surfaces, and

volumes, is only to be effected by means of the straight line, and requires,

even then, the most elaborate developments.† There is, therefore, no

possibility of any definite Geometry without points, no logical reason against

points and strong logical reasons in their favour. We may therefore take it as

proved that, if we are to construct any self-consistent theory of space, we

must hold space to be an aggregate of points, and not a unity which is

indefinable as a class. Space is, in fact, essentially a class, since it cannot be

defined by enumeration of its terms, but only by means of its relation to the

class-concept point. Space is nothing but the extension of the concept point,

as the British army is the extension of the concept British soldier; only, since

the number of points is infinite, Geometry is unable to imitate the Army-List

by the issue of a Space-List.

Space, then, is composed of points; and if analytical Geometry is to be

possible, the number of points must be either equal to, or less than, the

number of the continuum. If the number be less, some propositions of the

accepted Geometry will be false; but a space in which the number of points is

equal to the number of finite numbers, and in which the points of a line form

a series ordinally similar to the rationals, will, with suitable axioms, be

empirically indistinguishable from a continuous space, and may be actual.

Thus Arithmetic, as enlarged by Cantor, is undoubtedly adequate to deal with

Geometry; the only question is, whether the more elaborate parts of its

machinery are required. It is in number that we become certain of the

continuum; among actual existents, so far as present evidence shows,

continuity is possible, but cannot be rendered certain and indubitable.


* Riv. di Mat., Vol. iv, p. 52.

* Cf. Pieri, op. cit. § 6, Prop. 1.

† See Part V, Chap. 36.

* A length is not synonymous with a segment, since a length is regarded asessentially terminated. But a length is, for present purposes, synonymous

with a stretch or a distance.

† For shortness, I shall identify numbers with the lengths which they

measure.

* See Part V, Chap. 35.

† Cf. Leibniz, Phil. Werke (Gerhardt), ii, p. 379; iv, p. 491; also my

Philosophy of Leibniz, Chap. ix.

* Cf. Couturat, La Logique de Leibniz, Paris, 1901, p. 270.

* Riv. di Mat., iv, p. 53.

† Cf. Peano, “Sur une courbe qui remplit toute une aire plane”, Math.

Annalen, xxxvi, where it is shown that a continuous curve can be made to

pass through all the points of the area of a square, or, for that matter, of the

volume of a cube.51


LOGICAL ARGUMENTS


AGAINST POINTS




423. It has been an almost universal opinion among philosophers, ever since

the time of Leibniz, that a space composed of points is logically

  impossible. It is maintained that the spatial relations with which we have

  been concerned do not hold between spatial points, which essentially and

  timelessly have the relations which they do have, but between material

  points, which are capable of motion, i.e. of a change in their spatial

  relations. This is called the theory of relative position, whereas the theory

of spatial points is called the theory of absolute position. Those who

  advocate relative position usually also maintain that matter and spatial

  relations, on account of certain contradictions supposed to be found in

  them, are not real, but belong only to the world of appearance. This is,

  however, a further point, which need not be explicitly discussed in what

  follows. Apart from this point, the issue between the absolute and relative

  theories may be stated as follows: The absolute theory holds that there

are true propositions in which spatial relations are asserted to hold

  timelessly between certain terms, which may be called spatial points; the

  relational theory holds that every true proposition asserting a spatial

  relation involves a time at which this relation holds between its terms, so

that the simplest spatial propositions assert triangular relations of a time

and two terms, which may be called material points.

The question as to which of these two theories applies to the actual world

is, like all questions concerning the actual world, in itself irrelevant to pure

mathematics.* But the argument against absolute position usually takes the

form of maintaining that a space composed of points is logically

inadmissible, and hence issues are raised which a philosophy of mathematics

must discuss. In what follows, I am concerned only with the question: Is aspace composed of points self-contradictory? It is true that, if this question be

answered in the negative, the sole ground for denying that such a space exists

in the actual world is removed; but this is a further point, which, being

irrelevant to our subject, will be left entirely to the sagacity of the reader.

424. The arguments against the absolute theory are, in my opinion, one and

all fallacious. They are best collected in Lotze’s Metaphysic (§ 108 ff.).

  They are there confused with arguments for the subjectivity of space—an

  entirely distinct question, as should have been evident from the fact that

Kant, in the Critique, appears to have advocated the theory of absolute

  position.† Omitting arguments only bearing on this latter point, we have

the following summary of Lotze’s arguments against absolute space.

    Relations only are either (α) as presentations in a relating consciousness,1. 

    or (β) as internal states in the real elements which are said to stand in

    these relations (§ 109).

2. The being of empty space is neither the being which works effects

    (which belongs to a thing), nor the mere validity of a truth, nor the fact

    of being presented by us. What kind of being is it then? (§ 109).

3. All points are exactly alike, yet every pair have a relation peculiar to

    themselves; but being exactly like every other pair, the relation should

    be the same for all pairs (§ 111).

4. The being of every point must consist in the fact that it distinguishes

    itself from every other, and takes up an invariable position relatively to

    every other. Hence the being of space consists in an active mutual

      conditioning of its various points, which is really an interaction (§ 110).

5. If the relations of points were a mere fact, they could be altered, at least

    in thought; but this is impossible: we cannot move points or imagine

    holes in space. This impossibility is easily explained by a subjective

    theory (§ 110).

6. If there are real points, either (α) one point creates others in appropriate

    relations to itself, or (β) it brings already existing points into appropriate

    relations, which are indifferent to their natures (§ 111).


425. (1) All these arguments depend, at bottom, upon the first, the dogma

  concerning relations. As it is of the essence of the absolute theory to deny

this dogma, I shall begin by examining it at some length.‡ “All

  relations”, Lotze tells us, “only are as presentations in a relating

  consciousness, or as internal states in the real elements which, as we are  wont to say, stand in these relations.” This dogma Lotze regards as self-

  evident, as indeed he well may; for I doubt if there is one anterior

  philosopher, unless it be Plato, who does not, consciously or

  unconsciously, employ the dogma as an essential part of his system. To

deny it, therefore, is a somewhat hardy undertaking. Let us, nevertheless,

  examine the consequences to which the dogma leads us.

It would seem that, if we accept the dogma, we must distinguish two kinds

of relations, (α) those which are presentations in a relating consciousness, and

(β) those which are internal states of the elements supposed to be related.

These may be ultimately identical, but it will be safer in the mean time to

treat them as different. Let us begin with those which are only presentations

in a relating consciousness. These presentations, we must suppose, are beliefs

in propositions asserting relations between the terms which appear related.

For it must be allowed that there are beliefs in such propositions, and only

such beliefs seem capable of being regarded as presentations in which

relations have their being. But these beliefs, if the relations believed to hold

have no being except in the beliefs themselves, are necessarily false. If I

believe A to be B’s father, when this is not the case, my belief is erroneous;

and if I believe A to be west of B, when westerliness in fact exists only in my

mind, I am again mistaken. Thus this first class of relations has no validity

whatever, and consists merely in a collection of mistaken beliefs. The objects

concerning which the beliefs are entertained are as a matter of fact wholly

unrelated; indeed there cannot even be objects, for the plural implies

diversity, and all beliefs in the relation of diversity must be erroneous. There

cannot even be one object distinct from myself, since this would have to have

the relation of diversity to me, which is impossible. Thus we are committed,

so far as this class of relations goes, to a rigid monism.

But now, what shall we say of the second class of relations, those namely

which are reducible to internal states of the apparently related objects? It

must be observed that this class of relations presupposes a plurality of objects

(two at least), and hence involves the relation of diversity. Now we have seen

that, if there be diversity, it cannot be a relation of the first class; hence it

must itself be of the second class. That is, the mere fact that A is different

from B must be reducible to internal states of A and B. But is it not evident

that, before we can distinguish the internal states of A from those of B, we

must first distinguish A from B?, i.e. A and B must be different, before they

can have different states? If it be said that A and B are precisely similar, andare yet two, it follows even more evidently that their diversity is not due to

difference of internal states, but is prior to it. Thus the mere admission that

there are internal states of different things destroys the theory that the essence

of relations is to be found in these states. We are thus brought back to the

notion that the apparent relations of two things consist in the internal states of

one thing, which leads us again to the rigid monism implied in the first type

of relation.

  Thus the theory of relations propounded by Lotze is, in fact, a theory that

there are no relations. This has been recognized by the most logical adherents

of the dogma—e.g. Spinoza and Mr Bradley—who have asserted that there is

only one thing, God or the Absolute, and only one type of proposition,

namely that ascribing predicates to the Absolute. In order to meet this

development of the above theory of relations, it will be necessary to examine

the doctrine of subject and predicate.

426. Every proposition, true or false—so the present theory contends—

  ascribes a predicate to a subject, and—what is a corollary from the above

  —there is only one subject. The consequences of this doctrine are so

  strange, that I cannot believe they have been realized by those who

  maintain it. The theory is in fact self-contradictory. For if the Absolute

has predicates, then there are predicates; but the proposition “there are

  predicates” is not one which the present theory can admit. We cannot

  escape by saying that the predicates merely qualify the Absolute; for the

  Absolute cannot be qualified by nothing, so that the proposition “there

are predicates” is logically prior to the proposition “the Absolute has

  predicates”. Thus the theory itself demands, as its logical prius, a

  proposition without a subject and a predicate; moreover this proposition

  involves diversity, for even if there be only one predicate, this must be

  different from the one subject. Again, since there is a predicate, the

  predicate is an entity, and its predicability of the Absolute is a relation

  between it and the Absolute. Thus the very proposition which was to be

  non-relational turns out to be, after all, relational, and to express a

  relation which current philosophical language would describe as purely

  external. For both subject and predicate are simply what they are—

  neither is modified by its relation to the other. To be modified by the

  relation could only be to have some other predicate, and hence we should

be led into an endless regress. In short, no relation ever modifies either of

its terms. For if it holds between A and B, then it is between A and B thatit holds, and to say that it modifies A and B is to say that it really holds

  between different terms C and D. To say that two terms which are related

  would be different if they were not related, is to say something perfectly

  barren; for if they were different, they would be other, and it would not

be the terms in question, but a different pair, that would be unrelated. The

  notion that a term can be modified arises from neglect to observe the

eternal self-identity of all terms and all logical concepts, which alone

form the constituents of propositions.* What is called modification

  consists merely in having at one time, but not at another, some specific

  relation to some other specific term; but the term which sometimes has

and sometimes has not the relation in question must be unchanged,

  otherwise it would not be that term which had ceased to have the

  relation.

The general objection to Lotze’s theory of relations may be thus summed

up. The theory implies that all propositions consist in the ascription of a

predicate to a subject, and that this ascription is not a relation. The objection

is, that the predicate is either something or nothing. If nothing, it cannot be

predicated, and the pretended proposition collapses. If something, predication

expresses a relation, and a relation of the very kind which the theory was

designed to avoid. Thus in either case the theory stands condemned, and there

is no reason for regarding relations as all reducible to the subject-predicate

form.

427. (2) I come now to the second of Lotze’s objections to empty space.

This is again of a somewhat abstract logical character, but it is far easier

to dispose of, since it depends upon a view more or less peculiar to

  Lotze. There are, it says, three and only three kinds of being, no one of

  which belongs to space. These are (α) the being of things, which consists

in activity or the power to produce effects; (β) the validity of a truth; (γ)

the being which belongs to the contents of our presentations.

The answer to this is, that there is only one kind of being, namely, being

simpliciter, and only one kind of existence, namely, existence simpliciter.

Both being and existence, I believe, belong to empty space; but being alone is

relevant to the refutation of the relational theory—existence belongs to the

question which Lotze confounds with the above, namely, as to the reality or

subjectivity of space. It may be well first to explain the distinction of being

and existence, and then to return to Lotze’s three kinds of being.

  Being is that which belongs to every conceivable term, to every possibleobject of thought—in short to everything that can possibly occur in any

proposition, true or false, and to all such propositions themselves. Being

belongs to whatever can be counted. If A be any term that can be counted as

one, it is plain that A is something, and therefore that A is. “A is not” must

always be either false or meaningless. For if A were nothing, it could not be

said not to be; “A is not” implies that there is a term A whose being is denied,

and hence that A is. Thus unless “A is not” be an empty sound, it must

be false—whatever A may be, it certainly is. Numbers, the Homeric gods,

relations, chimeras and four-dimensional spaces all have being, for if they

were not entities of a kind, we could make no propositions about them. Thus

being is a general attribute of everything, and to mention anything is to show

that it is.

  Existence, on the contrary, is the prerogative of some only amongst beings.

To exist is to have a specific relation to existence—a relation, by the way,

which existence itself does not have. This shows, incidentally, the weakness

of the existential theory of judgment—the theory, that is, that every

proposition is concerned with something that exists. For if this theory were

true, it would still be true that existence itself is an entity, and it must be

admitted that existence does not exist. Thus the consideration of existence

itself leads to non-existential propositions, and so contradicts the theory. The

theory seems, in fact, to have arisen from neglect of the distinction between

existence and being. Yet this distinction is essential, if we are ever to deny

the existence of anything. For what does not exist must be something, or it

would be meaningless to deny its existence; and hence we need the concept

of being, as that which belongs even to the non-existent.

  Returning now to Lotze’s three kinds of being, it is sufficiently evident that

his views involve hopeless confusions.

(α) The being of things, Lotze thinks—following Leibniz here as else-

where—consists in activity. Now activity is a highly complex notion, which

Lotze falsely supposed unanalysable. But at any rate it is plain that, if there

be activity, what is active must both be and exist, in the senses explained

above. It will also be conceded, I imagine, that existence is conceptually

distinguishable from activity. Activity may be a universal mark of what

exists, but can hardly be synonymous with existence. Hence Lotze requires

the highly disputable proposition that whatever exists must be active. The

true answer to this proposition lies (1) in disproving the grounds alleged in its

favour, (2) in proving that activity implies the existence of time, whichcannot be itself active. For the moment, however, it may suffice to point out

that, since existence and activity are logically separable, the supposition that

something which is not activity exists cannot be logically absurd.

(β) The validity of a truth—which is Lotze’s second kind of being—is is in

reality no kind of being at all. The phrase, in the first place, is ill-chosen—

what is meant is the truth of a truth, or rather the truth of a proposition. Now

the truth of a proposition consists in a certain relation to truth, and

presupposes the being of the proposition. And as regards being, false

propositions are on exactly the same level, since to be false a proposition

must already be. Thus validity is not a kind of being, but being belongs to

valid and invalid propositions alike.

(γ) The being which belongs to the contents of our presentations is a

subject upon which there exists everywhere the greatest confusion. This kind

is described by Lotze as “ein Vorgestelltwerden durch uns”. Lotze

presumably holds that the mind is in some sense creative—that what it intuits

acquires, in some sense, an existence which it would not have if it were not

intuited. Some such theory is essential to every form of Kantianism—to the

belief, that is, that propositions which are believed solely because the mind is

so made that we cannot but believe them may yet be true in virtue of our

belief. But the whole theory rests, if I am not mistaken, upon neglect of the

fundamental distinction between an idea and its object. Misled by neglect of

being, people have supposed that what does not exist is nothing. Seeing that

numbers, relations, and many other objects of thought, do not exist outside

the mind, they have supposed that the thoughts in which we think of these

entities actually create their own objects. Every one except a philosopher can

see the difference between a post and my idea of a post, but few see the

difference between the number 2 and my idea of the number 2. Yet the

distinction is as necessary in one case as in the other. The argument that 2 is

mental requires that 2 should be essentially an existent. But in that case it

would be particular, and it would be impossible for 2 to be in two minds, or

in one mind at two times. Thus 2 must be in any case an entity, which will

have being even if it is in no mind.* But further, there are reasons for denying

that 2 is created by the thought which thinks it. For, in this case, there could

never be two thoughts until some one thought so; hence what the person so

thinking supposed to be two thoughts would not have been two, and the

opinion, when it did arise, would be erroneous. And applying the same

doctrine to 1; there cannot be one thought until some one thinks so. HenceAdam’s first thought must have been concerned with the number 1; for not a

single thought could precede this thought. In short, all knowledge must be

recognition, on pain of being mere delusion; Arithmetic must be discovered

in just the same sense in which Columbus discovered the West Indies, and we

no more create numbers than he created the Indians. The number 2 is not

purely mental, but is an entity which may be thought of. Whatever can be

thought of has being, and its being is a precondition, not a result, of its being

thought of. As regards the existence of an object of thought, however,

nothing can be inferred from the fact of its being thought of, since it certainly

does not exist in the thought which thinks of it. Hence, finally, no special

kind of being belongs to the objects of our presentations as such. With this

conclusion, Lotze’s second argument is disposed of.

428. (3) Lotze’s third argument has been a great favourite, ever since

  Leibniz introduced it. All points, we are told, are exactly alike, and

  therefore any two must have the same mutual relation as any other two;

yet their mutual distances must differ, and even, according to Lotze

  (though in this, in the sense in which he seems to mean it, he is

  mistaken), the relation of every pair must be peculiar to that pair. This

  argument will be found to depend again upon the subject-predicate logic

  which we have already examined. To be exactly alike can only mean—as

in Leibniz’s Identity of Indiscernibles—not to have different predicates.

But when once it is recognized that there is no essential distinction

  between subjects and predicates, it is seen that any two simple terms

simply differ immediately—they are two, and this is the sum-total of

their differences. Complex terms, it is true, have differences which can be

  revealed by analysis. The constituents of the one may be A, B, C, D,

  while those of the other are A, E, F, G. But the differences of B, C, D

from E, F, G are still immediate differences, and immediate differences

must be the source of all mediate differences. Indeed it is a sheer logical

error to suppose that, if there were an ultimate distinction between

  subjects and predicates, subjects could be distinguished by differences of

  predicates. For before two subjects can differ as to predicates, they must

  already be two; and thus the immediate diversity is prior to that obtained

from diversity of predicates. Again, two terms cannot be distinguished in

the first instance by difference of relation to other terms; for difference of

  relation presupposes two distinct terms, and cannot therefore be the

  ground of their distinctness. Thus if there is to be any diversity at all,there must be immediate diversity, and this kind belongs to points.

  Again, points have also the subsequent kind of diversity consisting in

difference of relation. They differ not only, as Lotze urges, in their relations

to each other, but also in their relations to the objects in them. Thus they

seem to be in the same position as colours, sounds, or smells. Two colours, or

two simple smells, have no intrinsic difference save immediate diversity, but

have, like points, different relations to other terms.

  Wherein, then, lies the plausibility of the notion that all points are exactly

alike? This notion is, I believe, a psychological illusion, due to the fact that

we cannot remember a point, so as to know it when we meet it again. Among

simultaneously presented points it is easy to distinguish; but though we are

perpetually moving, and thus being brought among new points, we are quite

unable to detect this fact by our senses, and we recognize places only by the

objects they contain. But this seems to be a mere blindness on our part—there

is no difficulty, so far as I can see, in supposing an immediate difference

between points, as between colours, but a difference which our senses are not

constructed to be aware of. Let us take an analogy: Suppose a man with a

very bad memory for faces: he would be able to know, at any moment,

whether he saw one face or many, but he would not be aware whether he had

ever seen any of the faces before. Thus he might be led to define people by

the rooms in which he saw them, and to suppose it self-contradictory that

new people should come to his lectures, or old people cease to do so. In the

latter point, at least, it will be admitted by lecturers that he would be

mistaken. And as with faces, so with points—inability to recognize them

must be attributed, not to the absence of individuality, but merely to our

incapacity.

429. (4) Lotze’s fourth argument is an endeavour to effect a reductio ad

  absurdum, by proving that, on the absolute theory, points must interact.

The being of every point, Lotze contends, must consist in the fact that it

  distinguishes itself from every other, and takes up an invariable position

  relatively to every other. Many fallacies are contained in this argument.

In the first place, there is what may be called the ratiocinator’s fallacy,

  which consists in supposing that everything has to be explained by

  showing that it is something else. Thus the being of a point, for Lotze,

must be found in its difference from other points, while, as a matter of

fact, its being is simply its being. So far from being explained by

  something else, the being of a point is presupposed in all other  propositions about it, as e.g. in the proposition that the point differs from

  other points. Again, the phrase that the point distinguishes itself from all

  other points seems to be designed to imply some kind of self-assertion, as

  though the point would not be different unless it chose to differ. This

  suggestion helps out the conclusion, that the relations between points are

in reality a form of interaction. Lotze, believing as he does that activity is

  essential to existence, is unable to imagine any other relation between

  existents than that of interaction. How hopelessly inapplicable such a

view is, will appear from an analysis of interaction. Interaction is an

  enormously complex notion, presupposing a host of other relations, and

  involving, in its usual form, the distinction of a thing from its qualities—

a distinction dependent on the subject-predicate logic already criticized.

  Interaction, to begin with, is either the simultaneous action of A on B and

B on A, or the action of the present states of A and B conjointly on their

  states at the next instant. In either case it implies action. Action generally

may be defined as a causal relation between one or more states of one or

  more things at the present instant and one or more states of the same or

  different things at a subsequent instant. When there is only one thing in

both cases, the action is immanent if the thing be the same in cause and

  effect, transient if the cause be in one thing and the effect in another. In

  order to speak of action, rather than causality simply, it is necessary to

  suppose things enduring for a certain time, and having changing states.

  Thus the notion of interaction presupposes the following relations: (1)

  diversity between things; (2) diversity between the states of things; (3)

  simultaneity; (4) succession; (5) causality; (6) the relation of a thing to its

  states. This notion, involving, as a moment’s inspection shows, six

  simpler relations in its analysis, is supposed to be the fundamental

  relation! No wonder absurdities are produced by such a supposition. But

the absurdities belong to Lotze, not to space. To reduce the relations of

  points to interactions, on the ground that interaction is the type of all

  relations, is to display a complete incapacity in the simplest problems of

  analysis. The relations of points are not interactions, any more than

  before and after, or diversity, or greater and less, are interactions. They

are eternal relations of entities, like the relation of 1 to 2 or of interaction

  itself to causality. Points do not assign positions to each other, as though

they were each other’s pew-openers: they eternally have the relations

  which they have, just like all other entities. The whole argument, indeed,rests upon an absurd dogma, supported by a false and scholastic logic.

430. (5) The fifth argument seems to be designed to prove the Kantian

  apriority of space. There are, it says, necessary propositions concerning

  space, which show that the nature of space is not a “mere fact”. We are

  intended to infer that space is an à priori intuition, and a psychological

  reason is given why we cannot imagine holes in space. The impossibility

of holes is apparently what is called a necessity of thought. This

  argument again involves much purely logical discussion. Concerning

  necessities of thought, the Kantian theory seems to lead to the curious

  result that whatever we cannot help believing must be false. What we

  cannot help believing, in this case, is something as to the nature of space,

not as to the nature of our minds. The explanation offered is, that there is

no space outside our minds; whence it is to be inferred that our

  unavoidable beliefs about space are all mistaken. Moreover we only push

one stage farther back the region of “mere fact”, for the constitution of

our minds remains still a mere fact.

The theory of necessity urged by Kant, and adopted here by Lotze, appears

radically vicious. Everything is in a sense a mere fact. A proposition is said to

be proved when it is deduced from premisses; but the premisses, ultimately,

and the rule of inference, have to be simply assumed. Thus any ultimate

premiss is, in a certain sense, a mere fact. On the other hand, there seems to

be no true proposition of which there is any sense in saying that it might have

been false. One might as well say that redness might have been a taste and

not a colour. What is true, is true; what is false, is false; and concerning

fundamentals, there is nothing more to be said. The only logical meaning of

necessity seems to be derived from implication. A proposition is more or less

necessary according as the class of propositions for which it is a premiss is

greater or smaller.* In this sense the propositions of logic have the greatest

necessity, and those of geometry have a high degree of necessity. But this

sense of necessity yields no valid argument from our inability to imagine

holes in space to the conclusion that there cannot really be any space at all

except in our imaginations.

431. (6) The last argument may be shortly disposed of. If points be

  independent entities, Lotze argues—so I interpret him—that we can

  imagine a new point coming into existence. This point, then, must have

the appropriate relations to other points. Either it creates the other points

with the relations, or it merely creates the relations to already existing  points. Now it must be allowed that, if there be real points, it is not self-

  contradictory to suppose some of them non-existent. But strictly

  speaking, no single proposition whatever is self-contradictory. The

  nearest approach would be “No proposition is true”, since this implies its

own truth. But even here, it is not strictly self-contradictory to deny the

  implication. Everywhere we come upon propositions accepted because

they are self-evident, and for no other reason: the law of contradiction

  itself is such a proposition. The mutual implication of all the points of

  space seems to be another; the denial of some only among points is

  rejected for the same reason as the assertion that such and such a

  proposition is both true and false, namely, because both are obviously

  untrue. But if, per impossible, a point previously missing were to come

into existence, it would not create new points, but would have the

  appropriate relations to already existing points. The point, in fact, would

  have already had being, and as an entity would have eternally had to

  other points the same relations as it has when it comes into existence.

  Thus Lotze’s argument on this, as on other points, depends upon a faulty

  logic, and is easily met by more correct views as to the nature of

  judgment.

I conclude, from the above discussion, that absolute position is not

logically inadmissible, and that a space composed of points is not self-

contradictory. The difficulties which used to be found in the nature of infinity

depended upon adherence to one definite axiom, namely, that a whole must

have more terms than a part; those in the nature of space, on the other hand,

seem to have been derived almost exclusively from general logic. With a

subject-predicate theory of judgment, space necessarily appears to involve

contradictions; but when once the irreducible nature of relational propositions

is admitted, all the supposed difficulties vanish like smoke.* There is no

reason, therefore, so far as I am able to perceive, to deny the ultimate and

absolute philosophical validity of a theory of geometry which regards space

as composed of points, and not as a mere assemblage of relations between

non-spatial terms.


* Some arguments on this point will be found in the earlier part of my

paper, “Is position in Time and Space absolute or relative?” Mind, N. S., No.

39; the later portions of this paper are here reprinted.

† Cf. Vaihinger, Commentar, pp. 189–190.‡ The logical opinions which follow are in the main due to Mr G. E.

Moore, to whom I owe also my first perception of the difficulties in the

relational theory of space and time.

* See Mr G. E. Moore’s paper on “The Nature of Judgment”, Mind, N.S.,

Vol. viii. Also supra, §§ 47, 48, where the view adopted differs somewhat

from Mr Moore’s.

* Cf. Frege, Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, p. xviii.

* Cf. G. E. Moore, “Necessity”, Mind, N.S., No. 35.

* Cf. my Philosophy of Leibniz, Cambridge, 1900, Chap. x.52


KANT’S THEORY OF SPACE




432. In the present chapter I do not propose to undertake a minute or textual

  examination of Kant’s opinions; this has been done elsewhere, and

  notably in Vaihinger’s monumental commentary, so well that it need not

be done over again here. It is only the broad outlines of the Kantian

  doctrine that I wish to discuss. This doctrine, more or less modified, has

held the field for over a century, and has won a nearly universal

  acceptance. As my views are, on almost every point of mathematical

  theory, diametrically opposed to those of Kant, it becomes necessary

  explicitly to defend the opinions in which I differ from him.* In this I

  shall pay special attention to what Kant calls the transcendental

  arguments, i.e. those derived from the nature of mathematics.

433. Broadly speaking, the way in which Kant seeks to deduce his theory of

  space from mathematics (especially in the Prolegomena) is as follows.

  Starting from the question: “How is pure mathematics possible?” Kant

  first points out that all the propositions of mathematics are synthetic. He

  infers hence that these propositions cannot, as Leibniz had hoped, be

  proved by means of a logical calculus; on the contrary, they require, he

  says, certain synthetic à priori propositions, which may be called axioms,

and even then (it would seem) the reasoning employed in deductions

from the axioms is different from that of pure logic. Now Kant was not

  willing to admit that knowledge of the external world could be obtained

  otherwise than by experience; hence he concluded that the propositions

of mathematics all deal with something subjective, which he calls a form

of intuition. Of these forms there are two, space and time; time is the

  source of Arithmetic, space of Geometry. It is only in the forms of time

and space that objects can be experienced by a subject; and thus pure

  mathematics must be applicable to all experience. What is essential, from

the logical point of view, is, that the à priori intuitions supply methods of  reasoning and inference which formal logic does not admit; and these

  methods, we are told, make the figure (which may of course be merely

  imagined) essential to all geometrical proofs. The opinion that time and

  space are subjective is reinforced by the antinomies, where Kant

  endeavours to prove that, if they be anything more than forms of

  experience, they must be definitely self-contradictory.

In the above outline I have omitted everything not relevant to the

philosophy of mathematics. The questions of chief importance to us, as

regards the Kantian theory, are two, namely, (1) are the reasonings in

mathematics in any way different from those of Formal Logic? (2) are there

any contradictions in the notions of time and space? If these two pillars of the

Kantian edifice can be pulled down, we shall have successfully played the

part of Samson towards his disciples.

434. The question of the nature of mathematical reasoning was obscured in

  Kant’s day by several causes. In the first place, Kant never doubted for a

  moment that the propositions of logic are analytic, whereas he rightly

  perceived that those of mathematics are synthetic. It has since appeared

that logic is just as synthetic as all other kinds of truth; but this is a purely

  philosophical question, which I shall here pass by.* In the second place,

  formal logic was, in Kant’s day, in a very much more backward state

than at present. It was still possible to hold, as Kant did, that no great

  advance had been made since Aristotle, and that none, therefore, was

  likely to occur in the future. The syllogism still remained the one type of

  formally correct reasoning; and the syllogism was certainly inadequate

for mathematics. But now, thanks mainly to the mathematical logicians,

  formal logic is enriched by several forms of reasoning not reducible to

the syllogism,† and by means of these all mathematics can be, and large

parts of mathematics actually have been, developed strictly according to

the rules. In the third place, in Kant’s day, mathematics itself was,

  logically, very inferior to what it is now. It is perfectly true, for example,

that any one who attempts, without the use of the figure, to deduce

  Euclid’s seventh proposition from Euclid’s axioms, will find the task

  impossible; and there probably did not exist, in the eighteenth century,

any single logically correct piece of mathematical reasoning, that is to

say, any reasoning which correctly deduced its result from the explicit

  premisses laid down by the author. Since the correctness of the result

  seemed indubitable, it was natural to suppose that mathematical proofwas something different from logical proof. But the fact is, that the whole

  difference lay in the fact that mathematical proofs were simply unsound.

On closer examination, it has been found that many of the propositions

  which, to Kant, were undoubted truths, are as a matter of fact

  demonstrably false.* A still larger class of propositions—for instance,

  Euclid’s seventh proposition mentioned above—can be rigidly deduced

from certain premisses, but it is quite doubtful whether the premisses

  themselves are true or false. Thus the supposed peculiarity of

  mathematical reasoning has disappeared.

The belief that the reasonings of Geometry are in any way peculiar has

been, I hope, sufficiently refuted already by the detailed accounts which have

been given of these reasonings, and especially by Chapter 49. We have seen

that all geometrical results follow, by the mere rules of logic, from the

definitions of the various spaces. And as regards the opinion that Arithmetic

depends upon time, this too, I hope, has been answered by our accounts of the

relation of Arithmetic to Logic. Indeed, apart from any detail, it seems to be

refuted by the simple observation that time must have parts, and therefore

plurality, whole and part, are prior to any theory of time. All mathematics, we

may say—and in proof of our assertion we have the actual development of

the subject—is deducible from the primitive propositions of formal logic:

these being admitted, no further assumptions are required.

But admitting the reasonings of Geometry to be purely formal, a Kantian

may still maintain that an à priori intuition assures him that the definition of

three-dimensional Euclidean space, alone among the definitions of possible

spaces, is the definition of an existent, or at any rate of an entity having some

relation to existents which other spaces do not have. This opinion is, strictly

speaking, irrelevant to the philosophy of mathematics, since mathematics is

throughout indifferent to the question whether its entities exist. Kant thought

that the actual reasoning of mathematics was different from that of logic; the

suggested emendation drops this opinion, and maintains merely a new

primitive proposition, to the effect that Euclidean space is that of the actual

world. Thus, although I do not believe in any immediate intuition

guaranteeing any such primitive proposition, I shall not undertake the

refutation of this opinion. It is enough, for my purpose, to have shown that no

such intuition is relevant in any strictly mathematical proposition.

435. It remains to discuss the mathematical antinomies. These are

  concerned with infinity and continuity, which Kant supposed to be  specially spatio-temporal. We have already seen that this view is

  mistaken, since both occur in pure Arithmetic. We have seen also in Part

V (especially in Chapter 42) that the supposed antinomies of infinity and

  continuity, in their arithmetical form, are soluble; it remains to prove the

  same conclusion concerning Kant’s spatio-temporal form. The third and

  fourth antinomies are not relevant here, since they involve causality; only

the first two, therefore, will be examined.

First Antinomy. Thesis: “The world has a beginning in time, and as regards

space also is enclosed within limits.” This statement is not concerned with

pure time and pure space, but with the things in them. The proof, such as it is,

applies in the first instance to time only, and is effected by reductio ad

absurdum. “For assume”, it says, “that the world has no beginning in time,

then an eternity has passed away (abgelaufen) before every given point of

time, and consequently an infinite series of conditions of the things in the

world has happened. But the infinity of a series consists in this, that it can

never be completed by successive synthesis. Consequently an infinite past

series of things in the world (Weltreihe) is impossible, and a beginning of the

world is a necessary condition of its existence, which was first to be proved.”

This argument is difficult to follow, and suggests a covert appeal to

causality and the supposed necessity for a first cause. Neglecting this aspect

of the argument, it would seem that, like most of the arguments against

infinity, it fails to understand the use of the class-concept and the word any. It

is supposed—so it would seem—that the events preceding a given event

ought to be definable by extension, which, if their number is infinite, is

obviously not the case. “Completion by successive synthesis” seems roughly

equivalent to enumeration, and it is true that enumeration of an infinite series

is practically impossible. But the series may be none the less perfectly

definable, as the class of terms having a specified relation to a specified term.

It then remains a question, as with all classes, whether the class is finite or

infinite; and in the latter alternative, as we saw in Part V, that there is nothing

self-contradictory. In fact, to elicit a contradiction, it would be necessary to

state as an axiom that every class must have a finite number of terms—an

axiom which can be refuted, and for which there are no grounds. It seems,

however, that previous events are regarded by Kant as causes of later ones,

and that the cause is supposed to be logically prior to the effect. This, no

doubt, is the reason for speaking of conditions, and for confining the

antinomy to events instead of moments. If the cause were logically prior tothe effect, this argument would, I think, be valid; but we shall find, in Part

VII, that cause and effect are on the same logical level. Thus the thesis of the

first antinomy, in so far as it concerns time, must be rejected as false, and the

argument concerning space, since it depends upon that regarding time, falls

also.

  Antithesis. “The world has no beginning, and no limits in space, but is

infinite both in respect of time and space.” The proof of this proposition

assumes the infinity of pure time and space, and argues that these imply

events and things to fill them. This view was rejected, as regards space, in the

preceding chapter, and can be disproved, as regards time, by precisely similar

arguments; it is in any case irrelevant to our contention, since no proof is

offered that time and space are themselves infinite. This, in fact, seems

incapable of proof, since it depends upon the merely self-evident axiom that

there is a moment before any given moment, and a point beyond any given

point. But as no converse proof is valid, we may, in this instance, regard the

self-evident as true. Whether events had a beginning, and whether matter is

bounded by empty space, are questions which, if our philosophy of space and

time be sound, no argument independent of causality can decide.

  Second Antinomy. Thesis: “Every complex substance in the world consists

of simple parts, and nothing exists anywhere except the simple, or what is

composed of simple parts.” Here, again, the argument applies to things in

space and time, not to space and time themselves. We may extend it to space

and time, and to all collections, whether existent or not. It is indeed obvious

that the proposition, true or false, is concerned purely with whole and part,

and has no special relation to space and time. Instead of a complex substance,

we might consider the numbers between 1 and 2, or any other definable

collection. And with this extension, the proof of the proposition must, I think,

be admitted; only that terms or concepts should be substituted for substances,

and that, instead of the argument that relations between substances are

accidental (zufällig), we should content ourselves with saying that relations

imply terms, and complexity implies relations.

  Antithesis. “No complex thing in the world consists of simple parts, and

nothing simple exists in it anywhere.” The proof of this proposition, as of the

first antithesis, assumes, what is alone really interesting to us, the

corresponding property of space. “Space”, Kant says, “does not consist of

simple parts, but of spaces.” This dogma is regarded as self-evident, though

all employment of points shows that it is not universally accepted. It appearsto me that the argument of the thesis, extended as I have just suggested,

applies to pure space as to any other collection, and demonstrates the

existence of simple points which compose space. As the dogma is not argued,

we can only conjecture the grounds upon which it is held. The usual

argument from infinite division is probably what influenced Kant. However

many parts we divide a space into, these parts are still spaces, not points. But

however many parts we divide the stretch of ratios between 1 and 2 into, the

parts are still stretches, not single numbers. Thus the argument against points

proves that there are no numbers, and will equally prove that there are no

colours or tones. All these absurdities involve a covert use of the axiom of

finitude, i.e. the axiom that, if a space does consist of points, it must consist

of some finite number of points. When once this is denied, we may admit that

no finite number of divisions of a space will lead to points, while yet holding

every space to be composed of points. A finite space is a whole consisting of

simple parts, but not of any finite number of simple parts. Exactly the same

thing is true of the stretch between 1 and 2. Thus the antinomy is not

specially spatial, and any answer which is applicable in Arithmetic is

applicable here also. The thesis, which is an essential postulate of Logic,

should be accepted, while the antithesis should be rejected.

  Thus Kant’s antinomies do not specially involve space and time: any other

continuous series, including that of real numbers, raises the same problems.

And what is more, the properties of space and time, to which Kant appeals,

are general properties of such series. Other antinomies than Kant’s—e.g. that

concerning absolute and relative position, or concerning the straight line as

both a relation and a collection of points—have been solved in the preceding

chapters of this Part. Kant’s antinomies, which involve the difficulties of

infinity, are by far the most serious, and these being essentially arithmetical,

have been already solved in Part V.

436. Before proceeding to matter and motion, let us briefly recapitulate the

  results of this Part. Geometry, we said, is the study of series having more

than one dimension; and such series arise wherever we have a series

  whose terms are series. This subject is important in pure mathematics,

  because it gives us new kinds of order and new methods of generating

order. It is important in applied mathematics, because at least one series

of several dimensions exists, namely, space. We found that the abstract

logical method, based upon the logic of relations, which had served

  hitherto, was still adequate, and enabled us to define all the classes of  entities which mathematicians call spaces, and to deduce from the

  definitions all the propositions of the corresponding Geometries. We

  found that the continuity and infinity of a space can always be

  arithmetically defined, and that no new indefinables occur in Geometry.

We saw that the philosophical objections to points raised by most

  philosophers are all capable of being answered by an amended logic, and

that Kant’s belief in the peculiarity of geometrical reasoning, and in the

  existence of certain antinomies peculiar to space and time, has been

  disproved by the modern realization of Leibniz’s universal characteristic.

  Thus, although we discussed no problems specially concerned with what

  actually exists, we incidentally answered all the arguments usually

  alleged against the existence of an absolute space. Since common sense

  affirms this existence, there seems therefore no longer any reason for

  denying it; and this conclusion, we shall find, will give us the greatest

  assistance in the philosophy of Dynamics.

* The theory of space which I shall discuss will be that of the Critique and

the Prolegomena. Pre-critical works, and the Metaphysische Anfangsgründe

der Naturwissenschaft (which differs from the Critique on this point), will

not be considered.

* See my Philosophy of Leibniz, § 11.

† See Chap. 2 supra, esp. § 18.

* For example, the proposition that every continuous function can be

differentiated.                                  Part VII


                  Matter and Motion53


MATTER




437. The nature of matter, even more than that of space, has always been

  regarded as a cardinal problem of philosophy. In the present work,

  however, we are not concerned with the question: What is the nature of

the matter that actually exists? We are concerned merely with the

  analysis of rational Dynamics considered as a branch of pure

  mathematics, which introduces its subject-matter by definition, not by

  observation of the actual world. Thus we are not confined to laws of

  motion which are empirically verified: non-Newtonian Dynamics, like

  non-Euclidean Geometry, must be as interesting to us as the orthodox

  system. It is true that philosophical arguments against the reality of

  matter usually endeavour to raise logical objections to the notion of

  matter, and these objections, like the objections to absolute space, are

  relevant to a discussion of mathematical principles. But they need not

  greatly concern us at this stage, as they have mostly been dealt with

  incidentally in the vindication of space. Those who have agreed that a

  space composed of points is possible, will probably agree also that matter

is possible. But the question of possibility is in any case subsequent to

our immediate question, which is: What is matter? And here matter is to

  mean, matter as it occurs in rational Dynamics, quite independently of all

  questions as to its actual existence.

438. There is—so we decided in Part VI—no logical implication of other

  entities in space. It does not follow, merely because there is space, that

  therefore there are things in it. If we are to believe this, we must believe

it on new grounds, or rather on what is called the evidence of the senses.

  Thus we are here taking an entirely new step. Among terms which appear

to exist, there are, we may say, four great classes: (1) instants, (2) points,

(3) terms which occupy instants but not points, (4) terms which occupy

both points and instants. It seems to be the fact that there are no terms  which occupy points but not instants. What is meant by occupying a point

or an instant, analysis cannot explain; this is a fundamental relation,

  expressed by in or at, asymmetrical and intransitive, indefinable and

  simple. It is evident that bits of matter are among the terms of (4). Matter

or materiality itself, the class-concept, is among the terms which do not

exist, but bits of matter exist both in time and in space. They do not,

  however, form the whole of class (4): there are, besides, the so-called

  secondary qualities, at least colours, which exist in time and space, but

are not matter. We are not called upon to decide as to the subjectivity of

  secondary qualities, but at least we must agree that they differ from

  matter. How, then, is matter to be defined?

439. There is a well-worn traditional answer to this question. Matter, we are

  told, is a substance, a thing, a subject, of which secondary qualities are

the predicates. But this traditional answer cannot content us. The whole

  doctrine of subject and predicate, as we have already had occasion to

  argue, is radically false, and must be abandoned. It may be questioned

  whether, without it, any sense other than that of Chapter 4 can be made

of the notion of thing. We are sometimes told that things are organic

  unities, composed of many parts expressing the whole and expressed in

the whole. This notion is apt to replace the older notion of substance, not,

I think, to the advantage of precise thinking. The only kind of unity to

  which I can attach any precise sense—apart from the unity of the

  absolutely simple—is that of a whole composed of parts. But this form of

  unity cannot be what is called organic; for if the parts express the whole

or the other parts, they must be complex, and therefore themselves

  contain parts; if the parts have been analysed as far as possible, they must

be simple terms, incapable of expressing anything except themselves. A

  distinction is made, in support of organic unities, between conceptual

  analysis and real division into parts. What is really indivisible, we are

  told, may be conceptually analysable. This distinction, if the conceptual

  analysis be regarded as subjective, seems to me wholly inadmissible. All

  complexity is conceptual in the sense that it is due to a whole capable of

logical analysis, but is real in the sense that it has no dependence upon

the mind, but only upon the nature of the object. Where the mind can

  distinguish elements, there must be different elements to distinguish;

  though, alas! there are often different elements which the mind does not

  distinguish. The analysis of a finite space into points is no more objectivethan the analysis (say) of causality into time-sequence + ground and

  consequent, or of equality into sameness of relation to a given magnitude.

In every case of analysis, there is a whole consisting of parts with

  relations; it is only the nature of the parts and the relations which

  distinguishes different cases. Thus the notion of an organic whole in the

  above sense must be attributed to defective analysis, and cannot be used

to explain things.

It is also said that analysis is falsification, that the complex is not

equivalent to the sum of its constituents and is changed when analysed into

these. In this doctrine, as we saw in Parts I and II, there is a measure of truth,

when what is to be analysed is a unity. A proposition has a certain indefinable

unity, in virtue of which it is an assertion; and this is so completely lost by

analysis that no enumeration of constituents will restore it, even though itself

be mentioned as a constituent. There is, it must be confessed, a grave logical

difficulty in this fact, for it is difficult not to believe that a whole must be

constituted by its constituents. For us, however, it is sufficient to observe that

all unities are propositions or propositional concepts, and that consequently

nothing that exists is a unity. If, therefore, it is maintained that things are

unities, we must reply that no things exist.

440. Thus no form of the notion of substance seems applicable to the

  definition of matter. The question remains: How and why is matter

  distinguished from the so-called secondary qualities? It cannot, I think,

be distinguished as belonging to a different logical class of concepts; the

only classes appear to be things, predicates and relations, and both matter

and the secondary qualities belong to the first class. Nevertheless the

  world of dynamics is sharply distinguished from that of the secondary

  qualities, and the elementary properties of matter are quite different from

  those of colours. Let us examine these properties with a view to

  definition.

The most fundamental characteristic of matter lies in the nature of its

connection with space and time. Two pieces of matter cannot occupy the

same place at the same moment, and the same piece cannot occupy two

places at the same moment, though it may occupy two moments at the same

place. That is, whatever, at a given moment, has extension, is not an

indivisible piece of matter: division of space always implies division of any

matter occupying the space, but division of time has no corresponding

implication. (These properties are commonly attributed to matter: I do notwish to assert that they do actually belong to it.) By these properties, matter is

distinguished from whatever else is in space. Consider colours for example:

these possess impenetrability, so that no two colours can be in the same place

at the same time, but they do not possess the other property of matter, since

the same colour may be in many places at once. Other pairs of qualities, as

colour and hardness, may also coexist in one place. On the view which

regarded matter as the subject of which qualities were attributes, one piece of

colour was distinguished from another by the matter whose attribute it was,

even when the two colours were exactly similar. I should prefer to say that

the colour is the same, and has no direct relation to the matter in the place.

The relation is indirect, and consists in occupation of the same place. (I do

not wish to decide any moot questions as to the secondary qualities, but

merely to show the difference between the common-sense notions of these

and of matter respectively.) Thus impenetrability and its converse seem to

characterize matter sufficiently to distinguish it from whatever else exists in

space. Two pieces of matter cannot occupy the same place and the same time,

and one piece of matter cannot occupy two places at the same time. But the

latter property must be understood of a simple piece of matter, one which is

incapable of analysis or division.

  Other properties of matter flow from the nature of motion. Every piece of

matter persists through time: if it exists once, it would seem that it must

always exist. It either retains its spatial position, or changes it continuously,

so that its positions at various times form a continuous series in space. Both

these properties require considerable discussion, which will follow at a later

stage. They are purely kinematical, i.e. they involve none of the so-called

laws of motion, but only the nature of motion itself.

A controversy has always existed, since early Greek times, as to the

possibility of a vacuum. The question whether there is a vacuum cannot, I

think, be decided on philosophical grounds, i.e. no decision is possible from

the nature of matter or of motion. The answer belongs properly to Science,

and therefore none will be suggested here.

We may sum up the nature of matter as follows. Material unit is a class-

concept, applicable to whatever has the following characteristics: (1) A

simple material unit occupies a spatial point at any moment; two units cannot

occupy the same point at the same moment, and one cannot occupy two

points at the same moment. (2) Every material unit persists through time; its

positions in space at any two moments may be the same or different; but ifdifferent, the positions at times intermediate between the two chosen must

form a continuous series. (3) Two material units differ in the same immediate

manner as two points or two colours; they agree in having the relation of

inclusion in a class to the general concept matter, or rather to the general

concept material unit. Matter itself seems to be a collective name for all

pieces of matter, as space for all points and time for all instants. It is thus the

peculiar relation to space and time which distinguishes matter from other

qualities, and not any logical difference such as that of subject and predicate,

or substance and attribute.

441. We can now attempt an abstract logical statement of what rational

  Dynamics requires its matter to be. In the first place, time and space may

be replaced by a one-dimensional and n-dimensional series respectively.

Next, it is plain that the only relevant function of a material point is to

  establish a correlation between all moments of time and some points of

  space, and that this correlation is many-one. So soon as the correlation is

  given, the actual material point ceases to have any importance. Thus we

may replace a material point by a many-one relation whose domain is a

certain one-dimensional series, and whose converse domain is contained

in a certain three-dimensional series. To obtain a material universe, so far

as kinematical considerations go, we have only to consider a class of

such relations subject to the condition that the logical product of any two

  relations of the class is to be null. This condition insures impenetrability.

If we add that the one-dimensional and the three-dimensional series are

to be both continuous, and that each many-one relation is to define a

  continuous function, we have all the kinematical conditions for a system

of material particles, generalized and expressed in terms of logical

  constants.54


MOTION




442. Much has been written concerning the laws of motion, the possibility

of dispensing with Causality in Dynamics, the relativity of motion and

  other kindred questions. But there are several preliminary questions, of

great difficulty and importance, concerning which little has been said.

Yet these questions, speaking logically, must be settled before the more

  complex problems usually discussed can be attacked with any hope of

  success. Most of the relevant modern philosophical literature will

  illustrate the truth of these remarks: the theories suggested usually repose

on a common dogmatic basis, and can be easily seen to be unsatisfactory.

So long as an author confines himself to demolishing his opponents, he is

  irrefutable; when he constructs his own theory, he exposes himself, as a

  rule, to a similar demolition by the next author. Under these

  circumstances, we must seek some different path, whose by-ways remain

  unexplained. “Back to Newton” is the watchword of reform in this

  matter. Newton’s scholium to the definitions contains arguments which

are unrefuted, and so far as I know, irrefutable: they have been before the

  world two hundred years, and it is time they were refuted or accepted.

  Being unequal to the former, I have adopted the latter alternative.

The concept of motion is logically subsequent to that of occupying a place

at a time, and also to that of change. Motion is the occupation, by one entity,

of a continuous series of places at a continuous series of times. Change is the

difference, in respect of truth or falsehood, between a proposition concerning

an entity and a time T and a proposition concerning the same entity and

another time T', provided that the two propositions differ only by the fact that

T occurs in the one where T' occurs in the other. Change is continuous when

the propositions of the above kind form a continuous series correlated with a

continuous series of moments. Change thus always involves (1) a fixed

entity, (2) a three-cornered relation between this entity, another entity, andsome but not all, of the moments of time. This is its bare minimum. Mere

existence at some but not all moments constitutes change on this definition.

Consider pleasure, for example. This, we know, exists at some moments, and

we may suppose that there are moments when it does not exist. Thus there is

a relation between pleasure, existence, and some moments, which does not

subsist between pleasure, existence, and other moments. According to the

definition, therefore, pleasure changes in passing from existence to

nonexistence or vice versâ. This shows that the definition requires

emendation, if it is to accord with usage. Usage does not permit us to speak

of change except where what changes is an existent throughout, or is at least

a class-concept one of whose particulars always exists. Thus we should say,

in the case of pleasure, that my mind is what changes when the pleasure

ceases to exist. On the other hand, if my pleasure is of different magnitudes at

different times, we should say the pleasure changes its amount, though we

agreed in Part III that not pleasure, but only particular amounts of pleasure,

are capable of existence. Similarly we should say that colour changes,

meaning that there are different colours at different times in some connection;

though not colour, but only particular shades of colour, can exist. And

generally, where both the class-concept and the particulars are simple, usage

would allow us to say, if a series of particulars exists at a continuous series of

times, that the class-concept changes. Indeed it seems better to regard this as

the only kind of change, and to regard as unchanging a term which itself

exists throughout a given period of time. But if we are to do this, we must say

that wholes consisting of existent parts do not exist, or else that a whole

cannot preserve its identity if any of its parts be changed. The latter is the

correct alternative, but some subtlety is required to maintain it. Thus people

say they change their minds; they say that the mind changes when pleasure

ceases to exist in it. If this expression is to be correct, the mind must not be

the sum of its constituents. For if it were the sum of all its constituents

throughout time, it would be evidently unchanging; if it were the sum of its

constituents at one time, it would lose its identity as soon as a former

constituent ceased to exist or a new one began to exist. Thus if the mind is

anything, and if it can change, it must be something persistent and constant,

to which all constituents of a psychical state have one and the same relation.

Personal identity could be constituted by the persistence of this term, to

which all a person’s states (and nothing else) would have a fixed relation.

The change of mind would then consist merely in the fact that these states arenot the same at all times.

  Thus we may say that a term changes, when it has a fixed relation to a

collection of other terms, each of which exists at some part of time, while all

do not exist at exactly the same series of moments. Can we say, with this

definition, that the universe changes? The universe is a somewhat ambiguous

term: it may mean all the things that exist at a single moment, or all the things

that ever have existed or will exist, or the common quality of whatever exists.

In the two former senses it cannot change; in the last, if it be other than

existence, it can change. Existence itself would not be held to change, though

different terms exist at different times; for existence is involved in the notion

of change as commonly employed, which applies only in virtue of the

difference between the things that exist at different times. On the whole, then,

we shall keep nearest to usage if we say that the fixed relation, mentioned at

the beginning of this paragraph, must be that of a simple class-concept to

simple particulars contained under it.

443. The notion of change has been much obscured by the doctrine of

  substance, by the distinction between a thing’s nature and its external

  relations, and by the pre-eminence of subject-predicate propositions. It

has been supposed that a thing could, in some way, be different and yet

the same: that though predicates define a thing, yet it may have different

  predicates at different times. Hence the distinction of the essential and the

  accidental, and a number of other useless distinctions, which were (I

  hope) employed precisely and consciously by the scholastics, but are

used vaguely and unconsciously by the moderns. Change, in this

  metaphysical sense, I do not at all admit. The so-called predicates of a

term are mostly derived from relations to other terms; change is due,

  ultimately, to the fact that many terms have relations to some parts of

time which they do not have to others. But every term is eternal, timeless

and immutable; the relations it may have to parts of time are equally

  immutable. It is merely the fact that different terms are related to

  different times that makes the difference between what exists at one time

and what exists at another. And though a term may cease to exist, it

  cannot cease to be; it is still an entity, which can be counted as one, and

  concerning which some propositions are true and others false.

444. Thus the important point is the relation of terms to the times they

  occupy, and to existence. Can a term occupy a time without existing? At

  first sight, one is tempted to say that it can. It is hard to deny that  Waverley’s adventures occupied the time of the ’45, or that the stories in

the 1,001 Nights occupy the period of Harun al Raschid. I should not say,

with Mr Bradley, that these times are not parts of real time; on the

  contrary, I should give them a definite position in the Christian Era. But I

  should say that the events are not real, in the sense that they never

  existed. Nevertheless, when a term exists at a time, there is an ultimate

  triangular relation, not reducible to a combination of separate relations to

  existence and the time respectively. This may be shown as follows. If “A

  exists now” can be analysed into “A is now” and “A exists”, where exists

is used without any tense, we shall have to hold that “A is then” is

  logically possible even if A did not exist then; for if occupation of a time

be separable from existence, a term may occupy a time at which it does

not exist, even if there are other times when it does exist. But, on the

  theory in question, “A is then” and “A exists” constitute the very meaning

of “A existed then”, and therefore, when these two propositions are true,

A must have existed then. This can only be avoided by denying the

  possibility of analysing “A exists now” into a combination of two-term

  relations; and hence non-existential occupation of a time, if possible at

all, is radically different from the existential kind of occupation.

It should be observed, however, that the above discussion has a merely

philosophical interest, and is strictly irrelevant to our theme. For existence,

being a constant term, need not be mentioned, from a mathematical point of

view, in defining the moments occupied by a term. From the mathematical

point of view, change arises from the fact that there are propositional

functions which are true of some but not all moments of time, and if these

involve existence, that is a further point with which mathematics as such need

not concern itself.

445. Before applying these remarks to motion, we must examine the

  difficult idea of occupying a place at a time. Here again we seem to have

an irreducible triangular relation. If there is to be motion, we must not

  analyse the relation into occupation of a place and occupation of a time.

For a moving particle occupies many places, and the essence of motion

lies in the fact that they are occupied at different times. If “A is here now”

were analysable into “A is here” and “A is now”, it would follow that “A

is there then” is analysable into “A is there” and “A is then”. If all these

  propositions were independent, we could combine them differently: we

  could, from “A is now” and “A is there”, infer “A is there now”, which we  know to be false, if A is a material point. The suggested analysis is

  therefore inadmissible. If we are determined to avoid a relation of three

  terms, we may reduce “A is here now” to “A’s occupation of this place is

  now”. Thus we have a relation between this time and a complex concept,

A’s occupation of this place. But this seems merely to substitute another

  equivalent proposition for the one which it professes to explain. But

  mathematically, the whole requisite conclusion is that, in relation to a

  given term which occupies a place, there is a correlation between a place

and a time.

446. We can now consider the nature of motion, which need not, I think,

  cause any great difficulty. A simple unit of matter, we agreed, can only

  occupy one place at one time. Thus if A be a material point, “A is here

  now” excludes “A is there now”, but not “A is here then”. Thus any given

  moment has a unique relation, not direct, but viâ A, to a single place,

  whose occupation by A is at the given moment; but there need not be a

unique relation of a given place to a given time, since the occupation of

the place may fill several times. A moment such that an interval

  containing the given moment otherwise than as an end-point can be

  assigned, at any moment within which interval A is in the same place, is a

  moment when A is at rest. A moment when this cannot be done is a

  moment when A is in motion, provided A occupies some place at

  neighbouring moments on either side. A moment when there are such

  intervals, but all have the said moment as an end-term, is one of

  transition from rest to motion or vice versâ. Motion consists in the fact

that, by the occupation of a place at a time, a correlation is established

  between places and times; when different times, throughout any period

  however short, are correlated with different places, there is motion; when

  different times, throughout some period however short, are all correlated

with the same place, there is rest.

We may now proceed to state our doctrine of motion in abstract logical

terms, remembering that material particles are replaced by many-one

relations of all times to some places, or of all terms of a continuous one-

dimensional series t to some terms of a continuous three-dimensional series s.

Motion consists broadly in the correlation of different terms of t with

different terms of s. A relation R which has a single term of s for its converse

domain corresponds to a material particle which is at rest throughout all time.

A relation R which correlates all the terms of t in a certain interval with asingle term of s corresponds to a material particle which is at rest throughout

the interval, with the possible exclusion of its end-terms (if any), which may

be terms of transition between rest and motion. A time of momentary rest is

given by any term for which the differential coefficient of the motion is zero.

The motion is continuous if the correlating relation R defines a continuous

function. It is to be taken as part of the definition of motion that it is

continuous, and that further it has first and second differential coefficients.

This is an entirely new assumption, having no kind of necessity, but serving

merely the purpose of giving a subject akin to rational Dynamics.

447. It is to be observed that, in consequence of the denial of the

  infinitesimal, and in consequence of the allied purely technical view of

the derivative of a function, we must entirely reject the notion of a state

of motion. Motion consists merely in the occupation of different places at

  different times, subject to continuity as explained in Part V. There is no

  transition from place to place, no consecutive moment or consecutive

  position, no such thing as velocity except in the sense of a real number

  which is the limit of a certain set of quotients. The rejection of velocity

and acceleration as physical facts (i.e. as properties belonging at each

instant to a moving point, and not merely real numbers expressing limits

of certain ratios) involves, as we shall see, some difficulties in the

  statement of the laws of motion; but the reform introduced by

  Weierstrass in the infinitesimal calculus has rendered this rejection

  imperative.55


CAUSALITY




448. A great controversy has existed in recent times, among those who are

  interested in the principles of Dynamics, on the question whether the

  notion of causality occurs in the subject or not. Kirchoff* and Mach, and,

in our own country, Karl Pearson, have upheld the view that Dynamics is

  purely descriptive, while those who adhere to the more traditional

  opinion maintain that it not merely registers sequences, but discovers

causal connections. This controversy is discussed in a very interesting

  manner in Professor James Ward’s Naturalism and Agnosticism, in

  which the descriptive theory is used to prove that Dynamics cannot give

  metaphysical truths about the real world. But I do not find, either in

  Professor Ward’s book or elsewhere, a very clear statement of the issue

  between the two schools. The practical mathematical form of the

  question arises as regards force, and in this form, there can be no doubt

that the descriptive school are in the right: the notion of force is one

  which ought not to be introduced into the principles of Dynamics. The

  reasons for this assertion are quite conclusive. Force is the supposed

  cause of acceleration: many forces are supposed to concur in producing a

  resultant acceleration. Now an acceleration, as was pointed out at the end

of the preceding chapter, is a mere mathematical fiction, a number, not a

  physical fact; and a component acceleration is doubly a fiction, for, like

the component of any other vector sum, it is not part of the resultant,

  which alone could be supposed to exist. Hence a force, if it be a cause, is

the cause of an effect which never takes place. But this conclusion does

not suffice to show that causality never occurs in Dynamics. If the

  descriptive theory were strictly correct, inferences from what occurs at

  some times to what occurs at others would be impossible. Such

  inferences must involve a relation of implication between events at

  different times, and any such relation is in a general sense causal. Whatdoes appear to be the case is, that the only causality occurring in

  Dynamics requires the whole configuration of the material world as a

  datum, and does not yield relations of particulars to particulars, such as

are usually called causal. In this respect, there is a difficulty in

  interpreting such seeming causation of particulars by particulars as

  appears, for example, in the law of gravitation. On account of this

  difficulty, it will be necessary to treat causation at some length,

  examining first the meaning to be assigned to the causation of particulars

by particulars as commonly understood, then the meaning of causality

  which is essential to rational Dynamics and finally the difficulty as

  regards component acceleration.

449. The first subject of the present chapter is the logical nature of causal

  propositions. In this subject there is a considerable difficulty, due to the

fact that temporal succession is not a relation between events directly, but

only between moments.* If two events could be successive, we could

  regard causation as a relation of succession holding between two events

  without regard to the time at which they occur. If “A precedes B” (where

A and B are actual or possible temporal existents) be a true proposition,

  involving no reference to any actual part of time, but only to temporal

  succession, then we say A causes B. The law of causality would then

  consist in asserting that, among the things which actually precede a given

  particular existent B now, there is always one series of events at

  successive moments which would necessarily have preceded B then, just

as well as B now; the temporal relations of B to the terms of this series

may then be abstracted from all particular times, and asserted per se.

  Such would have been the account of causality, if we had admitted that

events can be successive. But as we have denied this, we require a different

and more complicated theory. As a preliminary, let us examine some

characteristics of the causal relation.

A causal relation between two events, whatever its nature may be, certainly

involves no reference to constant particular parts of time. It is impossible that

we should have such a proposition as “A causes B now, but not then”. Such a

proposition would merely mean that A exists now but not then, and therefore

B will exist at a slightly subsequent moment, though it did not exist at a time

slightly subsequent to the former time. But the causal relation itself is eternal:

if A had existed at any other time, B would have existed at the subsequent

moment. Thus “A causes B” has no reference to constant particular parts oftime.

  Again, neither A nor B need ever exist, though if A should exist at any

moment, B must exist at a subsequent moment, and vice versâ. In all

Dynamics (as I shall prove later) we work with causal connections; yet,

except when applied to concrete cases, our terms are not existents. Their non-

existence is, in fact, the mark of what is called rational Dynamics. To take

another example: All deliberation and choice, all decisions as to policies,

demand the validity of causal series whose terms do not and will not exist.

For the rational choice depends upon the construction of two causal series,

only one of which can be made to exist. Unless both were valid, the choice

could have no foundation. The rejected series consists of equally valid causal

connections, but the events connected are not to be found among existents.

Thus all statesmanship, and all rational conduct of life, is based upon the

method of the frivolous historical game, in which we discuss what the world

would be if Cleopatra’s nose had been half an inch longer.

A causal relation, we have seen, has no essential reference to existence, as

to particular parts of time. But it has, none the less, some kind of connection

with both. If one of its terms is among existents, so is the other; if one is

nonexistent, the other is also non-existent. If one of the terms is at one

moment, the other is at a later or earlier moment. Thus if A causes B, we have

also “A’s existence implies B’s” and “A’s being at this moment implies B’s

being at a subsequent moment”. These two propositions are implied by “A

causes B”; the second, at least, also implies “A causes B”, so that we have

here a mutual implication. Whether the first also implies “A causes B” is a

difficult question. Some people would hold that two moments of time, or two

points of space, imply each other’s existence; yet the relation between these

cannot be said to be causal.

It would seem that whatever exists at any part of time has causal relations.

This is not a distinguishing characteristic of what exists, since we have seen

that two non-existent terms may be cause and effect. But the absence of this

characteristic distinguishes terms which cannot exist from terms which might

exist. Excluding space and time, we may define as a possible existent any

term which has a causal relation to some other term. This definition excludes

numbers, and all so-called abstract ideas. But it admits the entities of rational

Dynamics, which might exist, though we have no reason to suppose that they

do.

If we admit (what seems undeniable) that whatever occupies any giventime is both a cause and an effect, we obtain a reason for either the infinity or

the circularity of time, and a proof that, if there are events at any part of time,

there always have been and always will be events. If, moreover, we admit

that a single existent A can be isolated as the cause of another single existent

B, which in turn causes C, then the world consists of as many independent

causal series as there are existents at any one time. This leads to an absolute

Leibnizian monadism—a view which has always been held to be paradoxical,

and to indicate an error in the theory from which it springs. Let us, then,

return to the meaning of causality, and endeavour to avoid the paradox of

independent causal series.

450. The proposition “A causes B” is, as it stands, incomplete. The only

  meaning of which it seems capable is “A’s existence at any time implies

B’s existence at some future time”. It has always been customary to

  suppose that cause and effect must occupy consecutive moments; but as

time is assumed to be a compact series, there cannot be any consecutive

  moments, and the interval between any two moments will always be

finite. Thus in order to obtain a more complete causal proposition, we

must specify the interval between A and B. A causal connection then

  asserts that the existence of A at any one time implies the existence of B

after an interval which is independent of the particular time at which A

  existed. In other words, we assert: “There is an interval t such that A’s

  existence at any time t implies B’s existence at a time t + t.” This
                            11

  requires the measurement of time, and consequently involves either

  temporal distance, or magnitude of divisibility, which last we agreed to

  regard as not a motion of pure mathematics. Thus if our measure is

  effected by means of distance, our proposition is capable of the

  generalization which is required for a purely logical statement.

451. A very difficult question remains—the question which, when the

  problem is precisely stated, discriminates most clearly between monism

and monadism. Can the causal relation hold between particular events, or

does it hold only between the whole present state of the universe and the

  whole subsequent state? Or can we take a middle position, and regard

one group of events now as casually connected with one group at another

time, but not with any other events at that other time?

I will illustrate this difficulty by the case of gravitating particles. Let there

be three particles A, B, C. We say that B and C both cause accelerations in A,

and we compound these two accelerations by the parallelogram law. But thiscomposition is not truly addition, for the components are not parts of the

resultant. The resultant is a new term, as simple as its components, and not by

any means their sum. Thus the effects attributed to B and C are never

produced, but a third term different from either is produced. This, we may

say, is produced by B and C together, taken as one whole. But the effect

which they produce as a whole can only be discovered by supposing each to

produce a separate effect: if this were not supposed, it would be impossible to

obtain the two accelerations whose resultant is the actual acceleration. Thus

we seem to reach an antinomy: the whole has no effect except what results

from the effects of the parts, but the effects of the parts are non-existent.

The examination of this difficulty will rudely shake our cherished

prejudices concerning causation. The laws of motion, we shall find, actually

contradict the received view, and demand a quite different and far more

complicated view. In Dynamics, we shall find (1) that the causal relation

holds between events at three times, not at two; (2) that the whole state of the

material universe at two of the three times is necessary to the statement of a

causal relation. In order to provide for this conclusion, let us re-examine

causality in a less conventional spirit.

452. Causality, generally, is the principle in virtue of which, from a

  sufficient number of events at a sufficient number of moments, one or

  more events at one or more new moments can be inferred. Let us

  suppose, for example, that, by means of the principle, if we are given e
                                                                                      1

  events at a time t, e at a time t,…e at a time t, then we can infer e +
                      122nnn

1 events at a time tn + 1. If, then, er + 1 ≥ er, and if the times tr are

  arbitrary, except that t +  is after t, it follows that, from the original
                            r1r

  data, we can infer certain events at all future times. For we may choose e
                                                                                        1

of the events e,…e of the events e + , and infer e +  events at a new
                    2nn1n1

time t + . Hence by means of our supposed law, inference to future
        n2

  times is assured. And if, for any value of r, e +  > e, then more than e
                                                      r1rn

+  events can be inferred at the time t + , since there are several ways
    1n2

of choosing e events out of e +  events. But if for any value of r, e + 
                  rr1r1

> e, then inference to the past becomes in general impossible. In order
    r

that an unambiguous inference to the past may be possible, it is necessary

that the implication should be reciprocal, i.e. that e events at time t
                                                              11

  should be implied by e at t …e +  at t + . But some inference to the
                            22n1n1  past is possible without this condition, namely, that at time t there were
                                                                        1

e events implying, with the others up to t, the e +  events at time t +
  1nn1n

1. But even this inference soon fails if, for any value of r, er + 1 > er,

since, after inferring e events at time t, e for the next inference takes
                            11r

the place of e + , but is too small to allow the inference. Thus if
                r1

  unambiguous inference to any part of time is to be possible, it is

  necessary and sufficient (1) that any one of the n + 1 groups of events

  should be implied by the other  groups; (2) that e = e +  for all values of
                                                            rr1

r. Since causality demands the possibility of such inference, we may take

  these two conditions as satisfied.

  Another somewhat complicated point is the following. If e e …e cause
                                                                        12n

e + , and e …e + , cause e +  and so on, we have an independent causal
n12n1n2

series, and a return to monadism, though the monad is now complex, being at

each moment a group of events. But this result is not necessary. It may

happen that only certain groups e e …e allow inference to e + , and that
                                      12nn1

e e …e, e +  is not such a group. Thus suppose e'  e'  …e' 
23nn1124

simultaneous with e …e, and causing e'  + . It may be that e e …e e'  +
                      1nn123nn

1 and e' 2 e' 3 …e' n en + 1 form the next causal groups, causing en + 2 and e' n

+  respectively. In this way no independent causal series will arise, in spite
2

of particular causal sequences. This however remains a mere possibility, of

which, so far as I know, no instance occurs.

Do the general remarks on the logical nature of causal propositions still

hold good? Must we suppose the causal relation to hold directly between the

events e e …e + , and merely to imply their temporal succession? There
        12n1

are difficulties in this view. For, having recognized that consecutive times are

impossible, it has become necessary to assume finite intervals of time

between e and e, e and e etc. Hence the length of these intervals must be
          1223

specified, and thus a mere reference to events, without regard to temporal

position, becomes impossible. All we can say is, that only relative position is

relevant. Given a causal relation in which the times are t, this relation will
                                                                  r

still be valid for times T + t. Thus the ultimate statement seems to be: given
                              r

m events at any moment, m other events at a moment whose distance from

the first is specified, and so on till we have n groups of events, then m new

events can be inferred at any new moment whose distance from the first isspecified, provided m and n have suitable values, and the groups of events be

suitably chosen—where, however, the values to be assigned to m and n may

depend upon the nature of the events in question. For example, in a material

system consisting of N particles, we shall have m = N, n = 2. Here m depends

upon the nature of the material system in question. What circumstances

obtain in Psychology, it is as yet impossible to say, since psychologists have

failed to establish any strict causal laws.

  Thus rational Dynamics assume that, in an independent material system,

the configurations at any two moments imply the configuration at any other

moment. This statement is capable of translation into the language of pure

mathematics, as we shall see in the next chapter. But it remains a question

what we are to say concerning such causation of particulars by particulars as

appears to be involved in such principles as the law of gravitation. But this

discussion must be postponed until we have examined the so-called laws of

motion.


* Vorlesungen über mathematische Physik, Leipzig, 1883, Vorrede.

* See my article in Mind, N.S., No. 39, “Is position in time and space

absolute or relative?”56


DEFINITION OF A


DYNAMICAL WORLD




453. Before proceeding to the laws of motion, which introduce new

  complications of which some are difficult to express in terms of pure

  mathematics, I wish briefly to define in logical language the dynamical

  world as it results from previous chapters.

Let t be a one-dimensional continuous series, s a three-dimensional

continuous series, which we will not assume to be Euclidean as yet. If R be a

many-one relation whose domain is t and whose converse domain is

contained in s, then R defines a motion of a material particle. The

indestructibility and ingenerability of matter are expressed in the fact that R

has the whole of t for its field. Let us assume further that R defines a

continuous function in s. In order to define the motions of a material system,

it is only necessary to consider a class of relations having the properties

assigned above to R, and such that the logical product of any two of them is

null. This last condition expresses impenetrability. For it asserts that no two

of our relations relate the same moment to the same point, i.e. no two

particles can be at the same place at the same time. A set of relations

fulfilling these conditions will be called a class of kinematical motions.

  With these conditions, we have all that kinematics requires for the

definition of matter; and if the descriptive school were wholly in the right,

our definition would not add the new condition which takes us from

kinematics to kinetics. Nevertheless this condition is essential to inference

from events at one time to events at another, without which Dynamics would

lose its distinctive feature.

454. A generalized form of the statement of causality which we require is

the following: A class of kinetic motions is a class of kinematical motions

such that, given the relata of the various component relations at n giventimes, the relata at all times are determinate. In ordinary Dynamics we

  have n = 2, and this assumption may be made without the loss of any

  interesting generality. Our assertion then amounts to saying that there is a

certain specific many-one relation which holds between any two

  configurations and their times and any third time, as referent, and the

  configuration at the third time as relatum; in ordinary language, given

  two configurations at two given times, the configuration at any other time

is determinate. Formally, the principle of causality in this form may be

  stated as follows. If R be a relation which is any one of our motions, and t

any time, let R be the relation holding only between t and the term to
                  t

  which t has the relation R. If K be the whole class of motions, let K be
                                                                                t

the whole class of such terms as R. Then K expresses the configuration
                                          tt

of the system at the time t. Now let t' , t'' be any other two times. Then K

is a class of kinetic motions if there is a many-one relation S, the same

for any three times, which holds between the class whose terms are t, t' ,

t'' , K, K , as referent and the configuration K as relatum.
      tt't''

The particular causal laws of the particular universe considered are given

when S is given, and vice versâ.* We may treat of a whole set of universes

agreeing in having the same S, i.e. the same causal laws, and differing only in

respect of the distribution of matter, i.e. the class K. This is the ordinary

procedure of rational Dynamics, which commonly defines its S in the way

believed to apply to the actual world, and uses its liberty only to imagine

different material systems.

It will be observed that, owing to the rejection of the infinitesimal, it is

necessary to give an integrated form to our general law of causality. We

cannot introduce velocities and accelerations into statements of general

principles, though they become necessary as soon as we descend to the laws

of motion. A large part of Newton’s laws, as we shall see in the next chapter,

is contained in the above definition, but the third law introduces a radical

novelty, and gives rise to the difficulty as to the causation of particulars by

particulars, which we have mentioned but not yet examined.


* In the Dynamics applicable to the actual world, the specification of S

requires the notion of mass.57


NEWTON’S LAWS OF MOTION




455. The present chapter will adopt, for the moment, a naïve attitude

  towards Newton’s Laws. It will not examine whether they really hold, or

  whether there are other really ultimate laws applying to the ether; its

  problem is merely to give those laws a meaning.

The first thing to be remembered is—what physicists now-a-days will

scarcely deny—that force is a mathematical fiction, not a physical entity. The

second point is that, in virtue of the philosophy of the calculus, acceleration is

a mere mathematical limit, and does not itself express a definite state of an

accelerated particle. It may be remembered that, in discussing derivatives, we

inquired whether it was possible to regard them otherwise than as limits—

whether, in fact, they could be treated as themselves fractions. This we found

impossible. In this conclusion there was nothing new, but its application in

Dynamics will yield much that is distinctly new. It has been customary to

regard velocity and acceleration as physical facts, and thus to regard the laws

of motion as connecting configuration and acceleration. This, however, as an

ultimate account, is forbidden to us. It becomes necessary to seek a more

integrated form for the laws of motion, and this form, as is evident, must be

one connecting three configurations.

456. The first law of motion is regarded sometimes as a definition of equal

times. This view is radically absurd. In the first place, equal times have

no definition except as times whose magnitude is the same. In the second

place, unless the first law told us when there is no acceleration (which it

does not do), it would not enable us to discover what motions are

  uniform. In the third place, if it is always significant to say that a given

  motion is uniform, there can be no motion by which uniformity is

  defined. In the fourth place, science holds that no motion occurring in

nature is uniform; hence there must be a meaning of uniformity

  independent of all actual motions—and this definition is, the descriptionof equal absolute distances in equal absolute times.

The first law, in Newton’s form, asserts that velocity is unchanged in the

absence of causal action from some other piece of matter. As it stands, this

law is wholly confused. It tells us nothing as to how we are to discover causal

action, or as to the circumstances under which causal action occurs. But an

important meaning may be found for it, by remembering that velocity is a

fiction, and that the only events that occur in any material system are the

various positions of its various particles. If we then assume (as all the laws of

motion tacitly do) that there is to be some relation between different

configurations, the law tells us that such a relation can only hold between

three configurations, not between two. For two configurations are required

for velocity, and another for change of velocity, which is what the law asserts

to be relevant. Thus in any dynamical system, when the special laws (other

than the laws of motion) which regulate that system are specified, the

configuration at any given time can be inferred when two configurations at

two given times are known.

457. The second and third laws introduce the new idea of mass; the third

  also gives one respect in which acceleration depends upon configuration.

The second law as it stands is worthless. For we know nothing about the

impressed force except that it produces change of motion, and thus the law

might seem to be a mere tautology. But by relating the impressed force to the

configuration, an important law may be discovered, which is as follows. In

any material system consisting of n particles, there are certain constant

coefficients (masses) m, m …m to be associated with these particles
                          12n

respectively; and when these coefficients are considered as forming part of

the configuration, then m multiplied by the corresponding acceleration is a
                            1

certain function of the momentary configuration; this is the same function for

all times and all configurations. It is also a function dependent only upon the

relative positions: the same configuration in another part of space will lead to

the same accelerations. That is, if x, y, z be the coordinates of m at time t,
                                        rrrr

we have x = f (t) etc., and
          rr



 


This involves the assumption that x = f(r) is a function having a second
                                            11

differential coefficient ; the use of the equation involves the furtherassumption that  has a first and second integral. The above, however, is a

very specialized form of the second law; in its general form, the function F

may involve other coefficients than the masses, and velocities as well as

positions.

458. The third law is very interesting, and allows the analysis of F into a

vector sum of functions each depending only on m and one other particle
                                                              1

m and their relative position. It asserts that the acceleration of m is
  r1

  made up of component accelerations having special reference

  respectively to m, m …m; and if these components be f, f,…f, it
                      23n12131n

  asserts that the acceleration of any other particle m has a corresponding
                                                              r

  component f such that
                r1

      m f =−m f.
          rr111r

 


This law leads to the usual properties of the centre of mass. For if  be
                                                                                  12

the x-component of f, we have m  + m  = 0, and thus
                        12112221




 


  Again, the special reference of f to m can only be a reference to the mass
                                        122

m, the distance r, and the direction of the line 12; for these are the only
212

intrinsic relations of the two particles. It is often specified as part of the third

law that the acceleration is in the direction 12, and this seems worthy to be

included, as specifying the dependence of f upon the line 12. Thus f is
                                                  1212

along 12, and




 


and



 or, measuring f from 1 towards 2, and f from 2 towards 1, both will
                    1221

have the same sign, and



 


  Hence m  (m, m, r) is a symmetrical function of m and m, say
            1121212


      ψ (m, m, r).
            1212

 


  Thus




 




 


  Thus the resultant acceleration of each particle is analysable into

components depending only upon itself and one other particle; but this

analysis applies only to the statement in terms of acceleration. No such

analysis is possible when we compare, not configuration and acceleration, but

three configurations. At any moment, though the change of distance and

straight line 12 is not due to m and m alone, yet the acceleration of m
                                  121

consists of components each of which is the same as it would be if there were

only one other particle in the field. But where a finite time is in question this

is no longer the case. The total change in the position of m during a time t is
                                                                    1

not what it would have been if m had first operated alone for a time t, then
                                    2

m alone and so on. Thus we cannot speak of any total effect of m or of m;
323

and since momentary effects are fictions, there are really no independent

effects of separate particles on m. The statement by means of accelerations is
                                    1

to be regarded as a mathematical device, not as though there really were an

actual acceleration which is caused in one particle by one other. And thus we

escape the very grave difficulty which we should otherwise have to meet,namely, that the component accelerations, not being (in general) parts of the

resultant acceleration, would not be actual even if we allowed that

acceleration is an actual fact.

459. The first two laws are completely contained in the following statement:

In any independent system, the configuration at any time is a function of

that time and of the configurations at two given times, provided we

  include in configuration the masses of the various particles composing

the system. The third law adds the further fact that the configuration can

be analysed into distances and straight lines; the function of the

  configuration which represents the acceleration of any particle is a

  vector-sum of functions containing only one distance, one straight line,

and two masses each—moreover, if we accept the addition to the third

law spoken of above, each of these functions is a vector along the join of

the two particles which enter into it. But for this law, it might happen that

the acceleration of m would involve the area of the triangle 1 2 3, or the
                          1

  volume of the tetrahedron 1 2.3 4; and but for this law, we should not

  have the usual properties of the centre of mass.

The three laws together, as now expounded, give the greater part of the law

of gravitation; this law merely tells us that, so far as gravitation is concerned,

the above function



 


It should be remembered that nothing is known, from the laws of motion,

as to the form of ψ, and that we might have e.g. ψ = 0 if r > R. If ψ had this
                                                                  12

form, provided R were small compared to sensible distances, the world would

seem as though there were no action at a distance.

It is to be observed that the first two laws, according to the above analysis,

merely state the general form of the law of causality explained in Chapter 55.

From this it results that we shall be able, with the assumptions commonly

made as to continuity and the existence of first and second derivatives, to

determine a motion completely when the configuration and velocities at a

given instant are given; and in particular, these data will enable us to

determine the acceleration at the given instant. The third law and the law of

gravitation together add the further properties that the momentary

accelerations depend only upon the momentary configuration, not upon themomentary velocities, and that the resultant acceleration of any particle is the

vector-sum of components each dependent only on the masses and distances

of the given particle and one other.

The question whether Newtonian Dynamics applies in such problems as

those of the motion of the ether is an interesting and important one; but in so

far as it deals with the truth or falsehood of the laws of motion in relation to

the actual world, it is for us irrelevant. For us, as pure mathematicians, the

laws of motion and the law of gravitation are not properly laws at all, but

parts of the definition of a certain kind of matter.

460. By the above account the view of causality which has usually satisfied

  philosophers is contravened in two respects, (1) in that the relation

  embodied in a causal law holds between three events, not between two;

(2) in that the causal law has the unity of a formula or function, i.e. of a

  constant relation, not merely that derived from repetition of the same

  cause. The first of these is necessitated by modern theories of the

  infinitesimal calculus; the second was always necessary, at least since

  Newton’s time. Both demand some elucidation.

(1) The whole essence of dynamical causation is contained in the following

equation: if t, t be specified times, C, C the corresponding configurations
              1212

of any self-contained system, and C the configuration at any time t, then


      C = F (C, t, C, t, t)
                  1122

 


(a compressed form for as many equations as C has coordinates). The form

of F depends only upon the number of particles and the dynamical laws of

the system, not upon the choice of C or C. The cause must be taken to be
                                          12

the two configurations C and C, and the interval t − t may be any we
                            1221

please. Further t may fall between t and t, or before both. The effect is any
                                        12

single one of the coordinates of the system at time t, or any collection of

these coordinates; but it seems better to regard each coordinate as one effect,

since each is given in one equation. Thus the language of cause and effect has

to be greatly strained to meet the case, and seems scarcely worth preserving.

The cause is two states of the whole system, at times as far apart as we

please; the effect is one coordinate of the system at any time before, after or

between the times in the cause. Nothing could well be more unlike the viewswhich it has pleased philosophers to advocate. Thus on the whole it is not

worth while preserving the word cause: it is enough to say, what is far less

misleading, that any two configurations allow us to infer any other.

(2) The causal law regulating any system is contained in the form of F. The

law does not assert that one event A will always be followed by another B; if

A be the configuration of the system at one time, nothing can be inferred as to

that at another; the configuration might recur without a recurrence of any

configuration that formerly followed it. If A be two configurations whose

distance in time is given, then indeed our causal law does tell us what

configurations will follow them, and if A recurred, so would its

consequences. But if this were all that our causal law told us, it would afford

cold comfort, since no configuration ever does actually recur. Moreover, we

should need an infinite number of causal laws to meet the requirements of a

system which has successively an infinite number of configurations. What

our law does is to assert that an infinite class of effects have each the same

functional relation to one of an infinite class of causes; and this is done by

means of a formula. One formula connects any three configurations, and but

for this fact continuous motions would not be amenable to causal laws, which

consist in specifications of the formula.

461. I have spoken hitherto of independent systems of n particles. It

  remains to examine whether any difficulties are introduced by the fact

that, in the dynamical world, there are no independent systems short of

the material universe. We have seen that no effect can be ascribed, within

a material system, to any one part of the system; the whole system is

  necessary for any inference as to what will happen to one particle. The

only effect traditionally attributed to the action of a single particle on

  another is a component acceleration; but (α) this is not part of the

  resultant acceleration, (β) the resultant acceleration itself is not an event,

or a physical fact, but a mere mathematical limit. Hence nothing can be

  attributed to particular particles. But it may be objected that we cannot

  know the whole material universe, and that, since no effect is attributable

to any part as such, we cannot consequently know anything about the

  effect of the whole. For example, in calculating the motions of planets,

we neglect the fixed stars; we pretend that the solar system is the whole

  universe. By what right, then, do we assume that the effects of this

  feigned universe in any way resemble those of the actual universe?

The answer to this question is found in the law of gravitation. We canshow that, if we compare the motions of a particle in a number of universes

differing only as regards the matter at a greater distance than R, while much

within this distance all of them contain much matter, then the motion of the

particle in question relative to the matter well within the distance R will be

approximately the same in all the universes.* This is possible because, by the

third law, a kind of fictitious analysis into partial effects is possible. Thus we

can approximately calculate the effect of a universe of which part only is

known. We must not say that the effect of the fixed stars is insensible, for we

assume that they have no effect per se; we must say that the effect of a

universe in which they exist differs little from that of one in which they do

not exist; and this we are able to prove in the case of gravitation. Speaking

broadly, we require (recurring to our previous function ) that, if ε be any

number, however small, there should be some distance R such that, recurring


to our previous function , if  denote differentiation in any direction, then




 


  When this condition is satisfied, the difference between the relative

accelerations of two particles within a certain region, which results from

assuming different distributions of matter at a distance greater than R from a

certain point within the region, will have an assignable upper limit; and hence

there is an upper limit to the error incurred by pretending that there is no

matter outside the space of radius R. Hence approximation becomes possible

in spite of the fact that the whole universe is involved in the exact

determination of any motion.

The above leads to two observations of some interest. First, no law which

does not satisfy the above inequality is capable of being practically applied or

tested. The assumption that gravity varies as the direct distance, for example,

could only be tested in a finite universe. And in all phenomena, such as those

of electricity, we must assume, where the total effect is a sum or integral, or

is calculated by means of a sum or integral, that the portion contributed to

relative motions by large values of r is small. Secondly, the denial of any

partial effect of a part is quite necessary if we are to apply our formulae to an

infinite universe in the form of integrals. For an integral is not really an

infinite sum, but the limit of a finite sum. Thus if each particle had a partialeffect, the total effect of an infinite number of particles would not be an

integral. But though an integral cannot represent an infinite sum, there seems

no reason whatever why it should not represent the effect of a universe which

has an infinite number of parts. If there are finite volumes containing an

infinite number of particles, the notion of mass must be modified so as to

apply no longer to single particles, but to infinite classes of particles. The

density at a point will then be not the mass of that point, but the differential

coefficient, at the point, of the mass with respect to the volume.

It should be observed that the impossibility of an independent system short

of the whole universe does not result from the laws of motion, but from the

special laws, such as that of gravitation, which the laws of motion lead us to

seek.

462. The laws of motion, to conclude, have no vestige of self-evidence; on

the contrary, they contradict the form of causality which has usually been

  considered evident. Whether they are ultimately valid, or are merely

  approximate generalizations, must remain doubtful; the more so as, in all

their usual forms, they assume the truth of the axiom of parallels, of

  which we have so far no evidence. The laws of motion, like the axiom of

  parallels in regard to space, may be viewed either as parts of a definition

of a class of possible material universes, or as empirically verified

  assertions concerning the actual material universe. But in no way can

they be taken as à priori truths necessarily applicable to any possible

  material world. The à priori truths involved in Dynamics are only those

of logic: as a system of deductive reasoning, Dynamics requires nothing

  further, while as a science of what exists, it requires experiment and

  observation. Those who have admitted a similar conclusion in Geometry

are not likely to question it here; but it is important to establish separately

  every instance of the principle that knowledge as to what exists is never

  derivable from general philosophical considerations, but is always and

  wholly empirical.

* This is true only of relative, not of absolute motions.58


ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE


MOTION




463. In the justly famous scholium to the definitions, Newton has stated,

with admirable precision, the doctrine of absolute space, time and

  motion. Not being a skilled philosopher, he was unable to give grounds

for his views, except an empirical argument derived from actual

  Dynamics. Leibniz, with an unrivalled philosophical equipment,

  controverted Newton’s position in his letters against Clarke;* and the

  victory, in the opinion of subsequent philosophers, rested wholly with

  Leibniz. Although it would seem that Kant, in the Transcendental

  Aesthetic, inclines to absolute position in space, in the Metaphysische

  Anfangsgründe der Naturwissenschaft he quite definitely adopts the

  relational view. Not only other philosophers, but also men of science,

  have been nearly unanimous in rejecting absolute motion, the latter on

the ground that it is not capable of being observed, and cannot therefore

be a datum in an empirical study.

But a great difficulty has always remained as regards the argument from

absolute rotation, adduced by Newton himself. This argument, in spite of a

definite assertion that all motion is relative, is accepted and endorsed by

Clerk Maxwell.† It has been revived and emphasized by Heymans,‡

combated by Mach,§ Karl Pearson¶ and many others, and made part of the

basis of a general attack on Dynamics in Professor Ward’s Naturalism and

Agnosticism. Let us first state the argument in various forms, and then

examine some of the attempts to reply to it. For us, since absolute time and

space have been admitted, there is no need to avoid absolute motion, and

indeed no possibility of doing so. But if absolute motion is in any case

unavoidable, this affords a new argument in favour of the justice of our logic,

which, unlike the logic current among philosophers, admits and even urges itspossibility.

464. If a bucket containing water is rotated, Newton observes, the water

will become concave and mount up the sides of the bucket. But if the

  bucket be left at rest in a rotating vessel, the water will remain level in

  spite of the relative rotation. Thus absolute rotation is involved in the

  phenomenon in question. Similarly, from Foucault’s pendulum and other

  similar experiments, the rotation of the earth can be demonstrated, and

  could be demonstrated if there were no heavenly bodies in relation to

  which the rotation becomes sensible. But this requires us to admit that the

earth’s rotation is absolute. Simpler instances may be given, such as the

case of two gravitating particles. If the motion dealt with in Dynamics

were wholly relative, these particles, if they constituted the whole

  universe, could only move in the line joining them, and would therefore

  ultimately fall into one another. But Dynamics teaches that, if they have

  initially a relative velocity not in the line joining them, they will describe

  conics about their common centre of gravity as focus. And generally, if

  acceleration be expressed in polars, there are terms in the acceleration

  which, instead of containing several differentials, contain squares of

  angular velocities: these terms require absolute angular velocity, and are

  inexplicable so long as relative motion is adhered to.

If the law of gravitation be regarded as universal, the point may be stated

as follows. The laws of motion require to be stated by reference to what have

been called kinetic axes: these are in reality axes having no absolute

acceleration and no absolute rotation. It is asserted, for example, when the

third law is combined with the notion of mass, that, if m, m' be the masses of

two particles between which there is a force, the component accelerations of

the two particles due to this force are in the ratio m : m. But this will only
                                                          21

be true if the accelerations are measured relative to axes which themselves

have no acceleration. We cannot here introduce the centre of mass, for,

according to the principle that dynamical facts must be, or be derived from,

observable data, the masses, and therefore the centre of mass, must be

obtained from the acceleration, and not vice versâ. Hence any dynamical

motion, if it is to obey the laws of motion, must be referred to axes which are

not subject to any forces. But, if the law of gravitation be accepted, no

material axes will satisfy this condition. Hence we shall have to take spatial

axes, and motions relative to these are of course absolute motions.

465. In order to avoid this conclusion, C. Neumann* assumes as an  essential part of the laws of motion the existence, somewhere, of an

  absolutely rigid “Body Alpha”, by reference to which all motions are to

be estimated. This suggestion misses the essence of the discussion, which

is (or should be) as to the logical meaning of dynamical propositions, not

as to the way in which they are discovered. It seems sufficiently evident

that, if it is necessary to invent a fixed body, purely hypothetical and

  serving no purpose except to be fixed, the reason is that what is really

  relevant is a fixed place, and that the body occupying it is irrelevant. It is

true that Neumann does not incur the vicious circle which would be

  involved in saying that the Body Alpha is fixed, while all motions are

  relative to it; he asserts that it is rigid, but rightly avoids any statement as

to its rest or motion, which, in his theory, would be wholly unmeaning.

  Nevertheless, it seems evident that the question whether one body is at

rest or in motion must have as good a meaning as the same question

  concerning any other body; and this seems sufficient to condemn

  Neumann’s suggested escape from absolute motion.

466. A development of Neumann’s views is undertaken by Streintz,† who

  refers motions to what he calls “fundamental bodies” and “fundamental

  axes”. These are defined as bodies or axes which do not rotate and are

  independent of all outside influences. Streintz follows Kant’s

  Anfangsgründe in regarding it as possible to admit absolute rotation

  while denying absolute translation. This is a view which I shall discuss

  shortly, and which, as we shall see, though fatal to what is desired of the

  relational theory, is yet logically tenable, though Streintz does not show

that it is so. But apart from this question, two objections may be made to

his theory. (1) If motion means motion relative to fundamental bodies

(and if not, their introduction is no gain from a logical point of view),

then the law of gravitation becomes strictly meaningless if taken to be

  universal—a view which seems impossible to defend. The theory

  requires that there should be matter not subject to any forces, and this is

  denied by the law of gravitation. The point is not so much that universal

  gravitation must be true, as that it must be significant—whether true or

  false is an irrelevant question. (2) We have already seen that absolute

  accelerations are required even as regards translations, and that the

  failure to perceive this is due to overlooking the fact that the centre of

  mass is not a piece of matter, but a spatial point which is only determined

by means of accelerations.467. Somewhat similar remarks apply to Mr W. H. Macaulay’s article on

  “Newton’s Theory of Kinetics”.‡ Mr Macaulay asserts that the true way

to state Newton’s theory (omitting points irrelevant to the present issue)

is as follows: “Axes of reference can be so chosen, and the assignment of

  masses so arranged, that a certain decomposition of the rates of change of

  momenta, relative to the axes, of all the particles of the universe is

  possible, namely one in which the components occur in pairs; the

  members of each pair belonging to two different particles, and being

  opposite in direction, in the line joining the particles, and equal in

  magnitude” (p. 368). Here again, a purely logical point remains. The

  above statement appears unobjectionable, but it does not show that

  absolute motion is unnecessary. The axes cannot be material, for all

  matter is or may be subject to forces, and therefore unsuitable for our

  purpose; they cannot even be defined by any fixed geometrical relation to

  matter. Thus our axes will really be spatial; and if there were no absolute

  space, the suggested axes could not exist. For apart from absolute space,

any axes would have to be material or nothing. The axes can, in a sense,

be defined by relation to matter, but not by a constant geometrical

  relation; and when we ask what property is changed by motion relative to

such axes, the only possible answer is that the absolute position has

  changed. Thus absolute space and absolute motion are not avoided by Mr

  Macaulay’s statement of Newton’s laws.

468. If absolute rotation alone were in question, it would be possible, by

  abandoning all that recommends the relational theory to philosophers and

men of science, to keep its logical essence intact. What is aimed at is to

state the principles of Dynamics in terms of sensible entities. Among

  these we find the metrical properties of space, but not straight lines and

  planes. Collinearity and coplanarity may be included, but if a set of

  collinear material points change their straight line, there is no sensible

  intrinsic change. Hence all advocates of the relational theory, when they

are thorough, endeavour, like Leibniz,* to deduce the straight line from

  distance. For this there is also the reason that the field of a given distance

is all space, whereas the field of the generating relation of a straight line

is only that straight line, whence the latter, but not the former, makes an

  intrinsic distinction among the points of space, which the relational

  theory seeks to avoid. Still, we might regard straight lines as relations

  between material points, and absolute rotation would then appear as  change in a relation between material points, which is logically

  compatible with a relational theory of space. We should have to admit,

  however, that the straight line was not a sensible property of two particles

  between which it was a relation; and in any case, the necessity for

  absolute translational accelerations remains fatal to any relational theory

of motion.

469. Mach† has a very curious argument by which he attempts to refute the

  grounds in favour of absolute rotation. He remarks that, in the actual

  world, the earth rotates relating to the fixed stars, and that the universe is

not given twice over in different shapes, but only once, and as we find it.

  Hence any argument that the rotation of the earth could be inferred if

there were no heavenly bodies is futile. This argument contains the very

  essence of empiricism, in a sense in which empiricism is radically

  opposed to the philosophy advocated in the present work.* The logical

  basis of the argument is that all propositions are essentially concerned

with actual existents, not with entities which may or may not exist. For if,

as has been held throughout our previous discussions, the whole

  dynamical world with its laws can be considered without regard to

  existence, then it can be no part of the meaning of these laws to assert

that the matter to which they apply exists, and therefore they can be

  applied to universes which do not exist. Apart from general arguments, it

is evident that the laws are so applied throughout rational Dynamics, and

that, in all exact calculations, the distribution of matter which is assumed

is not that of the actual world. It seems impossible to deny significance to

such calculations; and yet, if they have significance, if they contain

  propositions at all, whether true or false, then it can be no necessary part

of their meaning to assert the existence of the matter to which they are

  applied. This being so, the universe is given, as an entity, not only twice,

but as many times as there are possible distributions of matter, and

  Mach’s argument falls to the ground. The point is important, as

  illustrating a respect in which the philosophy here advocated is to be

  reckoned with idealism and not with empiricism, in spite of the

  contention that what exists can only be known empirically.

  Thus, to conclude: Absolute motion is essential to Dynamics, and involves

absolute space. This fact, which is a difficulty in current philosophies, is for

us a powerful confirmation of the logic upon which our discussions have

been based.* Phil. Werke, ed. Gerhardt, Vol. vii.

† Matter and Motion, Art. cv. Contrast Art. xxx.

‡ Die Gesetze und Elemente des wissenschaftlichen Denkens, Leyden,

1890.

§ Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwickelung, Leipzig, 1883. (Translated,

London, 1902.)

¶ Grammar of Science, London, 1892. (2nd edition, 1900.)

* Die Galilei-Newtonsche Theorie, Leipzig, 1870, p. 15.

† Die physikalischen Grundlagen der Mechanik, Leipzig, 1883; see esp.

pp. 24, 25.

‡ Bulletin of the American Math. Soc., Vol. iii. (1896–7). For a later

statement of Mr Macaulay’s views, see Art. Motion, Laws of, in the new

volumes of the Encycl. Brit. (Vol. xxxi).

* See my article “Recent Work on Leibniz”, in Mind, 1903.

† Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwickelung, 1st edition, p. 216.

* Cf. Art. “Nativism” in the Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology,

edited by Baldwin, Vol. ii, 1902.59


HERTZ’S DYNAMICS




470. We have seen that Newton’s Laws are wholly lacking in self-evidence

  —so much so, indeed, that they contradict the law of causation in a form

  which has usually been held to be indubitable. We have seen also that

  these laws are specially suggestive of the law of gravitation. In order to

  eliminate what, in elementary Dynamics, is specially Newtonian, from

what is really essential to the subject, we shall do well to examine some

  attempts to re-state the fundamental principles in a form more applicable

to such sciences as Electricity. For this purpose the most suitable work

  seems to be that of Hertz.*

The fundamental principles of Hertz’s theory are so simple and so

admirable that it seems worth while to expound them briefly. His object, like

that of most recent writers, is to construct a system in which there are only

three fundamental concepts, space, time and mass. The elimination of a

fourth concept, such as force or energy, though evidently demanded by

theory, is difficult to carry out mathematically. Hertz seems, however, to

have overcome the difficulty in a satisfactory manner. There are, in his

system, three stages in the specification of a motion. In the first stage, only

the relations of space and time are considered: this stage is purely

kinematical. Matter appears here merely as a means of establishing, through

the motion of a particle, a one-one correlation between a series of points and

a series of instants. At this stage a collection of n particles has 3n coordinates,

all so far independent: the motions which result when all are regarded as

independent are all the thinkable motions of the system. But before coming to

kinetics, Hertz introduces an intermediate stage. Without introducing time,

there are in any free material system direct relations between space and mass,

which form the geometrical connections of the system. (These may introduce

time in the sense of involving velocities, but they are independent of time in

the sense that they are expressed at all times by the same equations, and thatthese do not contain the time explicitly.) Those among thinkable motions

which satisfy the equations of connection are called possible motions. The

connections among the parts of a system are assumed further to be

continuous in a certain well-defined sense (p. 89). It then follows that they

can be expressed by homogeneous linear differential equations of the first

order among the coordinates. But now a further principle is needed to

discriminate among possible motions, and here Hertz introduces his only law

of motion, which is as follows:

  “Every free system persists in its state of rest or of uniform motion in a

straightest path.”

This law requires some explanation. In the first place, when there are in a

system unequal particles, each is split into a number of particles proportional

to its mass. By this means all particles become equal. If now there are n

particles, their 3n coordinates are regarded as the coordinates of a point in

space of 3n dimensions. The above law then asserts that, in a free system, the

velocity of this representative point is constant, and its path from a given

point to another neighbouring point in a given direction is that one, among

the possible paths through these two points, which has the smallest curvature.

Such a path is called a natural path, and motion in it is called a natural

motion.

471. It will be seen that this system, though far simpler and more

  philosophical in form than Newton’s, does not differ very greatly in

  regard to the problems discussed in the preceding chapter. We still have,

what we found to be the essence of the law of inertia, the necessity for

three configurations in order to obtain a causal relation. This broad fact

must reappear in every system at all resembling ordinary Dynamics, and

is exhibited in the necessity for differential equations of the second order,

  which pervades all Physics. But there is one very material difference

  between Hertz’s system and Newton’s—a difference which, as Hertz

  points out, renders an experimental decision between the two at least

  theoretically possible. The special laws, other than the laws of motion,

  which regulate any particular system, are for Newton laws concerning

  mutual accelerations, such as gravitation itself. For Hertz, these special

laws are all contained in the geometrical connections of the system, and

are expressed in equations involving only velocities (v. p. 48). This is a

  considerable simplification, and is shown by Hertz to be more

  conformable to phenomena in all departments except where gravitation is  concerned. It is also a great simplification to have only one law of

  motion, instead of Newton’s three. But for the philosopher, so long as

this law involves second differentials (which are introduced through the

  curvature), it is a comparatively minor matter that the special laws of

  special systems should be of the first order.

The definition of mass as number of particles, it should be observed, is a

mere mathematical device, and is not, I think, regarded by Hertz as anything

more (v. p. 54). Not only must we allow the possibility of incommensurable

masses, but even if this difficulty were overcome, it would still remain

significant to assert that all our ultimate particles were equal. Mass would

therefore still be a variety of magnitude, only that all particles would happen

to be of the same magnitude as regards their mass. This would not effect any

theoretical simplification, and we shall do well, therefore, to retain mass as an

intensive quantity of which a certain magnitude belongs to a certain particle,

without any implication that the particle is divisible. There is, in fact, no valid

ground for denying ultimately different masses to different particles. The

whole question is, indeed, purely empirical, and the philosopher should, in

this matter, accept passively what the physicist finds requisite.

  With regard to ether and its relations to matter, a similar remark seems to

be applicable. Ether is, of course, matter in the philosophical sense; but

beyond this the present state of Science will scarcely permit us to go. It

should be observed, however, that in Electricity, as elsewhere, our equations

are of the second order, thus indicating that the law of inertia, as interpreted

in the preceding chapter, still holds good. This broad fact seems, indeed, to be

the chief result, for philosophy, of our discussion of dynamical principles.

472. Thus to sum up, we have two principal results:


1. In any independent system, there is a relation between the configurations

    at three given times, which is such that, given the configuration at two of

    the times, the configuration at the third time is determinate.

2. There is no independent system in the actual world except the whole

    material universe; but if two universes which have the same causal laws

    as the actual universe differ only in regard to the matter at a great

    distance from a given region, the relative motions within this region will

    be approximately the same in the two universes—i.e. an upper limit can

    be found for the difference between the two sets of motions.  These two principles apply equally to the Dynamics of Newton and to that

of Hertz. When these are abandoned, other principles will give a science

having but little resemblance to received Dynamics.

473. One general principle, which is commonly stated as vital to Dynamics,

  deserves at least a passing mention. This is the principle that the cause

and effect are equal. Owing to pre-occupation with quantity and

  ignorance of symbolic logic, it appears to have not been perceived that

this statement is equivalent to the assertion that the implication between

  cause and effect is mutual. All equations, at bottom, are logical

  equations, i.e. mutual implications; quantitative equality between

  variables, such as cause and effect, involves a mutual formal implication.

  Thus the principle in question can only be maintained if cause and effect

be placed on the same logical level, which, with the interpretation we

were compelled to give to causality, it is no longer possible to do.

  Nevertheless, when one state of the universe is given, any two others

  have a mutual implication; and this is the source of the various laws of

  conservation which pervade Dynamics, and give the truth underlying the

  supposed equality of cause and effect.

474. We may now review the whole course of the arguments contained in

the present work. In Part I, an attempt is made to analyse the nature of

  deduction, and of the logical concepts involved in it. Of these, the most

  puzzling is the notion of class, and from the contradiction discussed in

  Chapter 10 (though this is perhaps soluble by the doctrine of types*), it

  appeared that a tenable theory as to the nature of classes is very hard to

  obtain. In subsequent Parts, it was shown that existing pure mathematics

  (including Geometry and Rational Dynamics) can be derived wholly

from the indefinables and indemonstrables of Part I. In this process, two

  points are specially important: the definitions and the existence-theorems.

A definition is always either the definition of a class, or the definition of

the single member of a unit class: this is a necessary result of the plain

fact that a definition can only be effected by assigning a property of the

  object or objects to be defined, i.e. by stating a propositional function

  which they are to satisfy. A kind of grammar controls definitions, making

it impossible e.g. to define Euclidean Space, but possible to define the

class of Euclidean spaces. And wherever the principle of abstraction is

  employed, i.e. where the object to be defined is obtained from a transitive

  symmetrical relation, some class of classes will always be the object  required. When symbolic expressions are used, the requirements of what

may be called grammar become evident, and it is seen that the logical

type of the entity defined is in no way optional.

The existence-theorems of mathematics—i.e. the proofs that the various

classes defined are not null—are almost all obtained from Arithmetic. It may

be well here to collect the more important of them. The existence of zero is

derived from the fact that the null-class is a member of it; the existence of 1

from the fact that zero is a unit-class (for the null-class is its only member).

Hence, from the fact that, if n be a finite number, n + 1 is the number of

numbers from 0 to n (both inclusive), the existence-theorem follows for all

finite numbers. Hence, from the class of the finite cardinal numbers

themselves, follows the existence of α, the smallest of the infinite cardinal
                                            0

numbers; and from the series of finite cardinals in order of magnitude follows

the existence of ω, the smallest of infinite ordinals. From the definition of the

rational numbers and of their order of magnitude follows the existence of η,

the type of endless compact denumerable series; thence, from the segments of

the series of rationals, the existence of the real numbers, and of θ, the type of

continuous series. The terms of the series of well-ordered types are proved to

exist from the two facts: (1) that the number of well-ordered types from 0 to α

is α + 1, (2) that if u be a class of well-ordered types having no maximum, the

series of all types not greater than every u is itself of a type greater than every

u. From the existence of θ, by the definition of complex numbers (Chapter

44), we prove the existence of the class of Euclidean spaces of any number of

dimensions; thence, by the process of Chapter 46, we prove the existence of

the class of projective spaces, and thence, by removing the points outside a

closed quadric, we prove the existence of the class of non-Euclidean

descriptive (hyperbolic) spaces. By the methods of Chapter 48, we prove the

existence of spaces with various metrical properties. Lastly, by correlating

some of the points of a space with all the terms of a continuous series in the

ways explained in Chapter 56, we prove the existence of the class of

dynamical worlds. Throughout this process, no entities are employed but

such as are definable in terms of the fundamental logical constants. Thus the

chain of definitions and existence-theorems is complete, and the purely

logical nature of mathematics is established throughout.


* Principien der Mechanik, Leipzig, 1894.

* See Appendix B.                              Appendices