by James Legge


IN FIVE VOLUMES

CONFUCIAN ANALECTS
THE GREAT LEARNING
THE DOCTRINE OF THE MEAN




CONFUCIAN ANALECTS.
BOOK I.  HSIO R.

        CHAPTER I. 1. The Master said, 'Is it not pleasant to learn with
a constant perseverance and application?
        2. 'Is it not delightful to have friends coming from distant
quarters?'
        3. 'Is he not a man of complete virtue, who feels no
discomposure though men may take no note of him?'

        CHAP. II. 1. The philosopher Yu said, 'They are few who, being
filial and fraternal, are fond of offending against their superiors.
There have been none, who, not liking to offend against their
superiors, have been fond of stirring up confusion.
        2. 'The superior man bends his attention to what is radical.

That being established, all practical courses naturally grow up. Filial
piety and fraternal submission!-- are they not the root of all
benevolent actions?'
        CHAP. III. The Master said, 'Fine words and an insinuating
appearance are seldom associated with true virtue.'
        CHAP. IV. The philosopher Tsang said, 'I daily examine myself
on three points:-- whether, in transacting business for others, I may
have been not faithful;-- whether, in intercourse with friends, I
may have been not sincere;-- whether I may have not mastered
and practised the instructions of my teacher.'

        CHAP. V. The Master said, To rule a country of a thousand
chariots, there must be reverent attention to business, and
sincerity; economy in expenditure, and love for men; and the
employment of the people at the proper seasons.'
        CHAP. VI. The Master said, 'A youth, when at home, should be
filial, and, abroad, respectful to his elders. He should be earnest and
truthful. He should overflow in love to all, and cultivate the
friendship of the good. When he has time and opportunity, after the
performance of these things, he should employ them in polite
studies.'
        CHAP. VII. Tsze-hsia said, 'If a man withdraws his mind from
the love of beauty, and applies it as sincerely to the love of the
virtuous; if, in serving his parents, he can exert his utmost strength;

if, in serving his prince, he can devote his life; if, in his intercourse
with his friends, his words are sincere:-- although men say that he
has not learned, I will certainly say that he has.'
        CHAP. VIII. 1. The Master said, 'If the scholar be not grave, he
will not call forth any veneration, and his learning will not be solid.
        2. 'Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles.
        3. 'Have no friends not equal to yourself.
        4. 'When you have faults, do not fear to abandon them.'
        CHAP. IX. The philosopher Tsang said, 'Let there be a careful
attention to perform the funeral rites to parents, and let them be
followed when long gone with the ceremonies of sacrifice;-- then
the virtue of the people will resume its proper excellence.'

CHAP. X. 1. Tsze-ch'in asked Tsze-kung, saying, 'When our master
comes to any country, he does not fail to learn all about its
government. Does he ask his information? or is it given to him?'
        2. Tsze-kung said, 'Our master is benign, upright, courteous,
temperate, and complaisant, and thus he gets his information. The
master's mode of asking information!-- is it not different from that
of other men?'
        CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'While a man's father is alive, look
at the bent of his will; when his father is dead, look at his conduct.
If for three years he does not alter from the way of his father, he
may be called filial.'

CHAP. XII. 1. The philosopher Yu said, 'In practising the rules of
propriety, a natural ease is to be prized. In the ways prescribed by
the ancient kings, this is the excellent quality, and in things small
and great we follow them.
        2. 'Yet it is not to be observed in all cases. If one, knowing
how such ease should be prized, manifests it, without regulating it
by the rules of propriety, this likewise is not to be done.'
        CHAP. XIII. The philosopher Yu said, 'When agreements are
made according to what is right, what is spoken can be made good.
When respect is shown according to what is proper, one keeps far
from shame and disgrace. When the parties upon whom a man
leans are proper persons to be intimate with, he can make them his
guides and masters.'
        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'He who aims to be a man of
complete virtue in his food does not seek to gratify his appetite, nor

in his dwelling place does he seek the appliances of ease; he is
earnest in what he is doing, and careful in his speech; he frequents
the company of men of principle that he may be rectified:-- such a
person may be said indeed to love to learn.'
        CHAP. XV. 1. Tsze-kung said, 'What do you pronounce
concerning the poor man who yet does not flatter, and the rich man
who is not proud?' The Master replied, 'They will do; but they are
not equal to him, who, though poor, is yet cheerful, and to him, who,
though rich, loves the rules of propriety.'
        2. Tsze-kung replied, 'It is said in the Book of Poetry, "As you
cut and then file, as you carve and then polish."-- The meaning is
the same, I apprehend, as that which you have just expressed.'
        3. The Master said, 'With one like Ts'ze, I can begin to talk

about the odes. I told him one point, and he knew its proper
sequence.'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'I will not be afflicted at men's
not knowing me; I will be afflicted that I do not know men.'


BOOK II. WEI CHANG.

        CHAP. I. The Master said, 'He who exercises government by
means of his virtue may be compared to the north polar star, which
keeps its place and all the stars turn towards it.'
        CHAP. II. The Master said, 'In the Book of Poetry are three
hundred pieces, but the design of them all may be embraced in one
sentence-- "Having no depraved thoughts."'
        CHAP. III. 1. The Master said, 'If the people be led by laws,
and uniformity sought to be given them by punishments, they will
try to avoid the punishment, but have no sense of shame.
        2. 'If they be led by virtue, and uniformity sought to be given
them by the rules of propriety, they will have the sense of shame,
and moreover will become good.'
        CHAP. IV. 1. The Master said, 'At fifteen, I had my mind bent
on learning.
        2. 'At thirty, I stood firm.
        3. 'At forty, I had no doubts.
        4. 'At fifty, I knew the decrees of Heaven.

        5. 'At sixty, my ear was an obedient organ for the reception of
truth.
        6. 'At seventy, I could follow what my heart desired, without
transgressing what was right.'
        CHAP. V. 1. Mang I asked what filial piety was. The Master
said, 'It is not being disobedient.'
        2. Soon after, as Fan Ch'ih was driving him, the Master told
him, saying, 'Mang-sun asked me what filial piety was, and I
answered him,-- "not being disobedient."'
        3. Fan Ch'ih said, 'What did you mean?' The Master replied,
'That parents, when alive, be served according to propriety; that,
when dead, they should be buried according to propriety; and that
they should be sacrificed to according to propriety.'

        CHAP. VI. Mang Wu asked what filial piety was. The Master
said, 'Parents are anxious lest their children should be sick.'
        CHAP. VII. Tsze-yu asked what filial piety was. The Master
said, 'The filial piety of now-a-days means the support of one's
parents. But dogs and horses likewise are able to do something in
the way of support;-- without reverence, what is there to
distinguish the one support given from the other?'
        CHAP. VIII. Tsze-hsia asked what filial piety was. The Master
said, 'The difficulty is with the countenance. If, when their elders
have any troublesome affairs, the young take the toil of them, and
if, when the young have wine and food, they set them before their
elders, is THIS to be considered filial piety?'

        CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'I have talked with Hui for a whole
day, and he has not made any objection to anything I said;-- as if
he were stupid. He has retired, and I have examined his conduct
when away from me, and found him able to illustrate my teachings.
Hui!-- He is not stupid.'
        CHAP. X. 1. The Master said, 'See what a man does.
        2. 'Mark his motives.
        3. 'Examine in what things he rests.
        4. 'How can a man conceal his character?
        5. How can a man conceal his character?'
        CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'If a man keeps cherishing his old
knowledge, so as continually to be acquiring new, he may be a
teacher of others.'

        CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'The accomplished scholar is not a
utensil.'
        CHAP. XIII. Tsze-kung asked what constituted the superior
man. The Master said, 'He acts before he speaks, and afterwards
speaks according to his actions.'
        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'The superior man is catholic and
no partisan. The mean man is partisan and not catholic.'
        CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'Learning without thought is
labour lost; thought without learning is perilous.'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'The study of strange doctrines is
injurious indeed!'

        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'Yu, shall I teach you what
knowledge is? When you know a thing, to hold that you know it;
and when you do not know a thing, to allow that you do not know
it;-- this is knowledge.'
        CHAP. XVII. 1. Tsze-chang was learning with a view to official
emolument.
        2. The Master said, 'Hear much and put aside the points of
which you stand in doubt, while you speak cautiously at the same
time of the others:-- then you will afford few occasions for blame.
See much and put aside the things which seem perilous, while you
are cautious at the same time in carrying the others into practice:--
then you will have few occasions for repentance. When one gives
few occasions for blame in his words, and few occasions for
repentance in his conduct, he is in the way to get emolument.'

        CHAP. XIX. The Duke Ai asked, saying, 'What should be done
in order to secure the submission of the people?' Confucius replied,
'Advance the upright and set aside the crooked, then the people
will submit. Advance the crooked and set aside the upright, then
the people will not submit.'
        CHAP. XX. Chi K'ang asked how to cause the people to
reverence their ruler, to be faithful to him, and to go on to nerve
themselves to virtue. The Master said, 'Let him preside over them
with gravity;-- then they will reverence him. Let him be filial and
kind to all;-- then they will be faithful to him. Let him advance the
good and teach the incompetent;-- then they will eagerly seek to be
virtuous.'
        CHAP. XXI. 1. Some one addressed Confucius, saying, 'Sir, why
are you not engaged in the government?'

        2. The Master said, 'What does the Shu-ching say of filial
piety?-- "You are filial, you discharge your brotherly duties. These
qualities are displayed in government." This then also constitutes
the exercise of government. Why must there be THAT-- making one
be in the government?'
        CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'I do not know how a man
without truthfulness is to get on. How can a large carriage be made
to go without the cross-bar for yoking the oxen to, or a small
carriage without the arrangement for yoking the horses?'
        CHAP. XXIII. 1. Tsze-chang asked whether the affairs of ten
ages after could be known.
        2. Confucius said, 'The Yin dynasty followed the regulations of
the Hsia: wherein it took from or added to them may be known. The
Chau dynasty has followed the regulations of Yin: wherein it took
from or added to them may be known. Some other may follow the
Chau, but though it should be at the distance of a hundred ages, its
affairs may be known.'

        CHAP. XXIV. 1. The Master said, 'For a man to sacrifice to a
spirit which does not belong to him is flattery.
        2. 'To see what is right and not to do it is want of courage.'

BOOK III. PA YIH.

        CHAP. I. Confucius said of the head of the Chi family, who had
eight rows of pantomimes in his area, 'If he can bear to do this,
what may he not bear to do?'

        CHAP. II. The three families used the YUNG ode, while the
vessels were being removed, at the conclusion of the sacrifice. The
Master said, '"Assisting are the princes;-- the son of heaven looks
profound and grave:"-- what application can these words have in
the hall of the three families?'
        CHAP. III. The Master said, 'If a man be without the virtues
proper to humanity, what has he to do with the rites of propriety?
If a man be without the virtues proper to humanity, what has he to
do with music?'
        CHAP. IV. 1. Lin Fang asked what was the first thing to be
attended to in ceremonies.
        2. The Master said, 'A great question indeed!
        3. 'In festive ceremonies, it is better to be sparing than
extravagant.

In the ceremonies of mourning, it is better that there be deep
sorrow than a minute attention to observances.'
        CHAP. V. The Master said, 'The rude tribes of the east and
north have their princes, and are not like the States of our great
land which are without them.'
        CHAP. VI. The chief of the Chi family was about to sacrifice to
the T'ai mountain. The Master said to Zan Yu, 'Can you not save him
from this?' He answered, 'I cannot.' Confucius said, 'Alas! will you
say that the T'ai mountain is not so discerning as Lin Fang?'

        CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'The student of virtue has no
contentions. If it be said he cannot avoid them, shall this be in
archery? But he bows complaisantly to his competitors; thus he
ascends the hall, descends, and exacts the forfeit of drinking. In his
contention, he is still the Chun-tsze.'
        CHAP. VIII. 1. Tsze-hsia asked, saying, 'What is the meaning
of the passage-- "The pretty dimples of her artful smile! The well-
defined black and white of her eye! The plain ground for the
colours?"'
        2. The Master said, 'The business of laying on the colours
follows (the preparation of) the plain ground.'
        3. 'Ceremonies then are a subsequent thing?' The Master said,
'It is Shang who can bring out my meaning. Now I can begin to talk
about the odes with him.'

        CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'I could describe the ceremonies of
the Hsia dynasty, but Chi cannot sufficiently attest my words. I
could describe the ceremonies of the Yin dynasty, but Sung cannot
sufficiently attest my words. (They cannot do so) because of the
insufficiency of their records and wise men. If those were
sufficient, I could adduce them in support of my words.'
        CHAP. X. The Master said, 'At the great sacrifice, after the
pouring out of the libation, I have no wish to look on.'
        CHAP. XI. Some one asked the meaning of the great sacrifice.
The Master said, 'I do not know. He who knew its meaning would
find it as easy to govern the kingdom as to look on this;-- pointing
to his palm.

        CHAP. XII. 1. He sacrificed to the dead, as if they were
present. He sacrificed to the spirits, as if the spirits were present.
        2. The Master said, 'I consider my not being present at the
sacrifice, as if I did not sacrifice.'
        CHAP. XIII. 1. Wang-sun Chia asked, saying, 'What is the
meaning of the saying, "It is better to pay court to the furnace than
to the south-west corner?"'
        2. The Master said, 'Not so. He who offends against Heaven
has none to whom he can pray.'

        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'Chau had the advantage of
viewing the two past dynasties. How complete and elegant are its
regulations! I follow Chau.'
        CHAP. XV. The Master, when he entered the grand temple,
asked about everything. Some one said, 'Who will say that the son
of the man of Tsau knows the rules of propriety! He has entered the
grand temple and asks about everything.' The Master heard the
remark, and said, 'This is a rule of propriety.'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'In archery it is not going
through the leather which is the principal thing;-- because people's
strength is not equal. This was the old way.'

        CHAP. XVII. 1. Tsze-kung wished to do away with the offering
of a sheep connected with the inauguration of the first day of each
month.
        2. The Master said, 'Ts'ze, you love the sheep; I love the
ceremony.'
        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'The full observance of the rules
of propriety in serving one's prince is accounted by people to be
flattery.'
        CHAP. XIX. The Duke Ting asked how a prince should employ
his ministers, and how ministers should serve their prince.
Confucius replied, 'A prince should employ his minister according to
according to the rules of propriety; ministers should serve their
prince with faithfulness.'
        CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'The Kwan Tsu is expressive of
enjoyment without being licentious, and of grief without being
hurtfully excessive.'

        CHAP. XXI. 1. The Duke Ai asked Tsai Wo about the altars of
the spirits of the land. Tsai Wo replied, 'The Hsia sovereign planted
the pine tree about them; the men of the Yin planted the cypress;
and the men of the Chau planted the chestnut tree, meaning
thereby to cause the people to be in awe.'
        2. When the Master heard it, he said, 'Things that are done, it
is needless to speak about; things that have had their course, it is
needless to remonstrate about; things that are past, it is needless to
blame.'
        CHAP. XXII. 1. The Master said, 'Small indeed was the capacity
of Kwan Chung!'
        2. Some one said, 'Was Kwan Chung parsimonious?' 'Kwan,'
was the reply, 'had the San Kwei, and his officers performed no
double duties; how can he be considered parsimonious?'
        3. 'Then, did Kwan Chung know the rules of propriety?' The

Master said, 'The princes of States have a screen intercepting the
view at their gates. Kwan had likewise a screen at his gate. The
princes of States on any friendly meeting between two of them, had
a stand on which to place their inverted cups. Kwan had also such a
stand. If Kwan knew the rules of propriety, who does not know
them?'
        CHAP. XXXII. The Master instructing the grand music-master
of Lu said, 'How to play music may be known. At the
commencement of the piece, all the parts should sound together. As
it proceeds, they should be in harmony while severally distinct and
flowing without break, and thus on to the conclusion.'

        CHAP. XXIV. The border warden at Yi requested to be
introduced to the Master, saying, 'When men of superior virtue
have come to this, I have never been denied the privilege of seeing
them.' The followers of the sage introduced him, and when he came
out from the interview, he said, 'My friends, why are you distressed
by your master's loss of office? The kingdom has long been without
the principles of truth and right; Heaven is going to use your master
as a bell with its wooden tongue.'
        CHAP. XXV. The Master said of the Shao that it was perfectly
beautiful and also perfectly good. He said of the Wu that it was
perfectly beautiful but not perfectly good.
        CHAP. XXVI. The Master said, 'High station filled without
indulgent generosity; ceremonies performed without reverence;
mourning conducted without sorrow;-- wherewith should I
contemplate such ways?'

BOOK IV. LE JIN.

        CHAP. I. The Master said, 'It is virtuous manners which
constitute the excellence of a neighborhood. If a man in selecting a
residence, do not fix on one where such prevail, how can he be
wise?'
        CHAP. II. The Master said, 'Those who are without virtue
cannot abide long either in a condition of poverty and hardship, or
in a condition of enjoyment. The virtuous rest in virtue; the wise
desire virtue.'

        CHAP. III. The Master said, 'It is only the (truly) virtuous
man, who can love, or who can hate, others.'
        CHAP. IV. The Master said, 'If the will be set on virtue, there
will be no practice of wickedness.'
        CHAP. V. 1. The Master said, 'Riches and honours are what
men desire. If it cannot be obtained in the proper way, they should
not be held. Poverty and meanness are what men dislike. If it
cannot be avoided in the proper way, they should not be avoided.
        2. 'If a superior man abandon virtue, how can he fulfil the
requirements of that name?
        3. 'The superior man does not, even for the space of a single
meal, act contrary to virtue. In moments of haste, he cleaves to it.
In seasons of danger, he cleaves to it.'

        CHAP. VI. 1. The Master said, 'I have not seen a person who
loved virtue, or one who hated what was not virtuous. He who
loved virtue, would esteem nothing above it. He who hated what is
not virtuous, would practise virtue in such a way that he would not
allow anything that is not virtuous to approach his person.
        2. 'Is any one able for one day to apply his strength to virtue?
I have not seen the case in which his strength would be insufficient.
        3. 'Should there possibly be any such case, I have not seen it.'
        CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'The faults of men are
characteristic of the class to which they belong. By observing a
man's faults, it may be known that he is virtuous.'

        CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'If a man in the morning hear
the right way, he may die in the evening without regret.'
        CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'A scholar, whose mind is set on
truth, and who is ashamed of bad clothes and bad food, is not fit to
be discoursed with.'
        CHAP. X. The Master said, 'The superior man, in the world,
does not set his mind either for anything, or against anything; what
is right he will follow.'
        CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'The superior man thinks of virtue;
the small man thinks of comfort. The superior man thinks of the
sanctions of law; the small man thinks of favours which he may
receive.'

        CHAP. XII. The Master said: 'He who acts with a constant view
to his own advantage will be much murmured against.'
        CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'If a prince is able to govern his
kingdom with the complaisance proper to the rules of propriety,
what difficulty will he have? If he cannot govern it with that
complaisance, what has he to do with the rules of propriety?'
        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'A man should say, I am not
concerned that I have no place, I am concerned how I may fit
myself for one. I am not concerned that I am not known, I seek to
be worthy to be known.'
        CHAP. XV. 1. The Master said, 'Shan, my doctrine is that of an
all-pervading unity.' The disciple Tsang replied, 'Yes.'
        2. The Master went out, and the other disciples asked, saying,

'What do his words mean?' Tsang said, 'The doctrine of our master
is to be true to the principles of our nature and the benevolent
exercise of them to others,-- this and nothing more.'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'The mind of the superior man is
conversant with righteousness; the mind of the mean man is
conversant with gain.'
        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'When we see men of worth, we
should think of equalling them; when we see men of a contrary
character, we should turn inwards and examine ourselves.'
        CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'In serving his parents, a son
may remonstrate with them, but gently; when he sees that they do
not incline to follow his advice, he shows an increased degree of
reverence, but does not abandon his purpose; and should they
punish him, he does not allow himself to murmur.'

        CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'While his parents are alive, the
son may not go abroad to a distance. If he does go abroad, he must
have a fixed place to which he goes.'
        CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'If the son for three years does not
alter from the way of his father, he may be called filial.'
        CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'The years of parents may by no
means not be kept in the memory, as an occasion at once for joy
and for fear.'
        CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'The reason why the ancients did
not readily give utterance to their words, was that they feared lest
their actions should not come up to them.'
        CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'The cautious seldom err.'

        CHAP. XXIV. The Master said, 'The superior man wishes to be
slow in his speech and earnest in his conduct.'
        CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'Virtue is not left to stand alone.
He who practises it will have neighbors.'
        CHAP. XXVI. Tsze-yu said, 'In serving a prince, frequent
remonstrances lead to disgrace. Between friends, frequent reproofs
make the friendship distant.'

BOOK V. KUNG-YE CH'ANG.

        CHAP. I. 1. The Master said of Kung-ye Ch'ang that he might
be wived; although he was put in bonds, he had not been guilty of
any crime. Accordingly, he gave him his own daughter to wife.
        2. Of Nan Yung he said that if the country were well governed

he would not be out of office, and if it were ill-governed, he would
escape punishment and disgrace. He gave him the daughter of his
own elder brother to wife.
        CHAP. II. The Master said of Tsze-chien, 'Of superior virtue
indeed is such a man! If there were not virtuous men in Lu, how
could this man have acquired this character?'
        CHAP. III. Tsze-kung asked, 'What do you say of me, Ts'ze?
The Master said, 'You are a utensil.' 'What utensil?' 'A gemmed
sacrificial utensil.'

        CHAP. IV. 1. Some one said, 'Yung is truly virtuous, but he is
not ready with his tongue.'
        2. The Master said, 'What is the good of being ready with the
tongue? They who encounter men with smartnesses of speech for
the most part procure themselves hatred. I know not whether he
be truly virtuous, but why should he show readiness of the
tongue?'
        CHAP. V. The Master was wishing Ch'i-tiao K'ai to enter on
official employment. He replied, 'I am not yet able to rest in the
assurance of THIS.' The Master was pleased.
        CHAP. VI. The Master said, 'My doctrines make no way. I will
get upon a raft, and float about on the sea. He that will accompany
me will be Yu, I dare say.' Tsze-lu hearing this was glad,

upon which the Master said, 'Yu is fonder of daring than I am. He
does not exercise his judgment upon matters.'
        CHAP. VII. 1. Mang Wu asked about Tsze-lu, whether he was
perfectly virtuous. The Master said, 'I do not know.'
        2. He asked again, when the Master replied, 'In a kingdom of
a thousand chariots, Yu might be employed to manage the military
levies, but I do not know whether he be perfectly virtuous.'
        3. 'And what do you say of Ch'iu?' The Master replied, 'In a
city of a thousand families, or a clan of a hundred chariots, Ch'iu
might be employed as governor, but I do not know whether he is
perfectly virtuous.'
        4. 'What do you say of Ch'ih?' The Master replied, 'With his
sash girt and standing in a court, Ch'ih might be employed to
converse with the visitors and guests, but I do not know whether
he is perfectly virtuous.'

        CHAP. VII. 1. The Master said to Tsze-kung, 'Which do you
consider superior, yourself or Hui?'
        2. Tsze-kung replied, 'How dare I compare myself with Hui?
Hui hears one point and knows all about a subject; I hear one point,
and know a second.'
        3. The Master said, 'You are not equal to him. I grant you, you
are not equal to him.'
        CHAP. IX. 1. Tsai Yu being asleep during the daytime, the
Master said, 'Rotten wood cannot be carved; a wall of dirty earth
will not receive the trowel. This Yu!-- what is the use of my
reproving him?'
        2. The Master said, 'At first, my way with men was to hear
their words, and give them credit for their conduct. Now my way is
to hear their words, and look at their conduct. It is from Yu that I
have learned to make this change.'

        CHAP. X. The Master said, 'I have not seen a firm and
unbending man.' Some one replied, 'There is Shan Ch'ang.' 'Ch'ang,'
said the Master, 'is under the influence of his passions; how can he
be pronounced firm and unbending?'
        CHAP. XI. Tsze-kung said, 'What I do not wish men to do to
me, I also wish not to do to men.' The Master said, 'Ts'ze, you have
not attained to that.'
        CHAP. XII. Tsze-kung said, 'The Master's personal displays of
his principles and ordinary descriptions of them may be heard. His
discourses about man's nature, and the way of Heaven, cannot be
heard.'

        CHAP. XIII. When Tsze-lu heard anything, if he had not yet
succeeded in carrying it into practice, he was only afraid lest he
should hear something else.
        CHAP. XIV. Tsze-kung asked, saying, 'On what ground did
Kung-wan get that title of Wan?' The Master said, 'He was of an
active nature and yet fond of learning, and he was not ashamed to
ask and learn of his inferiors!-- On these grounds he has been
styled Wan.'
        CHAP. XV. The Master said of Tsze-ch'an that he had four of
the characteristics of a superior man:-- in his conduct of himself, he
was humble; in serving his superiors, he was respectful; in
nourishing the people, he was kind; in ordering the people, he was
just.'

        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'Yen P'ing knew well how to
maintain friendly intercourse. The acquaintance might be long, but
he showed the same respect as at first.'
        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'Tsang Wan kept a large tortoise
in a house, on the capitals of the pillars of which he had hills made,
and with representations of duckweed on the small pillars above
the beams supporting the rafters.-- Of what sort was his wisdom?'
        CHAP. XVIII. 1. Tsze-chang asked, saying, 'The minister Tsze-
wan thrice took office, and manifested no joy in his countenance.
Thrice he retired from office, and manifested no displeasure. He
made it a point to inform the new minister of the way in which he
had conducted the government;-- what do you say of him?' The
Master replied. 'He was loyal.' 'Was he perfectly virtuous?' 'I do not
know. How can he be pronounced perfectly virtuous?'
        2. Tsze-chang proceeded, 'When the officer Ch'ui killed the
prince of Ch'i, Ch'an Wan, though he was the owner of forty horses,
abandoned them and left the country. Coming to another State, he
said, "They are here like our great officer, Ch'ui," and left it. He
came to a second State, and with the same observation left it also;--
what do you say of him?' The Master replied, 'He was pure.' 'Was he
perfectly virtuous?' 'I do not know. How can he be pronounced
perfectly virtuous?'
        CHAP. XIX. Chi Wan thought thrice, and then acted. When the
Master was informed of it, he said, 'Twice may do.'
        CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'When good order prevailed in his
country, Ning Wu acted the part of a wise man. When his country
was in disorder, he acted the part of a stupid man. Others may
equal his wisdom, but they cannot equal his stupidity.'

        CHAP. XXI. When the Master was in Ch'an, he said, 'Let me
return! Let me return! The little children of my school are
ambitious and too hasty. They are accomplished and complete so
far, but they do not know how to restrict and shape themselves.'
        CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'Po-i and Shu-ch'i did not keep
the former wickednesses of men in mind, and hence the
resentments directed towards them were few.'
        CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'Who says of Wei-shang Kao

that he is upright? One begged some vinegar of him, and he begged
it of a neighbor and gave it to the man.'
        CHAP. XXIV. The Master said, 'Fine words, an insinuating
appearance, and excessive respect;-- Tso Ch'iu-ming was ashamed
of them. I also am ashamed of them. To conceal resentment against
a person, and appear friendly with him;-- Tso Ch'iu-ming was
ashamed of such conduct. I also am ashamed of it.'
        CHAP. XXV. 1. Yen Yuan and Chi Lu being by his side, the
Master said to them, 'Come, let each of you tell his wishes.'
        2. Tsze-lu said, 'I should like, having chariots and horses, and
light fur dresses, to share them with my friends, and though they
should spoil them, I would not be displeased.'
        3. Yen Yuan said, 'I should like not to boast of my excellence,
nor to make a display of my meritorious deeds.'
        4. Tsze-lu then said, 'I should like, sir, to hear your wishes.'
The Master said, 'They are, in regard to the aged, to give them rest;
in regard to friends, to show them sincerity; in regard to the young,
to treat them tenderly.'
        CHAP. XXVI. The Master said, 'It is all over! I have not yet
seen one who could perceive his faults, and inwardly accuse
himself.'
        CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'In a hamlet of ten families,
there may be found one honourable and sincere as I am, but not so
fond of learning.'

BOOK VI. YUNG YEY.

        CHAP. I. 1. The Master said, 'There is Yung!-- He might occupy
the place of a prince.'
        2. Chung-kung asked about Tsze-sang Po-tsze. The Master
said, 'He may pass. He does not mind small matters.'
        3. Chung-kung said, 'If a man cherish in himself a reverential
feeling of the necessity of attention to business, though he may be
easy in small matters in his government of the people, that may be
allowed. But if he cherish in himself that easy feeling, and also
carry it out in his practice, is not such an easy mode of procedure
excessive?'
        4. The Master said, 'Yung's words are right.'

        CHAP. II. The Duke Ai asked which of the disciples loved to
learn. Confucius replied to him, 'There was Yen Hui; HE loved to
learn. He did not transfer his anger; he did not repeat a fault.
Unfortunately, his appointed time was short and he died; and now
there is not such another. I have not yet heard of any one who
loves to learn as he did.'
        CHAP. III. 1. Tsze-hwa being employed on a mission to Ch'i,
the disciple Zan requested grain for his mother. The Master said,
'Give her a fu.' Yen requested more. 'Give her an yu,' said the
Master. Yen gave her five ping.
        2. The Master said, 'When Ch'ih was proceeding to Ch'i, he had
fat horses to his carriage, and wore light furs. I have heard that

a superior man helps the distressed, but does not add to the wealth
of the rich.'
        3. Yuan Sze being made governor of his town by the Master,
he gave him nine hundred measures of grain, but Sze declined
them.
        4.  The Master said, 'Do not decline them. May you not give
them away in the neighborhoods, hamlets, towns, and villages?'
        CHAP. IV. The Master, speaking of Chung-kung, said, 'If the
calf of a brindled cow be red and horned, although men may not
wish to use it, would the spirits of the mountains and rivers put it
aside?'
        CHAP. V. The Master said, 'Such was Hui that for three months
there would be nothing in his mind contrary to perfect virtue. The
others may attain to this on some days or in some months, but
nothing more.'

        CHAP. VI. Chi K'ang asked about Chung-yu, whether he was fit
to be employed as an officer of government. The Master said, 'Yu is
a man of decision; what difficulty would he find in being an officer
of government?' K'ang asked, 'Is Ts'ze fit to be employed as an
officer of government?' and was answered, 'Ts'ze is a man of
intelligence; what difficulty would he find in being an officer of
government?' And to the same question about Ch'iu the Master
gave the same reply, saying, 'Ch'iu is a man of various ability.'
        CHAP. VII. The chief of the Chi family sent to ask Min Tsze-
ch'ien to be governor of Pi. Min Tsze-ch'ien said, 'Decline the offer
for me politely. If any one come again to me with a second
invitation, I shall be obliged to go and live on the banks of the
Wan.'

        CHAP. VIII. Po-niu being ill, the Master went to ask for him.
He took hold of his hand through the window, and said, 'It is killing
him. It is the appointment of Heaven, alas! That such a man should
have such a sickness! That such a man should have such a sickness!'
                CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'Admirable indeed was the
virtue of Hui! With a single bamboo dish of rice, a single gourd dish
of drink, and living in his mean narrow lane, while others could not
have endured the distress, he did not allow his joy to be affected by
it. Admirable indeed was the virtue of Hui!'
        CHAP. X. Yen Ch'iu said, 'It is not that I do not delight in your
doctrines, but my strength is insufficient.' The Master said, 'Those
whose strength is insufficient give over in the middle of the way
but now you limit yourself.'

        CHAP. XI. The Master said to Tsze-hsia, 'Do you be a scholar
after the style of the superior man, and not after that of the mean
man.'
        CHAP. XII. Tsze-yu being governor of Wu-ch'ang, the Master
said to him, 'Have you got good men there?' He answered, 'There is
Tan-t'ai Mieh-ming, who never in walking takes a short cut, and
never comes to my office, excepting on public business.'
        CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'Mang Chih-fan does not boast of
his merit. Being in the rear on an occasion of flight, when they were
about to enter the gate, he whipped up his horse, saying, "It is not
that I dare to be last. My horse would not advance."'

        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'Without the specious speech of
the litanist T'o and the beauty of the prince Chao of Sung, it is
difficult to escape in the present age.'
        CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'Who can go out but by the door?
How is it that men will not walk according to these ways?'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'Where the solid qualities are in
excess of accomplishments, we have rusticity; where the
accomplishments are in excess of the solid qualities, we have the
manners of a clerk. When the accomplishments and solid qualities
are equally blended, we then have the man of virtue.'
        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'Man is born for uprightness. If
a man lose his uprightness, and yet live, his escape from death is
the effect of mere good fortune.'

        CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'They who know the truth are
not equal to those who love it, and they who love it are not equal to
those who delight in it.'
        CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'To those whose talents are above
mediocrity, the highest subjects may be announced. To those who
are below mediocrity, the highest subjects may not be announced.'
        CHAP. XX. Fan Ch'ih asked what constituted wisdom. The
Master said, 'To give one's self earnestly to the duties due to men,
and, while respecting spiritual beings, to keep aloof from them, may
be called wisdom.' He asked about perfect virtue. The Master said,
'The man of virtue makes the difficulty to be overcome his first
business, and success only a subsequent consideration;-- this may
be called perfect virtue.'

        CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'The wise find pleasure in water;
the virtuous find pleasure in hills. The wise are active; the virtuous
are tranquil. The wise are joyful; the virtuous are long-lived.'
        CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'Ch'i, by one change, would come
to the State of Lu. Lu, by one change, would come to a State where
true principles predominated.'
        CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'A cornered vessel without
corners.-- A strange cornered vessel! A strange cornered vessel!'
        CHAP. XXIV. Tsai Wo asked, saying, 'A benevolent man,
though it be told him,-- 'There is a man in the well' will go in after
him, I suppose.' Confucius said, 'Why should he do so?' A superior

man may be made to go to the well, but he cannot be made to go
down into it. He may be imposed upon, but he cannot be fooled.'
        CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'The superior man, extensively
studying all learning, and keeping himself under the restraint of
the rules of propriety, may thus likewise not overstep what is
right.'
        CHAP. XXVI. The Master having visited Nan-tsze, Tsze-lu was
displeased, on which the Master swore, saying, 'Wherein I have
done improperly, may Heaven reject me, may Heaven reject me!'
        CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'Perfect is the virtue which is

according to the Constant Mean! Rare for a long time has been its
practise among the people.'
        CHAP. XXVIII. 1. Tsze-kung said, 'Suppose the case of a man
extensively conferring benefits on the people, and able to assist all,
what would you say of him? Might he be called perfectly virtuous?'
The Master said, 'Why speak only of virtue in connexion with him?
Must he not have the qualities of a sage? Even Yao and Shun were
still solicitous about this.
        2. 'Now the man of perfect virtue, wishing to be established
himself, seeks also to establish others; wishing to be enlarged
himself, he seeks also to enlarge others.
        3. 'To be able to judge of others by what is nigh in ourselves;--
this may be called the art of virtue.'

BOOK VII. SHU R.

        CHAP. I. The Master said, 'A transmitter and not a maker,
believing in and loving the ancients, I venture to compare myself
with our old P'ang.'
        CHAP. II. The Master said, 'The silent treasuring up of
knowledge; learning without satiety; and instructing others without
being wearied:-- which one of these things belongs to me?'
        CHAP. III. The Master said, 'The leaving virtue without proper
cultivation; the not thoroughly discussing what is learned; not being
able to move towards righteousness of which a knowledge is
gained; and not being able to change what is not good:-- these are
the things which occasion me solicitude.'

        CHAP. IV. When the Master was unoccupied with business, his
manner was easy, and he looked pleased.
        CHAP. V. The Master said, 'Extreme is my decay. For a long
time, I have not dreamed, as I was wont to do, that I saw the duke
of Chau.'
        CHAP. VI. 1. The Master said, 'Let the will be set on the path
of duty.
        2. 'Let every attainment in what is good be firmly grasped.
        3. 'Let perfect virtue be accorded with.
        4. 'Let relaxation and enjoyment be found in the polite arts.'

        CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'From the man bringing his
bundle of dried flesh for my teaching upwards, I have never
refused instruction to any one.'
        CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'I do not open up the truth to
one who is not eager to get knowledge, nor help out any one who is
not anxious to explain himself. When I have presented one corner
of a subject to any one, and he cannot from it learn the other three,
I do not repeat my lesson.'
        CHAP. IX. 1. When the Master was eating by the side of a
mourner, he never ate to the full.
        2. He did not sing on the same day in which he had been
weeping.
        CHAP. X. 1. The Master said to Yen Yuan, 'When called to
office, to undertake its duties; when not so called, to lie retired;-- it
is only I and you who have attained to this.'
        2. Tsze-lu said, 'If you had the conduct of the armies of a
great State, whom would you have to act with you?'
        3. The Master said, 'I would not have him to act with me, who
will unarmed attack a tiger, or cross a river without a boat, dying
without any regret. My associate must be the man who proceeds to
action full of solicitude, who is fond of adjusting his plans, and then
carries them into execution.'
        CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'If the search for riches is sure to
be successful, though I should become a groom with whip in hand
to get them, I will do so. As the search may not be successful, I will
follow after that which I love.'
        CHAP. XII. The things in reference to which the Master
exercised the greatest caution were -- fasting, war, and sickness.

        CHAP. XIII. When the Master was in Ch'i, he heard the Shao,
and for three months did not know the taste of flesh. 'I did not
think'' he said, 'that music could have been made so excellent as
this.'
        CHAP. XIV. 1. Yen Yu said, 'Is our Master for the ruler of
Wei?' Tsze-kung said, 'Oh! I will ask him.'
        2. He went in accordingly, and said, 'What sort of men were
Po-i and Shu-ch'i?' 'They were ancient worthies,' said the Master.
'Did they have any repinings because of their course?' The Master
again replied, 'They sought to act virtuously, and they did so; what
was there for them to repine about?' On this, Tsze-kung went out
and said, 'Our Master is not for him.'

        CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'With coarse rice to eat, with
water to drink, and my bended arm for a pillow;-- I have still joy in
the midst of these things. Riches and honours acquired by
unrighteousness, are to me as a floating cloud.'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'If some years were added to my
life, I would give fifty to the study of the Yi, and then I might come
to be without great faults.'
        CHAP. XVII The Master's frequent themes of discourse were--
the Odes, the History, and the maintenance of the Rules of
Propriety. On all these he frequently discoursed.

        CHAP. XVIII. 1. The Duke of Sheh asked Tsze-lu about
Confucius, and Tsze-lu did not answer him.
        2. The Master said, 'Why did you not say to him,-- He is
simply a man, who in his eager pursuit (of knowledge) forgets his
food, who in the joy of its attainment forgets his sorrows, and who
does not perceive that old age is coming on?'
        CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'I am not one who was born in
the possession of knowledge; I am one who is fond of antiquity, and
earnest in seeking it there.'
        CHAP. XX. The subjects on which the Master did not talk,
were-- extraordinary things, feats of strength, disorder, and
spiritual beings.

        CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'When I walk along with two
others, they may serve me as my teachers. I will select their good
qualities and follow them, their bad qualities and avoid them.'
        CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'Heaven produced the virtue
that is in me. Hwan T'ui-- what can he do to me?'
        CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'Do you think, my disciples, that
I have any concealments? I conceal nothing from you. There is
nothing which I do that is not shown to you, my disciples;-- that is
my way.'
        CHAP. XXIV. There were four things which the Master
taught,-- letters, ethics, devotion of soul, and truthfulness.

        CHAP. XXV. 1. The Master said, 'A sage it is not mine to see;
could I see a man of real talent and virtue, that would satisfy me.'
        2. The Master said, 'A good man it is not mine to see; could I
see a man possessed of constancy, that would satisfy me.
        3. 'Having not and yet affecting to have, empty and yet
affecting to be full, straitened and yet affecting to be at ease:-- it is
difficult with such characteristics to have constancy.'
        CHAP. XXVI. The Master angled,-- but did not use a net. He
shot,-- but not at birds perching.
        CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'There may be those who act
without knowing why. I do not do so. Hearing much and selecting
what is good and following it; seeing much and keeping it in
memory:-- this is the second style of knowledge.'

        CHAP. XXVIII. 1. It was difficult to talk (profitably and
reputably) with the people of Hu-hsiang, and a lad of that place
having had an interview with the Master, the disciples doubted.
        2. The Master said, 'I admit people's approach to me without
committing myself as to what they may do when they have retired.
Why must one be so severe? If a man purify himself to wait upon
me, I receive him so purified, without guaranteeing his past
conduct.'
        CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'Is virtue a thing remote? I wish
to be virtuous, and lo! virtue is at hand.'
        CHAP. XXX. 1. The minister of crime of Ch'an asked whether
the duke Chao knew propriety, and Confucius said, 'He knew
propriety.'
        2. Confucius having retired, the minister bowed to Wu-ma Ch'i

to come forward, and said, 'I have heard that the superior man is
not a partisan. May the superior man be a partisan also? The prince
married a daughter of the house of Wu, of the same surname with
himself, and called her,-- "The elder Tsze of Wu." If the prince
knew propriety, who does not know it?'
        3. Wu-ma Ch'i reported these remarks, and the Master said, 'I
am fortunate! If I have any errors, people are sure to know them.'
        CHAP. XXXI. When the Master was in company with a person
who was singing, if he sang well, he would make him repeat the
song, while he accompanied it with his own voice.
        CHAP. XXXII. The Master said, 'In letters I am perhaps equal
to other men, but the character of the superior man, carrying out in
his conduct what he professes, is what I have not yet attained to.'

        CHAP. XXXIII. The Master said, 'The sage and the man of
perfect virtue;-- how dare I rank myself with them? It may simply
be said of me, that I strive to become such without satiety, and
teach others without weariness.' Kung-hsi Hwa said, 'This is just
what we, the disciples, cannot imitate you in.'
        CHAP. XXXIV. The Master being very sick, Tsze-lu asked leave
to pray for him. He said, 'May such a thing be done?' Tsze-lu
replied, 'It may. In the Eulogies it is said, "Prayer has been made
for thee to the spirits of the upper and lower worlds."' The Master
said, 'My praying has been for a long time.'

        CHAP. XXXV. The Master said, 'Extravagance leads to
insubordination, and parsimony to meanness. It is better to be
mean than to be insubordinate.'
        CHAP. XXXVI. The Master said, 'The superior man is satisfied
and composed; the mean man is always full of distress.'
        CHAP. XXXVII. The Master was mild, and yet dignified;
majestic, and yet not fierce; respectful, and yet easy.

BOOK VIII. T'AI-PO.

        CHAP. I. The Master said, 'T'ai-po may be said to have
reached the highest point of virtuous action. Thrice he declined the
kingdom, and the people in ignorance of his motives could not
express their approbation of his conduct.'

        CHAP. II. 1. The Master said, 'Respectfulness, without the
rules of propriety, becomes laborious bustle; carefulness, without
the rules of propriety, becomes timidity; boldness, without the rules
of propriety, becomes insubordination; straightforwardness,
without the rules of propriety, becomes rudeness.
        2. 'When those who are in high stations perform well all their
duties to their relations, the people are aroused to virtue. When old
friends are not neglected by them, the people are preserved from
meanness.'
        CHAP. III. The philosopher Tsang being ill, he called to him
the disciples of his school, and said, 'Uncover my feet, uncover my
hands. It is said in the Book of Poetry, "We should be apprehensive
and cautious, as if on the brink of a deep gulf, as if treading on thin
ice," and so have I been. Now and hereafter, I know my escape
from all injury to my person, O ye, my little children.'

        CHAP. IV. 1. The philosopher Tsang being ill, Meng Chang
went to ask how he was.
        2. Tsang said to him, 'When a bird is about to die, its notes are
mournful; when a man is about to die, his words are good.
        3. 'There are three principles of conduct which the man of
high rank should consider specially important:-- that in his
deportment and manner he keep from violence and heedlessness;
that in regulating his countenance he keep near to sincerity; and
that in his words and tones he keep far from lowness and
impropriety. As to such matters as attending to the sacrificial
vessels, there are the proper officers for them.'

        CHAP. V. The philosopher Tsang said, 'Gifted with ability, and
yet putting questions to those who were not so; possessed of much,
and yet putting questions to those possessed of little; having, as
though he had not; full, and yet counting himself as empty;
offended against, and yet entering into no altercation; formerly I
had a friend who pursued this style of conduct.'
        CHAP. VI. The philosopher Tsang said, 'Suppose that there is
an individual who can be entrusted with the charge of a young
orphan prince, and can be commissioned with authority over a state
of a hundred li, and whom no emergency however great can drive
from his principles:-- is such a man a superior man? He is a
superior man indeed.'
        CHAP. VII. 1. The philosopher Tsang said, 'The officer may not
be without breadth of mind and vigorous endurance. His burden is
heavy and his course is long.

        2. 'Perfect virtue is the burden which he considers it is his to
sustain;-- is it not heavy? Only with death does his course stop;-- is
it not long?
        CHAP. VIII. 1. The Master said, 'It is by the Odes that the
mind is aroused.
        2. 'It is by the Rules of Propriety that the character is
established.
        3. 'It is from Music that the finish is received.'
        CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'The people may be made to follow
a path of action, but they may not be made to understand it.'
        CHAP. X. The Master said, 'The man who is fond of daring and
is dissatisfied with poverty, will proceed to insubordination. So will
the man who is not virtuous, when you carry your dislike of him to
an extreme.'

        CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'Though a man have abilities as
admirable as those of the Duke of Chau, yet if he be proud and
niggardly, those other things are really not worth being looked at.'
        CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'It is not easy to find a man who
has learned for three years without coming to be good.'
        CHAP. XIII. 1. The Master said, 'With sincere faith he unites
the love of learning; holding firm to death, he is perfecting the
excellence of his course.
        2. 'Such an one will not enter a tottering State, nor dwell in a
disorganized one. When right principles of government prevail in
the kingdom, he will show himself; when they are prostrated, he
will keep concealed.
        3. 'When a country is well-governed, poverty and a mean
condition are things to be ashamed of. When a country is ill-
governed, riches and honour are things to be ashamed of.'

        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'He who is not in any particular
office, has nothing to do with plans for the administration of its
duties.'
        CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'When the music master Chih first
entered on his office, the finish of the Kwan Tsu was magnificent;--
how it filled the ears!'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'Ardent and yet not upright;
stupid and yet not attentive; simple and yet not sincere:-- such
persons I do not understand.'
        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'Learn as if you could not reach
your object, and were always fearing also lest you should lose it.'
        CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'How majestic was the manner
in which Shun and Yu held possession of the empire, as if it were
nothing to them!'

        CHAP. XIX. 1. The Master said, 'Great indeed was Yao as a
sovereign! How majestic was he! It is only Heaven that is grand,
and only Yao corresponded to it. How vast was his virtue! The
people could find no name for it.
        2. 'How majestic was he in the works which he accomplished!
How glorious in the elegant regulations which he instituted!'
        CHAP. XX. 1. Shun had five ministers, and the empire was
well-governed.
        2. King Wu said, 'I have ten able ministers.'
        3. Confucius said, 'Is not the saying that talents are difficult to
find, true? Only when the dynasties of T'ang and Yu met, were they
more abundant than in this of Chau, yet there was a woman among
them. The able ministers were no more than nine men.

        4. 'King Wan possessed two of the three parts of the empire,
and with those he served the dynasty of Yin. The virtue of the
house of Chau may be said to have reached the highest point
indeed.'
        CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'I can find no flaw in the
character of Yu. He used himself coarse food and drink, but
displayed the utmost filial piety towards the spirits. His ordinary
garments were poor, but he displayed the utmost elegance in his
sacrificial cap and apron. He lived in a low mean house, but
expended all his strength on the ditches and water-channels. I can
find nothing like a flaw in Yu.'

BOOK IX. TSZE HAN.

        CHAP. I. The subjects of which the Master seldom spoke
were-- profitableness, and also the appointments of Heaven, and
perfect virtue.
        CHAP. II. 1. A man of the village of Ta-hsiang said, 'Great
indeed is the philosopher K'ung! His learning is extensive, and yet
he does not render his name famous by any particular thing.'
        2. The Master heard the observation, and said to his disciples,
'What shall I practise? Shall I practise charioteering, or shall I
practise archery? I will practise charioteering.'

        CHAP. III. 1. The Master said, 'The linen cap is that prescribed
by the rules of ceremony, but now a silk one is worn. It is
economical, and I follow the common practice.
        2. 'The rules of ceremony prescribe the bowing below the hall,
but now the practice is to bow only after ascending it. That is
arrogant. I continue to bow below the hall, though I oppose the
common practice.'
        CHAP. IV. There were four things from which the Master was
entirely free. He had no foregone conclusions, no arbitrary
predeterminations, no obstinacy, and no egoism.
        CHAP. V. 1. The Master was put in fear in K'wang.
        2. He said, 'After the death of King Wan, was not the cause of
truth lodged here in me?

        3. 'If Heaven had wished to let this cause of truth perish, then
I, a future mortal, should not have got such a relation to that cause.
While Heaven does not let the cause of truth perish, what can the
people of K'wang do to me?'
        CHAP. VI. 1. A high officer asked Tsze-kung, saying, 'May we
not say that your Master is a sage? How various is his ability!'
        2. Tsze-kung said, 'Certainly Heaven has endowed him
unlimitedly. He is about a sage. And, moreover, his ability is
various.'
        3. The Master heard of the conversation and said, 'Does the
high officer know me? When I was young, my condition was low,
and therefore I acquired my ability in many things, but they were
mean matters. Must the superior man have such variety of ability?
He does not need variety of ability.'
        4. Lao said, 'The Master said, "Having no official employment,
I acquired many arts."'

        CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'Am I indeed possessed of
knowledge? I am not knowing. But if a mean person, who appears
quite empty-like, ask anything of me, I set it forth from one end to
the other, and exhaust it.'
        CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'The FANG bird does not come;
the river sends forth no map:-- it is all over with me!'
        CHAP. IX. When the Master saw a person in a mourning dress,
or any one with the cap and upper and lower garments of full
dress, or a blind person, on observing them approaching, though
they were younger than himself, he would rise up, and if he had to
pass by them, he would do so hastily.

        CHAP. X. 1. Yen Yuan, in admiration of the Master's doctrines,
sighed and said, 'I looked up to them, and they seemed to become
more high; I tried to penetrate them, and they seemed to become
more firm; I looked at them before me, and suddenly they seemed
to be behind.
        2. 'The Master, by orderly method, skilfully leads men on. He
enlarged my mind with learning, and taught me the restraints of
propriety.
        3. 'When I wish to give over the study of his doctrines, I
cannot do so, and having exerted all my ability, there seems
something to stand right up before me; but though I wish to follow
and lay hold of it, I really find no way to do so.'
        CHAP. XI. 1. The Master being very ill, Tsze-lu wished the
disciples to act as ministers to him.
        2. During a remission of his illness, he said, 'Long has the
conduct of Yu been deceitful! By pretending to have ministers when
I have them not, whom should I impose upon? Should I impose
upon Heaven?

        3. 'Moreover, than that I should die in the hands of ministers,
is it not better that I should die in the hands of you, my disciples?
And though I may not get a great burial, shall I die upon the road?'
        CHAP. XII. Tsze-kung said, 'There is a beautiful gem here.
Should I lay it up in a case and keep it? or should I seek for a good
price and sell it?' The Master said, 'Sell it! Sell it! But I would wait
for one to offer the price.'
        CHAP. XIII. 1. The Master was wishing to go and live among
the nine wild tribes of the east.
        2. Some one said, 'They are rude. How can you do such a
thing?' The Master said, 'If a superior man dwelt among them, what
rudeness would there be?'
        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'I returned from Wei to Lu, and
then the music was reformed, and the pieces in the Royal songs and
Praise songs all found their proper places.'

        CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'Abroad, to serve the high
ministers and nobles; at home, to serve one's father and elder
brothers; in all duties to the dead, not to dare not to exert one's self;
and not to be overcome of wine:-- which one of these things do I
attain to?'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master standing by a stream, said, 'It passes
on just like this, not ceasing day or night!'
        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'I have not seen one who loves
virtue as he loves beauty.'
        CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'The prosecution of learning
may be compared to what may happen in raising a mound. If there
want but one basket of earth to complete the work, and I stop, the

stopping is my own work. It may be compared to throwing down
the earth on the level ground. Though but one basketful is thrown
at a time, the advancing with it is my own going forward.'
        CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'Never flagging when I set forth
anything to him;-- ah! that is Hui.'
        CHAP. XX. The Master said of Yen Yuan, 'Alas! I saw his
constant advance. I never saw him stop in his progress.'
        CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'There are cases in which the
blade springs, but the plant does not go on to flower! There are
cases where it flowers, but no fruit is subsequently produced!'
        CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'A youth is to be regarded with
respect. How do we know that his future will not be equal to our
present? If he reach the age of forty or fifty, and has not made
himself heard of, then indeed he will not be worth being regarded
with respect.'

        CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'Can men refuse to assent to the
words of strict admonition? But it is reforming the conduct because
of them which is valuable. Can men refuse to be pleased with words
of gentle advice? But it is unfolding their aim which is valuable. If a
man be pleased with these words, but does not unfold their aim,
and assents to those, but does not reform his conduct, I can really
do nothing with him.'
        CHAP. XXIV. The Master said, 'Hold faithfulness and sincerity
as first principles. Have no friends not equal to yourself. When you
have faults, do not fear to abandon them.'
        CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'The commander of the forces of
a large state may be carried off, but the will of even a common man
cannot be taken from him.'

        CHAP. XXVI. 1. The Master said, 'Dressed himself in a tattered
robe quilted with hemp, yet standing by the side of men dressed in
furs, and not ashamed;-- ah! it is Yu who is equal to this!
        2. '"He dislikes none, he covets nothing;-- what can he do but
what is good!"'
        3. Tsze-lu kept continually repeating these words of the ode,
when the Master said, 'Those things are by no means sufficient to
constitute (perfect) excellence.'
        CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'When the year becomes cold,
then we know how the pine and the cypress are the last to lose
their leaves.'
        CHAP. XXVIII. The Master said, 'The wise are free from
perplexities; the virtuous from anxiety; and the bold from fear.'
        CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'There are some with whom we
may study in common, but we shall find them unable to go along

with us to principles. Perhaps we may go on with them to
principles, but we shall find them unable to get established in those
along with us. Or if we may get so established along with them, we
shall find them unable to weigh occurring events along with us.'
        CHAP. XXX. 1. How the flowers of the aspen-plum flutter and
turn! Do I not think of you? But your house is distant.
        2. The Master said, 'It is the want of thought about it. How is
it distant?'

BOOK X. HEANG TANG.

        CHAP. I. 1. Confucius, in his village, looked simple and sincere,
and as if he were not able to speak.
        2. When he was in the prince's ancestorial temple, or in the
court, he spoke minutely on every point, but cautiously.
        CHAP II. 1. When he was waiting at court, in speaking with
the great officers of the lower grade, he spake freely, but in a
straightforward manner; in speaking with those of the higher grade,
he did so blandly, but precisely.
        2. When the ruler was present, his manner displayed
respectful uneasiness; it was grave, but self-possessed.

        CHAP. III. 1. When the prince called him to employ him in the
reception of a visitor, his countenance appeared to change, and his
legs to move forward with difficulty.
        2. He inclined himself to the other officers among whom he
stood, moving his left or right arm, as their position required, but
keeping the skirts of his robe before and behind evenly adjusted.
        3. He hastened forward, with his arms like the wings of a
bird.
        4. When the guest had retired, he would report to the prince,
'The visitor is not turning round any more.'
        CHAP. IV. 1. When he entered the palace gate, he seemed to
bend his body, as if it were not sufficient to admit him.
        2. When he was standing, he did not occupy the middle of the
gate-way; when he passed in or out, he did not tread upon the
threshold.
        3. When he was passing the vacant place of the prince, his
countenance appeared to change, and his legs to bend under him,
and his words came as if he hardly had breath to utter them.
        4. He ascended the reception hall, holding up his robe with
both his hands, and his body bent; holding in his breath also, as if
he dared not breathe.
        5. When he came out from the audience, as soon as he had
descended one step, he began to relax his countenance, and had a
satisfied look. When he had got to the bottom of the steps, he
advanced rapidly to his place, with his arms like wings, and on
occupying it, his manner still showed respectful uneasiness.
        CHAP. V. 1. When he was carrying the scepter of his ruler, he
seemed to bend his body, as if he were not able to bear its weight.
He did not hold it higher than the position of the hands in making

a bow, nor lower than their position in giving anything to another.
His countenance seemed to change, and look apprehensive, and he
dragged his feet along as if they were held by something to the
ground.
        2. In presenting the presents with which he was charged, he
wore a placid appearance.
        3. At his private audience, he looked highly pleased.
        CHAP. VI. 1. The superior man did not use a deep purple, or a
puce colour, in the ornaments of his dress.
        2. Even in his undress, he did not wear anything of a red or
reddish colour.
        3. In warm weather, he had a single garment either of coarse
or fine texture, but he wore it displayed over an inner garment.
        4. Over lamb's fur he wore a garment of black; over fawn's fur
one of white; and over fox's fur one of yellow.

        5. The fur robe of his undress was long, with the right sleeve
short.
        6. He required his sleeping dress to be half as long again as
his body.
        7. When staying at home, he used thick furs of the fox or the
badger.
        8. When he put off mourning, he wore all the appendages of
the girdle.
        9. His under-garment, except when it was required to be of
the curtain shape, was made of silk cut narrow above and wide
below.
        10. He did not wear lamb's fur or a black cap, on a visit of
condolence.
        11. On the first day of the month he put on his court robes,
and presented himself at court.

        CHAP. VII. 1. When fasting, he thought it necessary to have
his clothes brightly clean and made of linen cloth.
        2. When fasting, he thought it necessary to change his food,
and also to change the place where he commonly sat in the
apartment.
        CHAP. VIII. 1. He did not dislike to have his rice finely
cleaned, nor to have his minced meat cut quite small.
        2. He did not eat rice which had been injured by heat or damp
and turned sour, nor fish or flesh which was gone. He did not eat
what was discoloured, or what was of a bad flavour, nor anything
which was ill-cooked, or was not in season.
        3. He did not eat meat which was not cut properly, nor what
was served without its proper sauce.
        4. Though there might be a large quantity of meat, he would
not allow what he took to exceed the due proportion for the rice. It
was only in wine that he laid down no limit for himself, but he did
not allow himself to be confused by it.
        5. He did not partake of wine and dried meat bought in the
market.
        6. He was never without ginger when he ate.
        7. He did not eat much.
        8. When he had been assisting at the prince's sacrifice, he did
not keep the flesh which he received overnight. The flesh of his
family sacrifice he did not keep over three days. If kept over three
days, people could not eat it.
        9. When eating, he did not converse. When in bed, he did not
speak.
        10. Although his food might be coarse rice and vegetable
soup, he would offer a little of it in sacrifice with a grave, respectful
air.
        CHAP. IX. If his mat was not straight, he did not sit on it.
        CHAP. X. 1. When the villagers were drinking together, on
those who carried staffs going out, he went out immediately after.
        2. When the villagers were going through their ceremonies to
drive away pestilential influences, he put on his court robes and
stood on the eastern steps.

        CHAP. XI. 1. When he was sending complimentary inquiries to
any one in another State, he bowed twice as he escorted the
messenger away.
        2. Chi K'ang having sent him a present of physic, he bowed
and received it, saying, 'I do not know it. I dare not taste it.'
        CHAP. XII. The stable being burned down, when he was at
court, on his return he said, 'Has any man been hurt?' He did not
ask about the horses.
        CHAP. XIII. 1. When the prince sent him a gift of cooked meat,
he would adjust his mat, first taste it, and then give it away to
others. When the prince sent him a gift of undressed meat, he
would have it cooked, and offer it to the spirits of his ancestors.
When the prince sent him a gift of a living animal, he would keep it
alive.
        2. When he was in attendance on the prince and joining in the
entertainment, the prince only sacrificed. He first tasted everything.

        3. When he was ill and the prince came to visit him, he had
his head to the east, made his court robes be spread over him, and
drew his girdle across them.
        4. When the prince's order called him, without waiting for his
carriage to be yoked, he went at once.
        CHAP. XIV. When he entered the ancestral temple of the
State, he asked about everything.
        CHAP. XV. 1. When any of his friends died, if he had no
relations who could be depended on for the necessary offices, he
would say, 'I will bury him.'
        2. When a friend sent him a present, though it might be a
carriage and horses, he did not bow.
        3. The only present for which he bowed was that of the flesh
of sacrifice.
        CHAP. XVI. 1. In bed, he did not lie like a corpse. At home, he
did not put on any formal deportment.
        2. When he saw any one in a mourning dress, though it might
be an acquaintance, he would change countenance; when he saw
any one wearing the cap of full dress, or a blind person, though he
might be in his undress, he would salute them in a ceremonious
manner.
        3. To any person in mourning he bowed forward to the
crossbar of his carriage; he bowed in the same way to any one
bearing the tables of population.
        4. When he was at an entertainment where there was an
abundance of provisions set before him, he would change
countenance and rise up.
        5. On a sudden clap of thunder, or a violent wind, he would
change countenance.
        CHAP. XVII. 1. When he was about to mount his carriage, he
would stand straight, holding the cord.
        2. When he was in the carriage, he did not turn his head quite
round, he did not talk hastily, he did not point with his hands.
        CHAP. XVIII. 1. Seeing the countenance, it instantly rises. It
flies round, and by and by settles.
        2. The Master said, 'There is the hen-pheasant on the hill
bridge. At its season! At its season!' Tsze-lu made a motion to it.
Thrice it smelt him and then rose.

BOOK XI. HSIEN TSIN.

        CHAP. I. 1. The Master said, 'The men of former times, in the
matters of ceremonies and music were rustics, it is said, while the
men of these latter times, in ceremonies and music, are
accomplished gentlemen.
        2. 'If I have occasion to use those things, I follow the men of
former times.'
        CHAP. II. 1. The Master said, 'Of those who were with me in
Ch'an and Ts'ai, there are none to be found to enter my door.'
        2. Distinguished for their virtuous principles and practice,
there were Yen Yuan, Min Tsze-ch'ien, Zan Po-niu, and Chung-kung;
for their ability in speech, Tsai Wo and Tsze-kung; for their
adminis-

trative talents, Zan Yu and Chi Lu; for their literary acquirements,
Tsze-yu and Tsze-hsia.
        CHAP. III. The Master said, 'Hui gives me no assistance. There
is nothing that I say in which he does not delight.'
        CHAP. IV. The Master said, 'Filial indeed is Min Tsze-ch'ien!
Other people say nothing of him different from the report of his
parents and brothers.'
        CHAP. V. Nan Yung was frequently repeating the lines about a
white scepter stone. Confucius gave him the daughter of his elder
brother to wife.

        CHAP. VI. Chi K'ang asked which of the disciples loved to
learn. Confucius replied to him, 'There was Yen Hui; he loved to
learn. Unfortunately his appointed time was short, and he died.
Now there is no one who loves to learn, as he did.'
        CHAP. VII. 1. When Yen Yuan died, Yen Lu begged the
carriage of the Master to sell and get an outer shell for his son's
coffin.
        2. The Master said, 'Every one calls his son his son, whether
he has talents or has not talents. There was Li; when he died, he
had a coffin but no outer shell. I would not walk on foot to get a
shell for him, because, having followed in the rear of the great
officers, it was not proper that I should walk on foot.'
        CHAP. VIII. When Yen Yuan died, the Master said, 'Alas!
Heaven is destroying me! Heaven is destroying me!'

        CHAP. IX. 1. When Yen Yuan died, the Master bewailed him
exceedingly, and the disciples who were with him said, 'Master,
your grief is excessive?'
        2. 'Is it excessive?' said he.
        3. 'If I am not to mourn bitterly for this man, for whom
should I mourn?'
        CHAP. X. 1. When Yen Yuan died, the disciples wished to give
him a great funeral, and the Master said, 'You may not do so.'
        2. The disciples did bury him in great style.
        3. The Master said, 'Hui behaved towards me as his father. I
have not been able to treat him as my son. The fault is not mine; it
belongs to you, O disciples.'
        CHAP. XI. Chi Lu asked about serving the spirits of the dead.
The Master said, 'While you are not able to serve men, how can you
serve their spirits?' Chi Lu added, 'I venture to ask about

death?' He was answered, 'While you do not know life, how can you
know about death?'
        CHAP. XII. 1. The disciple Min was standing by his side,
looking bland and precise; Tsze-lu, looking bold and soldierly; Zan
Yu and Tsze-kung, with a free and straightforward manner. The
Master was pleased.
        2. He said, 'Yu, there!-- he will not die a natural death.'
        CHAP. XIII. 1. Some parties in Lu were going to take down
and rebuild the Long Treasury.
        2. Min Tsze-ch'ien said, 'Suppose it were to be repaired after
its old style;-- why must it be altered and made anew?'
        3. The Master said, 'This man seldom speaks; when he does,
he is sure to hit the point.'

        CHAP. XIV. 1. The Master said, 'What has the lute of Yu to do
in my door?'
        2. The other disciples began not to respect Tsze-lu. The
Master said, 'Yu has ascended to the hall, though he has not yet
passed into the inner apartments.'
        CHAP. XV. 1. Tsze-kung asked which of the two, Shih or
Shang, was the superior. The Master said, 'Shih goes beyond the due
mean, and Shang does not come up to it.'
        2. 'Then,' said Tsze-kung, 'the superiority is with Shih, I
suppose.'
        3. The Master said, 'To go beyond is as wrong as to fall short.'
        CHAP. XVI. 1. The head of the Chi family was richer than the
duke of Chau had been, and yet Ch'iu collected his imposts for him,
and increased his wealth.

        2. The Master said, 'He is no disciple of mine. My little
children, beat the drum and assail him.'
        CHAP. XVII. 1. Ch'ai is simple.
        2. Shan is dull.
        3. Shih is specious.
        4. Yu is coarse.
        CHAP. XVIII. 1. The Master said, 'There is Hui! He has nearly
attained to perfect virtue. He is often in want.
        2. 'Ts'ze does not acquiesce in the appointments of Heaven,
and his goods are increased by him. Yet his judgments are often
correct.'
        CHAP. XIX. Tsze-chang asked what were the characteristics of

the GOOD man. The Master said, 'He does not tread in the footsteps
of others, but moreover, he does not enter the chamber of the sage.'
        CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'If, because a man's discourse
appears solid and sincere, we allow him to be a good man, is he
really a superior man? or is his gravity only in appearance?'
        CHAP. XXI. Tsze-lu asked whether he should immediately
carry into practice what he heard. The Master said, 'There are your
father and elder brothers to be consulted;-- why should you act on
that principle of immediately carrying into practice what you hear?'
Zan Yu asked the same, whether he should immediately carry into
practice what he heard, and the Master answered, 'Immediately
carry into practice what you hear.' Kung-hsi Hwa said, 'Yu asked
whether he should carry immediately into practice what he heard,
and you said, "There are your father and elder brothers to be
consulted." Ch'iu asked whether he should immediately carry into
practice what he heard, and you said, "Carry it immediately into
practice." I, Ch'ih, am perplexed, and venture to ask you for an
explanation.' The Master said, 'Ch'iu is retiring and slow; therefore,

I urged him forward. Yu has more than his own share of energy;
therefore I kept him back.'
        CHAP. XXII. The Master was put in fear in K'wang and Yen
Yuan fell behind. The Master, on his rejoining him, said, 'I thought
you had died.' Hui replied, 'While you were alive, how should I
presume to die?'
        CHAP. XXIII. 1. Chi Tsze-zan asked whether Chung Yu and Zan
Ch'iu could be called great ministers.
        2. The Master said, 'I thought you would ask about some
extraordinary individuals, and you only ask about Yu and Ch'iu!
        3. 'What is called a great minister, is one who serves his
prince according to what is right, and when he finds he cannot do
so, retires.

        4. 'Now, as to Yu and Ch'iu, they may be called ordinary
ministers.'
        5. Tsze-zan said, 'Then they will always follow their chief;--
will they?'
        6. The Master said, 'In an act of parricide or regicide, they
would not follow him.'
        CHAP. XXIV. 1. Tsze-lu got Tsze-kao appointed governor of Pi.
        2. The Master said, 'You are injuring a man's son.'
        3. Tsze-lu said, 'There are (there) common people and officers;
there are the altars of the spirits of the land and grain. Why must
one read books before he can be considered to have learned?'
        4. The Master said, 'It is on this account that I hate your
glib-tongued people.'
        CHAP. XXV. 1. Tsze-lu, Tsang Hsi, Zan Yu, and Kung-hsi Hwa
were sitting by the Master.
        2. He said to them, 'Though I am a day or so older than you,
do not think of that.

        3. 'From day to day you are saying, "We are not known." If
some ruler were to know you, what would you like to do?'
        4. Tsze-lu hastily and lightly replied, 'Suppose the case of a
State of ten thousand chariots; let it be straitened between other
large States; let it be suffering from invading armies; and to this let
there be added a famine in corn and in all vegetables:-- if I were
intrusted with the government of it, in three years' time I could
make the people to be bold, and to recognise the rules of righteous
conduct.' The Master smiled at him.
        5. Turning to Yen Yu, he said, 'Ch'iu, what are your wishes?'
Ch'iu replied, 'Suppose a state of sixty or seventy li square, or one
of fifty or sixty, and let me have the government of it;-- in three
years' time, I could make plenty to abound among the people. As to
teaching them the principles of propriety, and music, I must wait
for the rise of a superior man to do that.'

        6. 'What are your wishes, Ch'ih,' said the Master next to Kung-
hsi Hwa. Ch'ih replied, 'I do not say that my ability extends to these
things, but I should wish to learn them. At the services of the
ancestral temple, and at the audiences of the princes with the
sovereign, I should like, dressed in the dark square-made robe and
the black linen cap, to act as a small assistant.'
        7. Last of all, the Master asked Tsang Hsi, 'Tien, what are your
wishes?' Tien, pausing as he was playing on his lute, while it was
yet twanging, laid the instrument aside, and rose. 'My wishes,' he
said, 'are different from the cherished purposes of these three
gentlemen.' 'What harm is there in that?' said the Master; 'do you
also, as well as they, speak out your wishes.' Tien then said, 'In this,
the last month of spring, with the dress of the season all complete,
along with five or six young men who have assumed the cap, and
six or seven boys, I would wash in the I, enjoy the breeze among
the rain altars, and return home singing.' The Master heaved a sigh
and said, 'I give my approval to Tien.'

        8. The three others having gone out, Tsang Hsi remained
behind, and said, 'What do you think of the words of these three
friends?' The Master replied, 'They simply told each one his wishes.'
        9. Hsi pursued, 'Master, why did you smile at Yu?'
        10. He was answered, 'The management of a State demands
the rules of propriety. His words were not humble; therefore I
smiled at him.'
        11. Hsi again said, 'But was it not a State which Ch'iu proposed
for himself?' The reply was, 'Yes; did you ever see a territory of
sixty or seventy li or one of fifty or sixty, which was not a State?'
        12. Once more, Hsi inquired, 'And was it not a State which
Ch'ih proposed for himself?' The Master again replied, 'Yes; who but
princes have to do with ancestral temples, and with audiences but
the sovereign? If Ch'ih were to be a small assistant in these
services, who could be a great one?

BOOK XII. YEN YUAN.

        CHAP. I. 1. Yen Yuan asked about perfect virtue. The Master
said, 'To subdue one's self and return to propriety, is perfect virtue.
If a man can for one day subdue himself and return to propriety,
all under heaven will ascribe perfect virtue to him. Is the practice
of perfect virtue from a man himself, or is it from others?'
        2. Yen Yuan said, 'I beg to ask the steps of that process.' The
Master replied, 'Look not at what is contrary to propriety; listen not
to what is contrary to propriety; speak not what is contrary to
propriety; make no movement which is contrary to propriety.' Yen
Yuan then said, 'Though I am deficient in intelligence and vigour, I
will make it my business to practise this lesson.'

        CHAP. II. Chung-kung asked about perfect virtue. The Master
said, 'It is, when you go abroad, to behave to every one as if you
were receiving a great guest; to employ the people as if you were
assisting at a great sacrifice; not to do to others as you would not
wish done to yourself; to have no murmuring against you in the
country, and none in the family.' Chung-kung said, 'Though I am
deficient in intelligence and vigour, I will make it my business to
practise this lesson.'
        CHAP. III. 1. Sze-ma Niu asked about perfect virtue.
        2. The Master said, 'The man of perfect virtue is cautious and
slow in his speech.'

        3. 'Cautious and slow in his speech!' said Niu;-- 'is this what is
meant by perfect virtue?' The Master said, 'When a man feels the
difficulty of doing, can he be other than cautious and slow in
speaking?'
        CHAP. IV. 1. Sze-ma Niu asked about the superior man. The
Master said, 'The superior man has neither anxiety nor fear.'
        2. 'Being without anxiety or fear!' said Nui;-- 'does this
constitute what we call the superior man?'
        3. The Master said, 'When internal examination discovers
nothing wrong, what is there to be anxious about, what is there to
fear?'
        CHAP. V. 1. Sze-ma Niu, full of anxiety, said, 'Other men all
have their brothers, I only have not.'
        2. Tsze-hsia said to him, 'There is the following saying which I
have heard:--

        3. '"Death and life have their determined appointment; riches
and honours depend upon Heaven."
        4. 'Let the superior man never fail reverentially to order his
own conduct, and let him be respectful to others and observant of
propriety:-- then all within the four seas will be his brothers. What
has the superior man to do with being distressed because he has no
brothers?'
        CHAP. VI. Tsze-chang asked what constituted intelligence. The
Master said, 'He with whom neither slander that gradually soaks
into the mind, nor statements that startle like a wound in the flesh,
are successful, may be called intelligent indeed. Yea, he with whom
neither soaking slander, nor startling statements, are successful,
may be called farseeing.'

        CHAP. VII. 1. Tsze-kung asked about government. The Master
said, 'The requisites of government are that there be sufficiency of
food, sufficiency of military equipment, and the confidence of the
people in their ruler.'
        2. Tsze-kung said, 'If it cannot be helped, and one of these
must be dispensed with, which of the three should be foregone
first?' 'The military equipment,' said the Master.
        3. Tsze-kung again asked, 'If it cannot be helped, and one of
the remaining two must be dispensed with, which of them should
be foregone?' The Master answered, 'Part with the food. From of
old, death has been the lot of all men; but if the people have no
faith in their rulers, there is no standing for the state.'
        CHAP. VIII. 1. Chi Tsze-ch'ang said, 'In a superior man it is
only the substantial qualities which are wanted;-- why should we
seek for ornamental accomplishments?'

        2. Tsze-kung said, 'Alas! Your words, sir, show you to be a
superior man, but four horses cannot overtake the tongue.
        3. Ornament is as substance; substance is as ornament. The
hide of a tiger or a leopard stripped of its hair, is like the hide of a
dog or a goat stripped of its hair.'
        CHAP. IX. 1. The Duke Ai inquired of Yu Zo, saying, 'The year
is one of scarcity, and the returns for expenditure are not
sufficient;-- what is to be done?'
        2. Yu Zo replied to him, 'Why not simply tithe the people?'
        3. 'With two tenths, said the duke, 'I find it not enough;-- how
could I do with that system of one tenth?'
        4. Yu Zo answered, 'If the people have plenty, their prince will
not be left to want alone. If the people are in want, their prince
cannot enjoy plenty alone.'

        CHAP. X. 1. Tsze-chang having asked how virtue was to be
exalted, and delusions to be discovered, the Master said, 'Hold
faithfulness and sincerity as first principles, and be moving
continually to what is right;-- this is the way to exalt one's virtue.
        2. 'You love a man and wish him to live; you hate him and
wish him to die. Having wished him to live, you also wish him to
die. This is a case of delusion.
        3. '"It may not be on account of her being rich, yet you come
to make a difference."'
        CHAP. XI. 1. The Duke Ching, of Ch'i, asked Confucius about
government.
        2. Confucius replied, 'There is government, when the prince is
prince, and the minister is minister; when the father is father, and
the son is son.'
        3. 'Good!' said the duke; 'if, indeed; the prince be not prince,
the minister not minister, the father not father, and the son not son,
although I have my revenue, can I enjoy it?'

        CHAP. XII. 1. The Master said, 'Ah! it is Yu, who could with
half a word settle litigations!'
        2. Tsze-lu never slept over a promise.
        CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'In hearing litigations, I am like
any other body. What is necessary, however, is to cause the people
to have no litigations.'
        CHAP. XIV. Tsze-chang asked about government. The Master
said, 'The art of governing is to keep its affairs before the mind
without weariness, and to practise them with undeviating
consistency.'
        CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'By extensively studying all
learning, and keeping himself under the restraint of the rules of
propriety, one may thus likewise not err from what is right.'

        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'The superior man seeks to
perfect the admirable qualities of men, and does not seek to perfect
their bad qualities. The mean man does the opposite of this.'
        CHAP. XVII. Chi K'ang asked Confucius about government.
Confucius replied, 'To govern means to rectify. If you lead on the
people with correctness, who will dare not to be correct?'
        CHAP. XVIII. Chi K'ang, distressed about the number of
thieves in the state, inquired of Confucius how to do away with
them. Confucius said, 'If you, sir, were not covetous, although you
should reward them to do it, they would not steal.'
        CHAP. XIX. Chi K'ang asked Confucius about government,
saying, 'What do you say to killing the unprincipled for the good of
the principled?' Confucius replied, 'Sir, in carrying on your
government, why should you use killing at all? Let your evinced
desires be for what is good, and the people will be good. The
relation

between superiors and inferiors, is like that between the wind and
the grass. The grass must bend, when the wind blows across it.'
        CHAP. XX. 1. Tsze-chang asked, 'What must the officer be, who
may be said to be distinguished?'
        2. The Master said, 'What is it you call being distinguished?'
        3. Tsze-chang replied, 'It is to be heard of through the State,
to be heard of throughout his clan.'
        4. The Master said, 'That is notoriety, not distinction.
        5. 'Now the man of distinction is solid and straightforward,
and loves righteousness. He examines people's words, and looks at
their countenances. He is anxious to humble himself to others. Such
a man will be distinguished in the country; he will be distinguished
in his clan.
        6. 'As to the man of notoriety, he assumes the appearance of

virtue, but his actions are opposed to it, and he rests in this
character without any doubts about himself. Such a man will be
heard of in the country; he will be heard of in the clan.'
        CHAP. XXI. 1. Fan Ch'ih rambling with the Master under the
trees about the rain altars, said, 'I venture to ask how to exalt
virtue, to correct cherished evil, and to discover delusions.'
        2. The Master said, 'Truly a good question!
        3. 'If doing what is to be done be made the first business, and
success a secondary consideration;-- is not this the way to exalt
virtue? To assail one's own wickedness and not assail that of
others;-- is not this the way to correct cherished evil? For a
morning's anger to disregard one's own life, and involve that of his
parents;-- is not this a case of delusion?'
        CHAP. XXII. 1. Fan Ch'ih asked about benevolence. The Master
said, 'It is to love all men.' He asked about knowledge. The Master
said, 'It is to know all men.'

        2. Fan Ch'ih did not immediately understand these answers.
        3. The Master said, 'Employ the upright and put aside all the
crooked;-- in this way the crooked can be made to be upright.'
        4. Fan Ch'ih retired, and, seeing Tsze-hsia, he said to him, 'A
Little while ago, I had an interview with our Master, and asked him
about knowledge. He said, 'Employ the upright, and put aside all the
crooked;-- in this way, the crooked will be made to be upright.'
What did he mean?'
        5. Tsze-hsia said, 'Truly rich is his saying!
        6. 'Shun, being in possession of the kingdom, selected from
among all the people, and employed Kao-yao, on which all who
were devoid of virtue disappeared. T'ang, being in possession of the
kingdom, selected from among all the people, and employed I Yin,
and all who were devoid of virtue disappeared.'
        CHAP. XXIII. Tsze-kung asked about friendship. The Master
said, 'Faithfully admonish your friend, and skillfully lead him on. If
you find him impracticable, stop. Do not disgrace yourself.'

        CHAP. XXIV. The philosopher Tsang said, 'The superior man
on grounds of culture meets with his friends, and by their
friendship helps his virtue.'

BOOK XIII. TSZE-LU.

        CHAP. I. 1. Tsze-lu asked about government. The Master said,
'Go before the people with your example, and be laborious in their
affairs.'
        2. He requested further instruction, and was answered, 'Be
not weary (in these things).'
        CHAP. II. 1. Chung-kung, being chief minister to the Head of
the Chi family, asked about government. The Master said, 'Employ

first the services of your various officers, pardon small faults, and
raise to office men of virtue and talents.'
        2. Chung-kung said, 'How shall I know the men of virtue and
talent, so that I may raise them to office?' He was answered, 'Raise
to office those whom you know. As to those whom you do not know,
will others neglect them?'
        CHAP. III. 1. Tsze-lu said, 'The ruler of Wei has been waiting
for you, in order with you to administer the government. What will
you consider the first thing to be done?'
        2. The Master replied, 'What is necessary is to rectify names.'
        3. 'So, indeed!' said Tsze-lu. 'You are wide of the mark! Why
must there be such rectification?'
        4. The Master said, 'How uncultivated you are, Yu! A superior
man, in regard to what he does not know, shows a cautious reserve.
        5. 'If names be not correct, language is not in accordance with

the truth of things. If language be not in accordance with the truth
of things, affairs cannot be carried on to success.
        6. 'When affairs cannot be carried on to success, proprieties
and music will not flourish. When proprieties and music do not
flourish, punishments will not be properly awarded. When
punishments are not properly awarded, the people do not know
how to move hand or foot.
        7. 'Therefore a superior man considers it necessary that the
names he uses may be spoken appropriately, and also that what he
speaks may be carried out appropriately. What the superior man
requires, is just that in his words there may be nothing incorrect.'
        CHAP. IV. 1. Fan Ch'ih requested to be taught husbandry. The
Master said, 'I am not so good for that as an old husbandman.' He

requested also to be taught gardening, and was answered, 'I am not
so good for that as an old gardener.'
        2. Fan Ch'ih having gone out, the Master said, 'A small man,
indeed, is Fan Hsu!
        3. If a superior love propriety, the people will not dare not to
be reverent. If he love righteousness, the people will not dare not
to submit to his example. If he love good faith, the people will not
dare not to be sincere. Now, when these things obtain, the people
from all quarters will come to him, bearing their children on their
backs;-- what need has he of a knowledge of husbandry?'
        CHAP. V. The Master said, 'Though a man may be able to
recite the three hundred odes, yet if, when intrusted with a
governmental charge, he knows not how to act, or if, when sent to
any quarter on a mission, he cannot give his replies unassisted,
notwithstanding the extent of his learning, of what practical use is
it?'

        CHAP. VI. The Master said, 'When a prince's personal conduct
is correct, his government is effective without the issuing of orders.
If his personal conduct is not correct, he may issue orders, but they
will not be followed.'
        CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'The governments of Lu and Wei
are brothers.'
        CHAP. VIII. The Master said of Ching, a scion of the ducal
family of Wei, that he knew the economy of a family well. When he
began to have means, he said, 'Ha! here is a collection!' When they
were a little increased, he said, 'Ha! this is complete!' When he had
become rich, he said, 'Ha! this is admirable!'
        CHAP. IX. 1. When the Master went to Wei, Zan Yu acted as
driver of his carriage.
        2. The Master observed, 'How numerous are the people!'
        3. Yu said, 'Since they are thus numerous, what more shall be
done for them?' 'Enrich them,' was the reply.

        4. 'And when they have been enriched, what more shall be
done?' The Master said, 'Teach them.'
        CHAP. X. The Master said, 'If there were (any of the princes)
who would employ me, in the course of twelve months, I should
have done something considerable. In three years, the government
would be perfected.'
        CHAP. XI. The Master said, '"If good men were to govern a
country in succession for a hundred years, they would be able to
transform the violently bad, and dispense with capital
punishments." True indeed is this saying!'
        CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'If a truly royal ruler were to
arise, it would still require a generation, and then virtue would
prevail.'

        CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'If a minister make his own
conduct correct, what difficulty will he have in assisting in
government? If he cannot rectify himself, what has he to do with
rectifying others?'
        CHAP. XIV. The disciple Zan returning from the court, the
Master said to him, 'How are you so late?' He replied, 'We had
government business.' The Master said, 'It must have been family
affairs. If there had been government business, though I am not
now in office, I should have been consulted about it.'
        CHAP. XV. 1. The Duke Ting asked whether there was a single
sentence which could make a country prosperous. Confucius replied,
'Such an effect cannot be expected from one sentence.
        2. 'There is a saying, however, which people have-- "To be a
prince is difficult; to be a minister is not easy."
        3. 'If a ruler knows this,-- the difficulty of being a prince,--
may there not be expected from this one sentence the prosperity of
his country?'
        4. The duke then said, 'Is there a single sentence which can
ruin a country?' Confucius replied, 'Such an effect as that cannot be
expected from one sentence. There is, however, the saying which
people have-- "I have no pleasure in being a prince, but only in
that no one can offer any opposition to what I say!"
        5. 'If a ruler's words be good, is it not also good that no one
oppose them? But if they are not good, and no one opposes them,
may there not be expected from this one sentence the ruin of his
country?'
        CHAP. XVI. 1. The Duke of Sheh asked about government.
        2. The Master said, 'Good government obtains, when those
who are near are made happy, and those who are far off are
attracted.'

        CHAP. XVII. Tsze-hsia, being governor of Chu-fu, asked about
government. The Master said, 'Do not be desirous to have things
done quickly; do not look at small advantages. Desire to have things
done quickly prevents their being done thoroughly. Looking at
small advantages prevents great affairs from being accomplished.'
        CHAP. XVIII. 1. The Duke of Sheh informed Confucius, saying,
'Among us here there are those who may be styled upright in their
conduct. If their father have stolen a sheep, they will bear witness
to the fact.'
        2. Confucius said, 'Among us, in our part of the country, those
who are upright are different from this. The father conceals the
misconduct of the son, and the son conceals the misconduct of the
father. Uprightness is to be found in this.'

        CHAP. XIX. Fan Ch'ih asked about perfect virtue. The Master
said, 'It is, in retirement, to be sedately grave; in the management
of business, to be reverently attentive; in intercourse with others,
to be strictly sincere. Though a man go among rude, uncultivated
tribes, these qualities may not be neglected.'
        CHAP. XX. 1. Tsze-kung asked, saying, 'What qualities must a
man possess to entitle him to be called an officer? The Master said,
'He who in his conduct of himself maintains a sense of shame, and
when sent to any quarter will not disgrace his prince's commission,
deserves to be called an officer.'
        3. Tsze-kung pursued, 'I venture to ask who may be placed in
the next lower rank?' And he was told, 'He whom the circle of his
relatives pronounce to be filial, whom his fellow-villagers and
neighbours pronounce to be fraternal.'
        3. Again the disciple asked, 'I venture to ask about the class
still next in order.' The Master said, 'They are determined to be
sincere in what they say, and to carry out what they do. They are
obstinate little men. Yet perhaps they may make the next class.'

        4. Tsze-kung finally inquired, 'Of what sort are those of the
present day, who engage in government?' The Master said 'Pooh!
they are so many pecks and hampers, not worth being taken into
account.'
        CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'Since I cannot get men pursuing
the due medium, to whom I might communicate my instructions, I
must find the ardent and the cautiously-decided. The ardent will
advance and lay hold of truth; the cautiously-decided will keep
themselves from what is wrong.'
        CHAP. XXII. 1. The Master said, 'The people of the south have
a saying-- "A man without constancy cannot be either a wizard or a
doctor." Good!
        2. 'Inconstant in his virtue, he will be visited with disgrace.'

        3. The Master said, 'This arises simply from not attending to
the prognostication.'
        CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'The superior man is affable,
but not adulatory; the mean man is adulatory, but not affable.'
        CHAP. XXIV. Tsze-kung asked, saying, 'What do you say of a
man who is loved by all the people of his neighborhood?' The
Master replied, 'We may not for that accord our approval of him.'
'And what do you say of him who is hated by all the people of his
neighborhood?' The Master said, 'We may not for that conclude that
he is bad. It is better than either of these cases that the good in the
neighborhood love him, and the bad hate him.'
        CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'The superior man is easy to
serve and difficult to please. If you try to please him in any way
which is not accordant with right, he will not be pleased. But in his

employment of men, he uses them according to their capacity. The
mean man is difficult to serve, and easy to please. If you try to
please him, though it be in a way which is not accordant with right,
he may be pleased. But in his employment of men, he wishes them
to be equal to everything.'
        CHAP. XXVI. The Master said, 'The superior man has a
dignified ease without pride. The mean man has pride without a
dignified ease.'
        CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'The firm, the enduring, the
simple, and the modest are near to virtue.'
        CHAP. XXVIII. Tsze-lu asked, saying, 'What qualities must a
man possess to entitle him to be called a scholar?' The Master said,
'He must be thus,-- earnest, urgent, and bland:-- among his friends,
earnest and urgent; among his brethren, bland.'

        CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'Let a good man teach the
people seven years, and they may then likewise be employed in
war.'
        CHAP. XXX. The Master said, 'To lead an uninstructed people
to war, is to throw them away.'

BOOK XIV. HSIEN WAN.

        CHAP. I. Hsien asked what was shameful. The Master said,
'When good government prevails in a state, to be thinking only of
salary; and, when bad government prevails, to be thinking, in the
same way, only of salary;-- this is shameful.'

        CHAP. II. 1. 'When the love of superiority, boasting,
resentments, and covetousness are repressed, this may be deemed
perfect virtue.'
        2. The Master said, 'This may be regarded as the achievement
of what is difficult. But I do not know that it is to be deemed
perfect virtue.'
        CHAP. III. The Master said, 'The scholar who cherishes the
love of comfort is not fit to be deemed a scholar.'
        CHAP. IV. The Master said, 'When good government prevails
in a state, language may be lofty and bold, and actions the same.
When bad government prevails, the actions may be lofty and bold,
but the language may be with some reserve.'
        CHAP. V. The Master said, 'The virtuous will be sure to speak
correctly, but those whose speech is good may not always be
virtuous. Men of principle are sure to be bold, but those who are
bold may not always be men of principle.'

        CHAP. VI. Nan-kung Kwo, submitting an inquiry to Confucius,
said, 'I was skillful at archery, and Ao could move a boat along
upon the land, but neither of them died a natural death. Yu and Chi
personally wrought at the toils of husbandry, and they became
possessors of the kingdom.' The Master made no reply; but when
Nan-kung Kwo went out, he said, 'A superior man indeed is this! An
esteemer of virtue indeed is this!'
        CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'Superior men, and yet not
always virtuous, there have been, alas! But there never has been a
mean man, and, at the same time, virtuous.'

        CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'Can there be love which does
not lead to strictness with its object? Can there be loyalty which
does not lead to the instruction of its object?'
        CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'In preparing the governmental
notifications, P'i Shan first made the rough draft; Shi-shu
examined and discussed its contents; Tsze-yu, the manager of
Foreign intercourse, then polished the style; and, finally, Tsze-ch'an
of Tung-li gave it the proper elegance and finish.'
        CHAP. X. 1. Some one asked about Tsze-ch'an. The Master said,
'He was a kind man.'
        2. He asked about Tsze-hsi. The Master said, 'That man! That
man!'
        3. He asked about Kwan Chung. 'For him,' said the Master, 'the
city of Pien, with three hundred families, was taken from the chief
of the Po family, who did not utter a murmuring word, though, to
the end of his life, he had only coarse rice to eat.'

        CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'To be poor without murmuring is
difficult. To be rich without being proud is easy.'
        CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'Mang Kung-ch'o is more than fit
to be chief officer in the families of Chao and Wei, but he is not fit
to be great officer to either of the States Tang or Hsieh.'
        CHAP. XIII. 1. Tsze-lu asked what constituted a COMPLETE
man. The Master said, 'Suppose a man with the knowledge of Tsang
Wu-chung, the freedom from covetousness of Kung-ch'o, the
bravery of Chwang of Pien, and the varied talents of Zan Ch'iu; add
to these the accomplishments of the rules of propriety and music:--
such a one might be reckoned a COMPLETE man.'
        2. He then added, 'But what is the necessity for a complete
man of the present day to have all these things? The man, who in
the

view of gain, thinks of righteousness; who in the view of danger is
prepared to give up his life; and who does not forget an old
agreement however far back it extends:-- such a man may be
reckoned a COMPLETE man.'
        CHAP. XIV. 1. The Master asked Kung-ming Chia about Kung-
shu Wan, saying, 'Is it true that your master speaks not, laughs not,
and takes not?'
        2. Kung-ming Chia replied, 'This has arisen from the reporters
going beyond the truth.-- My master speaks when it is the time to
speak, and so men do not get tired of his speaking. He laughs when
there is occasion to be joyful, and so men do not get tired of his
laughing. He takes when it is consistent with righteousness to do so,
and so men do not get tired of his taking.' The Master said, 'So! But
is it so with him?'

        CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'Tsang Wu-chung, keeping
possession of Fang, asked of the duke of Lu to appoint a successor
to him in his family. Although it may be said that he was not using
force with his sovereign, I believe he was.'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'The duke Wan of Tsin was crafty
and not upright. The duke Hwan of Ch'i was upright and not crafty.'
        CHAP. XVII. 1. Tsze-lu said, 'The Duke Hwan caused his
brother Chiu to be killed, when Shao Hu died with his master, but
Kwan Chung did not die. May not I say that he was wanting in
virtue?'

        2. The Master said, 'The Duke Hwan assembled all the princes
together, and that not with weapons of war and chariots:-- it was
all through the influence of Kwan Chung. Whose beneficence was
like his? Whose beneficence was like his?'
        CHAP. XVIII. 1. Tsze-kung said, 'Kwan Chung, I apprehend,
was wanting in virtue. When the Duke Hwan caused his brother
Chiu to be killed, Kwan Chung was not able to die with him.
Moreover, he became prime minister to Hwan.'
        2. The Master said, 'Kwan Chung acted as prime minister to
the Duke Hwan, made him leader of all the princes, and united and
rectified the whole kingdom. Down to the present day, the people
enjoy the gifts which he conferred. But for Kwan Chung, we should
now be wearing our hair unbound, and the lappets of our coats
buttoning on the left side.
        3. 'Will you require from him the small fidelity of common

men and common women, who would commit suicide in a stream or
ditch, no one knowing anything about them?'
        CHAP. XIX. 1. The great officer, Hsien, who had been family-
minister to Kung-shu Wan, ascended to the prince's court in
company with Wan.
        2. The Master, having heard of it, said, 'He deserved to be
considered WAN (the accomplished).'
        CHAP. XX. 1. The Master was speaking about the unprincipled
course of the duke Ling of Wei, when Ch'i K'ang said, 'Since he is of
such a character, how is it he does not lose his State?'
        2. Confucius said, 'The Chung-shu Yu has the superintendence
of his guests and of strangers; the litanist, T'o, has the management

of his ancestral temple; and Wang-sun Chia has the direction of the
army and forces:-- with such officers as these, how should he lose
his State?'
        CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'He who speaks without modesty
will find it difficult to make his words good.'
        CHAP. XXII. 1. Chan Ch'ang murdered the Duke Chien of Ch'i.
        2. Confucius bathed, went to court, and informed the duke Ai,
saying, 'Chan Hang has slain his sovereign. I beg that you will
undertake to punish him.'
        3. The duke said, 'Inform the chiefs of the three families of it.'
        4. Confucius retired, and said, 'Following in the rear of the
great officers, I did not dare not to represent such a matter, and my
prince says, "Inform the chiefs of the three families of it."'
        5. He went to the chiefs, and informed them, but they would
not act. Confucius then said, 'Following in the rear of the great
officers, I did not dare not to represent such a matter.'
        CHAP. XXIII. Tsze-lu asked how a ruler should be served. The
Master said, 'Do not impose on him, and, moreover, withstand him
to his face.'
        CHAP. XXIV. The Master said, 'The progress of the superior
man is upwards; the progress of the mean man is downwards.'
        CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'In ancient times, men learned
with a view to their own improvement. Now-a-days, men learn
with a view to the approbation of others.'
        CHAP. XXVI. 1. Chu Po-yu sent a messenger with friendly
inquiries to Confucius.
        2. Confucius sat with him, and questioned him. 'What,' said he,
'is your master engaged in?' The messenger replied, 'My master is

anxious to make his faults few, but he has not yet succeeded.' He
then went out, and the Master said, 'A messenger indeed! A
messenger indeed!'
        CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'He who is not in any particular
office, has nothing to do with plans for the administration of its
duties.'
        CHAP. XXVIII. The philosopher Tsang said, 'The superior man,
in his thoughts, does not go out of his place.'
        CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'The superior man is modest in
his speech, but exceeds in his actions.'
        CHAP. XXX. 1. The Master said, 'The way of the superior man
is threefold, but I am not equal to it. Virtuous, he is free from
anxieties; wise, he is free from perplexities; bold, he is free from
fear.
        2. Tsze-kung said, 'Master, that is what you yourself say.'

        CHAP. XXXI. Tsze-kung was in the habit of comparing men
together. The Master said, 'Tsze must have reached a high pitch of
excellence! Now, I have not leisure for this.'
        CHAP. XXXII. The Master said, 'I will not be concerned at
men's not knowing me; I will be concerned at my own want of
ability.'
        CHAP. XXXIII. The Master said, 'He who does not anticipate
attempts to deceive him, nor think beforehand of his not being
believed, and yet apprehends these things readily (when they
occur);-- is he not a man of superior worth?'
        CHAP. XXXIV. 1. Wei-shang Mau said to Confucius, 'Ch'iu, how
is it that you keep roosting about? Is it not that you are an
insinuating talker?'
        2. Confucius said, 'I do not dare to play the part of such a
talker, but I hate obstinacy.'

        CHAP. XXXV. The Master said, 'A horse is called a ch'i, not
because of its strength, but because of its other good qualities.'
        CHAP. XXXVI. 1. Some one said, 'What do you say concerning
the principle that injury should be recompensed with kindness?'
        2. The Master said, 'With what then will you recompense
kindness?
        3. 'Recompense injury with justice, and recompense kindness
with kindness.'
        CHAP. XXXVII. 1. The Master said, 'Alas! there is no one that
knows me.'
        2. Tsze-kung said, 'What do you mean by thus saying-- that
no one knows you?' The Master replied, 'I do not murmur against

Heaven. I do not grumble against men. My studies lie low, and my
penetration rises high. But there is Heaven;-- that knows me!'
        CHAP. XXXVIII. 1. The Kung-po Liao, having slandered Tsze-lu
to Chi-sun, Tsze-fu Ching-po informed Confucius of it, saying, 'Our
master is certainly being led astray by the Kung-po Liao, but I have
still power enough left to cut Liao off, and expose his corpse in the
market and in the court.'
        2. The Master said, 'If my principles are to advance, it is so
ordered. If they are to fall to the ground, it is so ordered. What can
the Kung-po Liao do where such ordering is concerned?'

        CHAP. XXXIX. 1. The Master said, 'Some men of worth retire
from the world.
        2. Some retire from particular states.
        3. Some retire because of disrespectful looks.
        4. Some retire because of contradictory language.'
        CHAP. XL.  The Master said, 'Those who have done this are
seven men.'
        CHAP. XLI. Tsze-lu happening to pass the night in Shih-man,
the gatekeeper said to him, 'Whom do you come from?' Tsze-lu said,
'From Mr. K'ung.' 'It is he,-- is it not?'-- said the other, 'who knows
the impracticable nature of the times and yet will be doing in
them.'
        CHAP. XLII. 1. The Master was playing, one day, on a musical
stone in Wei, when a man, carrying a straw basket, passed the door

of the house where Confucius was, and said, 'His heart is full who so
beats the musical stone.'
        2. A little while after, he added, 'How contemptible is the
one-ideaed obstinacy those sounds display! When one is taken no
notice of, he has simply at once to give over his wish for public
employment. "Deep water must be crossed with the clothes on;
shallow water may be crossed with the clothes held up."'
        3. The Master said, 'How determined is he in his purpose! But
this is not difficult!'
        CHAP. XLIII. 1. Tsze-chang said, 'What is meant when the Shu
says that Kao-tsung, while observing the usual imperial mourning,
was for three years without speaking?'
        2. The Master said, 'Why must Kao-tsung be referred to as an
example of this? The ancients all did so. When the sovereign died,
the officers all attended to their several duties, taking instructions
from the prime minister for three years.'

        CHAP. XLIV. The Master said, 'When rulers love to observe
the rules of propriety, the people respond readily to the calls on
them for service.'
        CHAP. XLV. Tsze-lu asked what constituted the superior man.
The Master said, 'The cultivation of himself in reverential
carefulness.' 'And is this all?' said Tsze-lu. 'He cultivates himself so
as to give rest to others,' was the reply. 'And is this all?' again
asked Tsze-lu. The Master said, 'He cultivates himself so as to give
rest to all the people. He cultivates himself so as to give rest to all
the people:-- even Yao and Shun were still solicitous about this.'
        CHAP. XLVI. Yuan Zang was squatting on his heels, and

so waited the approach of the Master, who said to him, 'In youth
not humble as befits a junior; in manhood, doing nothing worthy of
being handed down; and living on to old age:-- this is to be a pest.'
With this he hit him on the shank with his staff.
        CHAP. XLVI. 1. A youth of the village of Ch'ueh was employed
by Confucius to carry the messages between him and his visitors.
Some one asked about him, saying, 'I suppose he has made great
progress.'
        2. The Master said, 'I observe that he is fond of occupying the
seat of a full-grown man; I observe that he walks shoulder to
shoulder with his elders. He is not one who is seeking to make
progress in learning. He wishes quickly to become a man.'

BOOK XV. WEI LING KUNG.

        CHAP. I. 1. The Duke Ling of Wei asked Confucius about
tactics. Confucius replied, 'I have heard all about sacrificial vessels,
but I have not learned military matters.' On this, he took his
departure the next day.
        2. When he was in Chan, their provisions were exhausted, and
his followers became so ill that they were unable to rise.
        3. Tsze-lu, with evident dissatisfaction, said, 'Has the superior
man likewise to endure in this way?' The Master said, 'The superior
man may indeed have to endure want, but the mean man, when he
is in want, gives way to unbridled license.'

        CHAP. II. 1. The Master said, 'Ts'ze, you think, I suppose, that
I am one who learns many things and keeps them in memory?'
        2. Tsze-kung replied, 'Yes,-- but perhaps it is not so?'
        3. 'No,' was the answer; 'I seek a unity all-pervading.'
        CHAP. III. The Master said, 'Yu, those who know virtue are
few.'
        CHAP. IV. The Master said, 'May not Shun be instanced as
having governed efficiently without exertion? What did he do? He
did nothing but gravely and reverently occupy his royal seat.'
        CHAP. V. 1. Tsze-chang asked how a man should conduct
himself, so as to be everywhere appreciated.
        2. The Master said, 'Let his words be sincere and truthful, and
his actions honourable and careful;-- such conduct may be practised
among the rude tribes of the South or the North. If his words be

not sincere and truthful and his actions not honourable and careful,
will he, with such conduct, be appreciated, even in his
neighborhood?
        3. 'When he is standing, let him see those two things, as it
were, fronting him. When he is in a carriage, let him see them
attached to the yoke. Then may he subsequently carry them into
practice.'
        4. Tsze-chang wrote these counsels on the end of his sash.
        CHAP. VI. 1. The Master said, 'Truly straightforward was the
historiographer Yu. When good government prevailed in his State,
he was like an arrow. When bad government prevailed, he was like
an arrow.
        2. A superior man indeed is Chu Po-yu! When good
government prevails in his state, he is to be found in office. When
bad government prevails, he can roll his principles up, and keep
them in his breast.'

        CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'When a man may be spoken
with, not to speak to him is to err in reference to the man. When a
man may not be spoken with, to speak to him is to err in reference
to our words. The wise err neither in regard to their man nor to
their words.'
        CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'The determined scholar and the
man of virtue will not seek to live at the expense of injuring their
virtue. They will even sacrifice their lives to preserve their virtue
complete.'
        CHAP. IX. Tsze-kung asked about the practice of virtue. The
Master said, 'The mechanic, who wishes to do his work well, must
first sharpen his tools. When you are living in any state, take
service with the most worthy among its great officers, and make
friends of the most virtuous among its scholars.'
        CHAP. X. 1. Yen Yuan asked how the government of a country
should be administered.
        2. The Master said, 'Follow the seasons of Hsia.

        3. 'Ride in the state carriage of Yin.
        4. 'Wear the ceremonial cap of Chau.
        5. 'Let the music be the Shao with its pantomimes.
        6. Banish the songs of Chang, and keep far from specious
talkers. The songs of Chang are licentious; specious talkers are
dangerous.'
        CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'If a man take no thought about
what is distant, he will find sorrow near at hand.'
        CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'It is all over! I have not seen one
who loves virtue as he loves beauty.'
        CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'Was not Tsang Wan like one
who had stolen his situation? He knew the virtue and the talents

of Hui of Liu-hsia, and yet did not procure that he should stand
with him in court.'
        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'He who requires much from
himself and little from others, will keep himself from being the
object of resentment.'
        CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'When a man is not in the habit of
saying-- "What shall I think of this? What shall I think of this?" I
can indeed do nothing with him!'
        CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'When a number of people are
together, for a whole day, without their conversation turning on
righteousness, and when they are fond of carrying out the
suggestions of a small shrewdness;-- theirs is indeed a hard case.'
        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'The superior man in everything
considers righteousness to be essential. He performs it according to
the rules of propriety. He brings it forth in humility. He completes it
with sincerity. This is indeed a superior man.'

        CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'The superior man is distressed
by his want of ability. He is not distressed by men's not knowing
him.'
        CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'The superior man dislikes the
thought of his name not being mentioned after his death.'
        CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'What the superior man seeks, is
in himself. What the mean man seeks, is in others.'
        CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'The superior man is dignified,
but does not wrangle. He is sociable, but not a partizan.'
        CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'The superior man does not
promote a man simply on account of his words, nor does he put
aside good words because of the man.'

        CHAP. XXIII. Tsze-kung asked, saying, 'Is there one word
which may serve as a rule of practice for all one's life?' The Master
said, 'Is not RECIPROCITY such a word? What you do not want done
to yourself, do not do to others.'
        CHAP. XXIV. 1. The Master said, 'In my dealings with men,
whose evil do I blame, whose goodness do I praise, beyond what is
proper? If I do sometimes exceed in praise, there must be ground
for it in my examination of the individual.
        2. 'This people supplied the ground why the three dynasties
pursued the path of straightforwardness.'
        CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'Even in my early days, a
historiographer would leave a blank in his text, and he who had a
horse would lend him to another to ride. Now, alas! there are no
such things.'

        CHAP. XXVI. The Master said, 'Specious words confound
virtue. Want of forbearance in small matters confounds great plans.'
        CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'When the multitude hate a
man, it is necessary to examine into the case. When the multitude
like a man, it is necessary to examine into the case.'
        CHAP. XXVIII. The Master said, 'A man can enlarge the
principles which he follows; those principles do not enlarge the
man.'
        CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'To have faults and not to
reform them,-- this, indeed, should be pronounced having faults.'
        CHAP. XXX. The Master said, 'I have been the whole day

without eating, and the whole night without sleeping:-- occupied
with thinking. It was of no use. The better plan is to learn.'
        CHAP. XXXI. The Master said, 'The object of the superior man
is truth. Food is not his object. There is plowing;-- even in that
there is sometimes want. So with learning;-- emolument may be
found in it. The superior man is anxious lest he should not get truth;
he is not anxious lest poverty should come upon him.'
        CHAP. XXXII. 1. The Master said, 'When a man's knowledge is
sufficient to attain, and his virtue is not sufficient to enable him to
hold, whatever he may have gained, he will lose again.
        2. 'When his knowledge is sufficient to attain, and he has
virtue enough to hold fast, if he cannot govern with dignity, the
people will not respect him.
        3. 'When his knowledge is sufficient to attain, and he has
virtue enough to hold fast; when he governs also with dignity, yet if
he try to move the people contrary to the rules of propriety:-- full
excellence is not reached.'

        CHAP. XXXIII. The Master said, 'The superior man cannot be
known in little matters; but he may be intrusted with great
concerns. The small man may not be intrusted with great concerns,
but he may be known in little matters.'
        CHAP. XXXIV. The Master said, 'Virtue is more to man than
either water or fire. I have seen men die from treading on water
and fire, but I have never seen a man die from treading the course
of virtue.'
        CHAP. XXXV. The Master said, 'Let every man consider virtue
as what devolves on himself. He may not yield the performance of
it even to his teacher.'

        CHAP. XXXVI. The Master said, 'The superior man is correctly
firm, and not firm merely.'
        CHAP. XXXVII. The Master said, 'A minister, in serving his
prince, reverently discharges his duties, and makes his emolument
a secondary consideration.'
        CHAP. XXXVIII. The Master said, 'In teaching there should be
no distinction of classes.'
        CHAP. XXXIX. The Master said, 'Those whose courses are
different cannot lay plans for one another.'
        CHAP. XL. The Master said, 'In language it is simply required
that it convey the meaning.'
        CHAP. XLI. 1. The Music-master, Mien, having called upon
him, when they came to the steps, the Master said, 'Here are the
steps.' When they came to the mat for the guest to sit upon, he

said, 'Here is the mat.' When all were seated, the Master informed
him, saying, 'So and so is here; so and so is here.'
        2. The Music-master, Mien, having gone out, Tsze-chang
asked, saying. 'Is it the rule to tell those things to the Music-
master?'
        3. The Master said, 'Yes. This is certainly the rule for those
who lead the blind.'

BOOK XVI. KE SHE.

        CHAP. I. 1. The head of the Chi family was going to attack
Chwan-yu.
        2. Zan Yu and Chi-lu had an interview with Confucius, and
said, 'Our chief, Chi, is going to commence operations against
Chwan-yu.'
        3. Confucius said, 'Ch'iu, is it not you who are in fault here?
        4. 'Now, in regard to Chwan-yu, long ago, a former king
appointed its ruler to preside over the sacrifices to the eastern
Mang; moreover, it is in the midst of the territory of our State; and
its ruler is a minister in direct connexion with the sovereign:--
What has your chief to do with attacking it?'
        5. Zan Yu said, 'Our master wishes the thing; neither of us two
ministers wishes it.'
        6. Confucius said, 'Ch'iu, there are the words of Chau Zan,--
"When he can put forth his ability, he takes his place in the ranks of
office; when he finds himself unable to do so, he retires from it.
How can he be used as a guide to a blind man, who does not
support him when tottering, nor raise him up when fallen?"
        7. 'And further, you speak wrongly. When a tiger or
rhinoceros escapes from his cage; when a tortoise or piece of jade is
injured in its repository:-- whose is the fault?'
        8. Zan Yu said, 'But at present, Chwan-yu is strong and near to
Pi; if our chief do not now take it, it will hereafter be a sorrow to
his descendants.'
        9. Confucius said. 'Ch'iu, the superior man hates that declining
to say-- "I want such and such a thing," and framing explanations
for the conduct.
        10. 'I have heard that rulers of States and chiefs of families
are not troubled lest their people should be few, but are troubled
lest they should not keep their several places; that they are not
troubled with fears of poverty, but are troubled with fears of a
want of contented repose among the people in their several places.
For when the people keep their several places, there will be no
poverty; when harmony prevails, there will be no scarcity of
people; and when there is such a contented repose, there will be no
rebellious upsettings.
        11. 'So it is.-- Therefore, if remoter people are not submissive,
all

the influences of civil culture and virtue are to be cultivated to
attract them to be so; and when they have been so attracted, they
must be made contented and tranquil.
        12. 'Now, here are you, Yu and Ch'iu, assisting your chief.
Remoter people are not submissive, and, with your help, he cannot
attract them to him. In his own territory there are divisions and
downfalls, leavings and separations, and, with your help, he cannot
preserve it.
        13. 'And yet he is planning these hostile movements within
the State.-- I am afraid that the sorrow of the Chi-sun family will
not be on account of Chwan-yu, but will be found within the screen
of their own court.'

        CHAP. II. 1. Confucius said, 'When good government prevails
in the empire, ceremonies, music, and punitive military expeditions
proceed from the son of Heaven. When bad government prevails in
the empire, ceremonies, music, and punitive military expeditions
proceed from the princes. When these things proceed from the
princes, as a rule, the cases will be few in which they do not lose
their power in ten generations. When they proceed from the Great
officers of the princes, as a rule, the cases will be few in which they
do not lose their power in five generations. When the subsidiary
ministers of the great officers hold in their grasp the orders of the
state, as a rule, the cases will be few in which they do not lose their
power in three generations.
        2. 'When right principles prevail in the kingdom, government
will not be in the hands of the Great officers.
        3. 'When right principles prevail in the kingdom, there will be
no discussions among the common people.'

        CHAP. III. Confucius said, 'The revenue of the state has left
the ducal House now for five generations. The government has been
in the hands of the Great officers for four generations. On this
account, the descendants of the three Hwan are much reduced.'
        CHAP. IV. Confucius said, 'There are three friendships which
are advantageous, and three which are injurious. Friendship with
the upright; friendship with the sincere; and friendship with the
man of much observation:-- these are advantageous. Friendship
with the man of specious airs; friendship with the insinuatingly
soft; and friendship with the glib-tongued:-- these are injurious.'
        CHAP. V. Confucius said, 'There are three things men find
enjoyment in which are advantageous, and three things they find
enjoyment in which are injurious. To find enjoyment in the
discriminating study of ceremonies and music; to find enjoyment in

speaking of the goodness of others; to find enjoyment in having
many worthy friends:-- these are advantageous. To find enjoyment
in extravagant pleasures; to find enjoyment in idleness and
sauntering; to find enjoyment in the pleasures of feasting:-- these
are injurious.'
        CHAP. VI. Confucius said, 'There are three errors to which
they who stand in the presence of a man of virtue and station are
liable. They may speak when it does not come to them to speak;--
this is called rashness. They may not speak when it comes to them
to speak;-- this is called concealment. They may speak without
looking at the countenance of their superior;-- this is called
blindness.'
        CHAP. VII. Confucius said, 'There are three things which the
superior man guards against. In youth, when the physical powers

are not yet settled, he guards against lust. When he is strong and
the physical powers are full of vigor, he guards against
quarrelsomeness. When he is old, and the animal powers are
decayed, he guards against covetousness.'
        CHAP. VIII. 1. Confucius said, 'There are three things of which
the superior man stands in awe. He stands in awe of the ordinances
of Heaven. He stands in awe of great men. He stands in awe of the
words of sages.
        2. 'The mean man does not know the ordinances of Heaven,
and consequently does not stand in awe of them. He is disrespectful
to great men. He makes sport of the words of sages.'
        CHAP. IX. Confucius said, 'Those who are born with the
possession of knowledge are the highest class of men. Those who
learn, and so, readily, get possession of knowledge, are the next.

Those who are dull and stupid, and yet compass the learning, are
another class next to these. As to those who are dull and stupid and
yet do not learn;-- they are the lowest of the people.'
        CHAP. X. Confucius said, 'The superior man has nine things
which are subjects with him of thoughtful consideration. In regard
to the use of his eyes, he is anxious to see clearly. In regard to the
use of his ears, he is anxious to hear distinctly. In regard to his
countenance, he is anxious that it should be benign. In regard to his
demeanor, he is anxious that it should be respectful. In regard to
his speech, he is anxious that it should be sincere. In regard to his
doing of business, he is anxious that it should be reverently careful.
In regard to what he doubts about, he is anxious to question others.
When he is angry, he thinks of the difficulties (his anger may
involve him in). When he sees gain to be got, he thinks of
righteousness.'
        CHAP. XI. 1. Confucius said, 'Contemplating good, and pursuing
it, as if they could not reach it; contemplating evil, and shrinking
from it, as they would from thrusting the hand into boiling water:--
I have seen such men, as I have heard such words.
        2. 'Living in retirement to study their aims, and practising

righteousness to carry out their principles:-- I have heard these
words, but I have not seen such men.'
        CHAP. XII. 1. The duke Ching of Ch'i had a thousand teams,
each of four horses, but on the day of his death, the people did not
praise him for a single virtue. Po-i and Shu-ch'i died of hunger at
the foot of the Shau-yang mountain, and the people, down to the
present time, praise them.
        2. 'Is not that saying illustrated by this?'

        CHAP. XIII. 1. Ch'an K'ang asked Po-yu, saying, 'Have you
heard any lessons from your father different from what we have all
heard?'
        2. Po-yu replied, 'No. He was standing alone once, when I
passed below the hall with hasty steps, and said to me, "Have you
learned the Odes?" On my replying "Not yet," he added, "If you do
not learn the Odes, you will not be fit to converse with." I retired
and studied the Odes.

        3. 'Another day, he was in the same way standing alone, when
I passed by below the hall with hasty steps, and said to me, 'Have
you learned the rules of Propriety?' On my replying 'Not yet,' he
added, 'If you do not learn the rules of Propriety, your character
cannot be established.' I then retired, and learned the rules of
Propriety.
        4. 'I have heard only these two things from him.'
        5. Ch'ang K'ang retired, and, quite delighted, said, 'I asked one
thing, and I have got three things. I have heard about the Odes. I
have heard about the rules of Propriety. I have also heard that the
superior man maintains a distant reserve towards his son.'
        CHAP. XIV. The wife of the prince of a state is called by him
FU ZAN. She calls herself HSIAO T'UNG. The people of the State call

her CHUN FU ZAN, and, to the people of other States, they call her
K'WA HSIAO CHUN. The people of other states also call her CHUN FU
ZAN.

BOOK XVII. YANG HO.

        CHAP. I. 1. Yang Ho wished to see Confucius, but Confucius
would not go to see him. On this, he sent a present of a pig to
Confucius, who, having chosen a time when Ho was not at home,
went to pay his respects for the gift. He met him, however, on the
way.
        2. Ho said to Confucius, 'Come, let me speak with you.' He then
asked, 'Can he be called benevolent who keeps his jewel in his

bosom, and leaves his country to confusion?' Confucius replied, 'No.'
'Can he be called wise, who is anxious to be engaged in public
employment, and yet is constantly losing the opportunity of being
so?' Confucius again said, 'No.' 'The days and months are passing
away; the years do not wait for us.' Confucius said, 'Right; I will go
into office.'
        CHAP. II. The Master said, 'By nature, men are nearly alike;
by practice, they get to be wide apart.'
        CHAP. III. The Master said, 'There are only the wise of the
highest class, and the stupid of the lowest class, who cannot be
changed.'

        CHAP. IV. 1. The Master, having come to Wu-ch'ang, heard
there the sound of stringed instruments and singing.
        2. Well pleased and smiling, he said, 'Why use an ox knife to
kill a fowl?'
        3. Tsze-yu replied, 'Formerly, Master, I heard you say,--
"When the man of high station is well instructed, he loves men;
when the man of low station is well instructed, he is easily ruled."'
        4. The Master said, 'My disciples, Yen's words are right. What
I said was only in sport.'
        CHAP. V. Kung-shan Fu-zao, when he was holding Pi, and in
an attitude of rebellion, invited the Master to visit him, who was
rather inclined to go.
        2. Tsze-lu was displeased, and said, 'Indeed, you cannot go!
Why must you think of going to see Kung-shan?'

        3. The Master said, 'Can it be without some reason that he has
invited ME? If any one employ me, may I not make an eastern
Chau?'
        CHAP. VI. Tsze-chang asked Confucius about perfect virtue.
Confucius said, 'To be able to practise five things everywhere under
heaven constitutes perfect virtue.' He begged to ask what they
were, and was told, 'Gravity, generosity of soul, sincerity,
earnestness, and kindness. If you are grave, you will not be treated
with disrespect. If you are generous, you will win all. If you are
sincere, people will repose trust in you. If you are earnest, you will
accomplish much. If you are kind, this will enable you to employ
the services of others.

        CHAP. VII. 1. Pi Hsi inviting him to visit him, the Master was
inclined to go.
        2. Tsze-lu said, 'Master, formerly I have heard you say,
"When a man in his own person is guilty of doing evil, a superior
man will not associate with him." Pi Hsi is in rebellion, holding
possession of Chung-mau; if you go to him, what shall be said?'
        3. The Master said, 'Yes, I did use these words. But is it not
said, that, if a thing be really hard, it may be ground without being
made thin? Is it not said, that, if a thing be really white, it may be
steeped in a dark fluid without being made black?
        4. 'Am I a bitter gourd! How can I be hung up out of the way
of being eaten?'

        CHAP. VIII. 1. The Master said, 'Yu, have you heard the six
words to which are attached six becloudings?' Yu replied, 'I have
not.'
        2. 'Sit down, and I will tell them to you.
        3. 'There is the love of being benevolent without the love of
learning;-- the beclouding here leads to a foolish simplicity. There is
the love of knowing without the love of learning;-- the beclouding
here leads to dissipation of mind. There is the love of being sincere
without the love of learning;-- the beclouding here leads to an
injurious disregard of consequences. There is the love of
straightforwardness without the love of learning;-- the beclouding
here leads to rudeness. There is the love of boldness without the
love of learning;-- the beclouding here leads to insubordination.
There is the love of firmness without the love of learning;-- the
beclouding here leads to extravagant conduct.'

        CHAP. IX. 1. The Master said, 'My children, why do you not
study the Book of Poetry?
        2. 'The Odes serve to stimulate the mind.
        3. 'They may be used for purposes of self-contemplation.
        4. 'They teach the art of sociability.
        5. 'They show how to regulate feelings of resentment.
        6. 'From them you learn the more immediate duty of serving
one's father, and the remoter one of serving one's prince.
        7. 'From them we become largely acquainted with the names
of birds, beasts, and plants.'
        CHAP. X. The Master said to Po-yu, 'Do you give yourself to
the Chau-nan and the Shao-nan. The man who has not studied the
Chau-nan and the Shao-nan, is like one who stands with his face
right against a wall. Is he not so?'

        CHAP. XI. The Master said, '"It is according to the rules of
propriety," they say.-- "It is according to the rules of propriety,"
they say. Are gems and silk all that is meant by propriety? "It is
music," they say.-- "It is music," they say. Are bells and drums all
that is meant by music?'
        CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'He who puts on an appearance of
stern firmness, while inwardly he is weak, is like one of the small,
mean people;-- yea, is he not like the thief who breaks through, or
climbs over, a wall?'
        CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'Your good, careful people of the
villages are the thieves of virtue.'
        CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'To tell, as we go along, what we
have heard on the way, is to cast away our virtue.'

        CHAP. XV. 1. The Master said, 'There are those mean
creatures! How impossible it is along with them to serve one's
prince!
        2. 'While they have not got their aims, their anxiety is how to
get them. When they have got them, their anxiety is lest they
should lose them.
        3. 'When they are anxious lest such things should be lost,
there is nothing to which they will not proceed.'
        CHAP. XVI. 1. The Master said, 'Anciently, men had three
failings, which now perhaps are not to be found.
        2. 'The high-mindedness of antiquity showed itself in a
disregard of small things; the high-mindedness of the present day
shows itself in wild license. The stern dignity of antiquity showed
itself in grave reserve; the stern dignity of the present day shows
itself in quarrelsome perverseness. The stupidity of antiquity
showed itself in straightforwardness; the stupidity of the present
day shows itself in sheer deceit.'

        CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'Fine words and an insinuating
appearance are seldom associated with virtue.'
        CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'I hate the manner in which
purple takes away the luster of vermilion. I hate the way in which
the songs of Chang confound the music of the Ya. I hate those who
with their sharp mouths overthrow kingdoms and families.'
        CHAP. XIX. 1. The Master said, 'I would prefer not speaking.'
        2. Tsze-kung said, 'If you, Master, do not speak, what shall
we, your disciples, have to record?'
        3. The Master said, 'Does Heaven speak? The four seasons
pursue their courses, and all things are continually being produced,
but does Heaven say anything?'

        CHAP. XX. Zu Pei wished to see Confucius, but Confucius
declined, on the ground of being sick, to see him. When the bearer
of this message went out at the door, (the Master) took his lute and
sang to it, in order that Pei might hear him.
        CHAP. XXI. 1. Tsai Wo asked about the three years' mourning
for parents, saying that one year was long enough.
        2. 'If the superior man,' said he, 'abstains for three years from
the observances of propriety, those observances will be quite lost.
If for three years he abstains from music, music will be ruined.
        3. 'Within a year the old grain is exhausted, and the new grain
has sprung up, and, in procuring fire by friction, we go through all
the changes of wood for that purpose. After a complete year, the
mourning may stop.'
        4. The Master said, 'If you were, after a year, to eat good rice,
and wear embroidered clothes, would you feel at ease?' 'I should,'
replied Wo.

        5. The Master said, 'If you can feel at ease, do it. But a
superior man, during the whole period of mourning, does not enjoy
pleasant food which he may eat, nor derive pleasure from music
which he may hear. He also does not feel at ease, if he is
comfortably lodged. Therefore he does not do what you propose.
But now you feel at ease and may do it.'
        6. Tsai Wo then went out, and the Master said, 'This shows
Yu's want of virtue. It is not till a child is three years old that it is
allowed to leave the arms of its parents. And the three years'
mourning is universally observed throughout the empire. Did Yu
enjoy the three years' love of his parents?'

        CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'Hard is it to deal with him, who
will stuff himself with food the whole day, without applying his
mind to anything good! Are there not gamesters and chess players?
To be one of these would still be better than doing nothing at all.'
        CHAP. XXIII. Tsze-lu said, 'Does the superior man esteem
valour?' The Master said, 'The superior man holds righteousness to
be of highest importance. A man in a superior situation, having
valour without righteousness, will be guilty of insubordination; one
of the lower people having valour without righteousness, will
commit robbery.'
        CHAP. XXIV. 1. Tsze-kung said, 'Has the superior man his
hatreds also?' The Master said, 'He has his hatreds. He hates those
who proclaim the evil of others. He hates the man who,

being in a low station, slanders his superiors. He hates those who
have valour merely, and are unobservant of propriety. He hates
those who are forward and determined, and, at the same time, of
contracted understanding.'
        2. The Master then inquired, 'Ts'ze, have you also your
hatreds?' Tsze-kung replied, 'I hate those who pry out matters, and
ascribe the knowledge to their wisdom. I hate those who are only
not modest, and think that they are valourous. I hate those who
make known secrets, and think that they are straightforward.'
        CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'Of all people, girls and servants
are the most difficult to behave to. If you are familiar with them,
they lose their humility. If you maintain a reserve towards them,
they are discontented.'
        CHAP. XXVI. The Master said, 'When a man at forty is the
object of dislike, he will always continue what he is.'

BOOK XVIII. WEI TSZE.

        CHAP. I. 1. The Viscount of Wei withdrew from the court. The
Viscount of Chi became a slave to Chau. Pi-kan remonstrated with
him and died.
        2. Confucius said, 'The Yin dynasty possessed these three men
of virtue.'
        CHAP. II. Hui of Liu-hsia being chief criminal judge, was
thrice dismissed from his office. Some one said to him, 'Is it not yet
time for you, sir, to leave this?' He replied, 'Serving men in an
upright way, where shall I go to, and not experience such a thrice-
repeated

dismissal? If I choose to serve men in a crooked way, what
necessity is there for me to leave the country of my parents?'
        CHAP. III. The duke Ching of Ch'i, with reference to the
manner in which he should treat Confucius, said, 'I cannot treat him
as I would the chief of the Chi family. I will treat him in a manner
between that accorded to the chief of the Chi, and that given to the
chief of the Mang family.' He also said, 'I am old; I cannot use his
doctrines.' Confucius took his departure.
        CHAP. IV. The people of Ch'i sent to Lu a present of female
musicians, which Chi Hwan received, and for three days no court
was held. Confucius took his departure.
        CHAP. V. 1. The madman of Ch'u, Chieh-yu, passed by
Confucius, singing and saying, 'O FANG! O FANG! How is your

virtue degenerated! As to the past, reproof is useless; but the future
may still be provided against. Give up your vain pursuit. Give up
your vain pursuit. Peril awaits those who now engage in affairs of
government.'
        2. Confucius alighted and wished to converse with him, but
Chieh-yu hastened away, so that he could not talk with him.
        CHAP. VI. 1. Ch'ang-tsu and Chieh-ni were at work in the field
together, when Confucius passed by them, and sent Tsze-lu to
inquire for the ford.
        2. Ch'ang-tsu said, 'Who is he that holds the reins in the
carriage there?' Tsze-lu told him, 'It is K'ung Ch'iu.' 'Is it not K'ung
Ch'iu of Lu?' asked he. 'Yes,' was the reply, to which the other
rejoined, 'He knows the ford.'
        3. Tsze-lu then inquired of Chieh-ni, who said to him, 'Who

are you, sir?' He answered, 'I am Chung Yu.' 'Are you not the
disciple of K'ung Ch'iu of Lu?' asked the other. 'I am,' replied he,
and then Chieh-ni said to him, 'Disorder, like a swelling flood,
spreads over the whole empire, and who is he that will change its
state for you? Than follow one who merely withdraws from this
one and that one, had you not better follow those who have
withdrawn from the world altogether?' With this he fell to covering
up the seed, and proceeded with his work, without stopping.
        4. Tsze-lu went and reported their remarks, when the Master
observed with a sigh, 'It is impossible to associate with birds and
beasts, as if they were the same with us. If I associate not with
these people,-- with mankind,-- with whom shall I associate? If
right principles prevailed through the empire, there would be no
use for me to change its state.'

        CHAP. VII. 1. Tsze-lu, following the Master, happened to fall
behind, when he met an old man, carrying across his shoulder on a
staff a basket for weeds. Tsze-lu said to him, 'Have you seen my
master, sir!' The old man replied, 'Your four limbs are
unaccustomed to toil; you cannot distinguish the five kinds of
grain:-- who is your master?' With this, he planted his staff in the
ground, and proceeded to weed.
        2. Tsze-lu joined his hands across his breast, and stood before
him.
        3. The old man kept Tsze-lu to pass the night in his house,
killed a fowl, prepared millet, and feasted him. He also introduced
to him his two sons.
        4. Next day, Tsze-lu went on his way, and reported his
adventure. The Master said, 'He is a recluse,' and sent Tsze-lu back
to see him again, but when he got to the place, the old man was
gone.
        5. Tsze-lu then said to the family, 'Not to take office is not

righteous. If the relations between old and young may not be
neglected, how is it that he sets aside the duties that should be
observed between sovereign and minister? Wishing to maintain his
personal purity, he allows that great relation to come to confusion.
A superior man takes office, and performs the righteous duties
belonging to it. As to the failure of right principles to make
progress, he is aware of that.'
        CHAP. VIII. 1. The men who have retired to privacy from the
world have been Po-i, Shu-ch'i, Yu-chung, I-yi, Chu-chang, Hui of
Liu-hsia, and Shao-lien.
        2. The Master said, 'Refusing to surrender their wills, or to
submit to any taint in their persons;-- such, I think, were Po-i and
Shu-ch'i.
        3. 'It may be said of Hui of Liu-hsia, and of Shao-lien, that
they surrendered their wills, and submitted to taint in their
persons,

but their words corresponded with reason, and their actions were
such as men are anxious to see. This is all that is to be remarked in
them.
        4. 'It may be said of Yu-chung and I-yi, that, while they hid
themselves in their seclusion, they gave a license to their words;
but, in their persons, they succeeded in preserving their purity,
and, in their retirement, they acted according to the exigency of the
times.
        5. 'I am different from all these. I have no course for which I
am predetermined, and no course against which I am
predetermined.'
        CHAP. IX. 1. The grand music master, Chih, went to Ch'i.
        2. Kan, the master of the band at the second meal, went to
Ch'u. Liao, the band master at the third meal, went to Ts'ai. Chueh,
the band master at the fourth meal, went to Ch'in.
        3. Fang-shu, the drum master, withdrew to the north of the
river.

        4. Wu, the master of the hand drum, withdrew to the Han.
        5. Yang, the assistant music master, and Hsiang, master of the
musical stone, withdrew to an island in the sea.
        CHAP. X. The duke of Chau addressed his son, the duke of Lu,
saying, 'The virtuous prince does not neglect his relations. He does
not cause the great ministers to repine at his not employing them.
Without some great cause, he does not dismiss from their offices
the members of old families. He does not seek in one man talents
for every employment.'
        CHAP. XI. To Chau belonged the eight officers, Po-ta, Po-

kwo, Chung-tu, Chung-hwu, Shu-ya, Shu-hsia, Chi-sui, and Chi-kwa.

BOOK XIX. TSZE-CHANG.

        CHAP. I. Tsze-chang said, 'The scholar, trained for public duty,
seeing threatening danger, is prepared to sacrifice his life. When
the opportunity of gain is presented to him, he thinks of
righteousness. In sacrificing, his thoughts are reverential. In
mourning, his thoughts are about the grief which he should feel.
Such a man commands our approbation indeed.'
        CHAP. II. Tsze-chang said, 'When a man holds fast to virtue,
but without seeking to enlarge it, and believes right principles, but
without firm sincerity, what account can be made of his existence
or non-existence?'

        CHAP. III. The disciples of Tsze-hsia asked Tsze-chang about
the principles that should characterize mutual intercourse. Tsze-
chang asked, 'What does Tsze-hsia say on the subject?' They
replied, 'Tsze-hsia says:-- "Associate with those who can advantage
you. Put away from you those who cannot do so."' Tsze-chang
observed, 'This is different from what I have learned. The superior
man honours the talented and virtuous, and bears with all. He
praises the good, and pities the incompetent. Am I possessed of
great talents and virtue?-- who is there among men whom I will
not bear with? Am I devoid of talents and virtue?-- men will put
me away from them. What have we to do with the putting away of
others?'
        CHAP. IV. Tsze-hsia said, 'Even in inferior studies and
employments there is something worth being looked at; but if it be

attempted to carry them out to what is remote, there is a danger of
their proving inapplicable. Therefore, the superior man does not
practise them.'
        CHAP. V. Tsze-hsia said, 'He, who from day to day recognises
what he has not yet, and from month to month does not forget what
he has attained to, may be said indeed to love to learn.'
        CHAP. VI. Tsze-hsia said, 'There are learning extensively, and
having a firm and sincere aim; inquiring with earnestness, and
reflecting with self-application:-- virtue is in such a course.'
        CHAP. VII. Tsze-hsia said, 'Mechanics have their shops to
dwell in, in order to accomplish their works. The superior man
learns, in order to reach to the utmost of his principles.'

        CHAP. VIII. Tsze-hsia said, 'The mean man is sure to gloss his
faults.'
        CHAP. IX. Tsze-hsia said, 'The superior man undergoes three
changes. Looked at from a distance, he appears stern; when
approached, he is mild; when he is heard to speak, his language is
firm and decided.'
        CHAP. X. Tsze-hsia said, 'The superior man, having obtained
their confidence, may then impose labours on his people. If he have
not gained their confidence, they will think that he is oppressing
them. Having obtained the confidence of his prince, one may then
remonstrate with him. If he have not gained his confidence, the
prince will think that he is vilifying him.'
        CHAP. XI. Tsze-hsia said, 'When a person does not transgress
the boundary line in the great virtues, he may pass and repass it in
the small virtues.'

        CHAP. XII. 1. Tsze-yu said, 'The disciples and followers of
Tsze-hsia, in sprinkling and sweeping the ground, in answering and
replying, in advancing and receding, are sufficiently accomplished.
But these are only the branches of learning, and they are left
ignorant of what is essential.-- How can they be acknowledged as
sufficiently taught?'
        2. Tsze-hsia heard of the remark and said, 'Alas! Yen Yu is
wrong. According to the way of the superior man in teaching, what
departments are there which he considers of prime importance, and
delivers? what are there which he considers of secondary
importance, and allows himself to be idle about? But as in the case
of plants, which are assorted according to their classes, so he deals
with his disciples. How can the way of a superior man be such as to
make fools of any of them? Is it not the sage alone, who can unite
in one the beginning and the consummation of learning?'

        CHAP. XIII. Tsze-hsia said, 'The officer, having discharged all
his duties, should devote his leisure to learning. The student, having
completed his learning, should apply himself to be an officer.'
        CHAP. XIV. Tsze-hsia said, 'Mourning, having been carried to
the utmost degree of grief, should stop with that.'
        CHAP. XV. Tsze-hsia said, 'My friend Chang can do things
which are hard to be done, but yet he is not perfectly virtuous.'
        CHAP. XVI. The philosopher Tsang said, 'How imposing is the
manner of Chang! It is difficult along with him to practise virtue.'
        CHAP. XVII. The philosopher Tsang said, 'I heard this from
our Master:-- "Men may not have shown what is in them to the full
extent, and yet they will be found to do so, on occasion of mourning
for their parents."'

        CHAP. XVIII. The philosopher Tsang said, 'I have heard this
from our Master:-- "The filial piety of Mang Chwang, in other
matters, was what other men are competent to, but, as seen in his
not changing the ministers of his father, nor his father's mode of
government, it is difficult to be attained to."'
        CHAP. XIX. The chief of the Mang family having appointed
Yang Fu to be chief criminal judge, the latter consulted the
philosopher Tsang. Tsang said, 'The rulers have failed in their
duties, and the people consequently have been disorganised, for a
long time. When you have found out the truth of any accusation, be
grieved for and pity them, and do not feel joy at your own ability.'
        CHAP. XX. Tsze-kung said, 'Chau's wickedness was not so great
as that name implies. Therefore, the superior man hates to dwell

in a low-lying situation, where all the evil of the world will flow in
upon him.'
        CHAP. XXI. Tsze-kung said, 'The faults of the superior man are
like the eclipses of the sun and moon. He has his faults, and all men
see them; he changes again, and all men look up to him.'
        CHAP. XXII. 1. Kung-sun Ch'ao of Wei asked Tsze-kung,
saying, 'From whom did Chung-ni get his learning?'
        2. Tsze-kung replied, 'The doctrines of Wan and Wu have not
yet fallen to the ground. They are to be found among men. Men of
talents and virtue remember the greater principles of them, and
others, not possessing such talents and virtue, remember the
smaller. Thus, all possess the doctrines of Wan and Wu. Where
could our Master go that he should not have an opportunity of
learning them? And yet what necessity was there for his having a
regular master?'

        CHAP. XXIII. 1. Shu-sun Wu-shu observed to the great
officers in the court, saying, 'Tsze-kung is superior to Chung-ni.'
        2. Tsze-fu Ching-po reported the observation to Tsze-kung,
who said, 'Let me use the comparison of a house and its
encompassing wall. My wall only reaches to the shoulders. One may
peep over it, and see whatever is valuable in the apartments.
        3. 'The wall of my Master is several fathoms high. If one do
not find the door and enter by it, he cannot see the ancestral
temple with its beauties, nor all the officers in their rich array.
        4. 'But I may assume that they are few who find the door.
Was not the observation of the chief only what might have been
expected?'

        CHAP. XXIV. Shu-sun Wu-shu having spoken revilingly of
Chung-ni, Tsze-kung said, 'It is of no use doing so. Chung-ni cannot
be reviled. The talents and virtue of other men are hillocks and
mounds which may be stepped over. Chung-ni is the sun or moon,
which it is not possible to step over. Although a man may wish to
cut himself off from the sage, what harm can he do to the sun or
moon? He only shows that he does not know his own capacity.
        CHAP. XXV. 1. Ch'an Tsze-ch'in, addressing Tsze-kung, said,
'You are too modest. How can Chung-ni be said to be superior to
you?'
        2. Tsze-kung said to him, 'For one word a man is often
deemed to be wise, and for one word he is often deemed to be
foolish. We ought to be careful indeed in what we say.
        3. 'Our Master cannot be attained to, just in the same way as
the heavens cannot be gone up to by the steps of a stair.

        4. 'Were our Master in the position of the ruler of a State or
the chief of a Family, we should find verified the description which
has been given of a sage's rule:-- he would plant the people, and
forthwith they would be established; he would lead them on, and
forthwith they would follow him; he would make them happy, and
forthwith multitudes would resort to his dominions; he would
stimulate them, and forthwith they would be harmonious. While he
lived, he would be glorious. When he died, he would be bitterly
lamented. How is it possible for him to be attained to?'

BOOK XX. YAO YUEH.

        CHAP. I. 1. Yao said, 'Oh! you, Shun, the Heaven-determined
order of succession now rests in your person. Sincerely hold fast the
due Mean. If there shall be distress and want within the four seas,
the Heavenly revenue will come to a perpetual end.'
        2. Shun also used the same language in giving charge to Yu.
        3. T'ang said, 'I the child Li, presume to use a dark-coloured
victim, and presume to announce to Thee, O most great and
sovereign God, that the sinner I dare not pardon, and thy ministers,
O God, I do not keep in obscurity. The examination of them is by
thy mind, O God. If, in my person, I commit offences, they are not to
be attributed to you, the people of the myriad regions. If you in the
myriad regions commit offences, these offences must rest on my
person.'

        4. Chau conferred great gifts, and the good were enriched.
        5. 'Although he has his near relatives, they are not equal to
my virtuous men. The people are throwing blame upon me, the One
man.'
        6. He carefully attended to the weights and measures,
examined the body of the laws, restored the discarded officers, and
the good government of the kingdom took its course.
        7. He revived States that had been extinguished, restored
families whose line of succession had been broken, and called to
office those who had retired into obscurity, so that throughout the
kingdom the hearts of the people turned towards him.
        8. What he attached chief importance to, were the food of the
people, the duties of mourning, and sacrifices.
        9. By his generosity, he won all. By his sincerity, he made the
people repose trust in him. By his earnest activity, his
achievements were great. By his justice, all were delighted.

        CHAP. II. 1. Tsze-chang asked Confucius, saying, 'In what way
should a person in authority act in order that he may conduct
government properly?' The Master replied, 'Let him honour the five
excellent, and banish away the four bad, things;-- then may he
conduct government properly.' Tsze-chang said, 'What are meant by
the five excellent things?' The Master said, 'When the person in
authority is beneficent without great expenditure; when he lays
tasks on the people without their repining; when he pursues what
he desires without being covetous; when he maintains a dignified
ease without being proud; when he is majestic without being fierce.'
        2. Tsze-chang said, 'What is meant by being beneficent
without great expenditure?' The Master replied, 'When the person
in authority makes more beneficial to the people the things from
which

they naturally derive benefit;-- is not this being beneficent without
great expenditure? When he chooses the labours which are proper,
and makes them labour on them, who will repine? When his desires
are set on benevolent government, and he secures it, who will
accuse him of covetousness? Whether he has to do with many
people or few, or with things great or small, he does not dare to
indicate any disrespect;-- is not this to maintain a dignified ease
without any pride? He adjusts his clothes and cap, and throws a
dignity into his looks, so that, thus dignified, he is looked at with
awe;-- is not this to be majestic without being fierce?'
        3. Tsze-chang then asked, 'What are meant by the four bad
things?' The Master said, 'To put the people to death without having
instructed them;-- this is called cruelty. To require from them,
suddenly, the full tale of work, without having given them
warning;-- this is called oppression. To issue orders as if without
urgency, at first, and, when the time comes, to insist on them with
severity;-- this is called injury. And, generally, in the giving pay

or rewards to men, to do it in a stingy way;-- this is called acting
the part of a mere official.'
        CHAP III. 1. The Master said, 'Without recognising the
ordinances of Heaven, it is impossible to be a superior man.
        2. 'Without an acquaintance with the rules of Propriety, it is
impossible for the character to be established.
        3. 'Without knowing the force of words, it is impossible to
know men.'







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ANALECTS OF CONFUCIUS (FROM THE CHINESE CLASSICS) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Sayings of Confucius
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Sayings of Confucius

Author: Confucius

Translator: Lionel Giles

Release date: July 24, 2014 [eBook #46389]
                Most recently updated: October 24, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Madeleine Fournier and Marc D'Hooghe (Images generously made available by the Internet Archive.]


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SAYINGS OF CONFUCIUS ***
THE SAYINGS OF CONFUCIUS

A NEW TRANSLATION OF THE GREATER

PART OF THE CONFUCIAN ANALECTS


WITH INTRODUCTION AND NOTES



LIONEL GILES, M.A. (Oxon.)


ASSISTANT IN THE DEPARTMENT OF ORIENTAL BOOKS

AND MANUSCRIPTS OF THE BRITISH MUSEUM



THE WISDOM OF THE EAST SERIES

Edited by

L. CRANMER-BYNG

Dr. S. A. KAPADIA.





NEW YORK

E. P. DUTTON AND COMPANY

1910




CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION
LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL DISCIPLES
GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS
INDIVIDUAL VIRTUE
CONFUCIUS' ESTIMATE OF OTHERS
CONFUCIUS ON HIMSELF
MISCELLANEOUS SAYINGS
PERSONALIA
CONFUCIUS AS SEEN BY OTHERS
SAYINGS OF THE DISCIPLES




EDITORIAL NOTE


The object of the Editors of this series is a very definite one.
They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these books
shall be the ambassadors of goodwill and understanding between East
and West--the old world of Thought and the new of Action. In this
endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but followers of the
highest example in the land. They are confident that a deeper knowledge
of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of Oriental thought may help
to a revival of that true spirit of Charity which neither despises nor
fears the nations of another creed and colour. Finally, in thanking
press and public for the very cordial reception given to the "Wisdom of
the East" Series, they wish to state that no pains have been spared to
secure the best specialists for the treatment of the various subjects
at hand.

L. CRANMER-BYNG.
S. A. KAPADIA.

NORTHBROOK SOCIETY,
185, PICCADILLY, W.




INTRODUCTION


Confucius is one of the few supremely great figures in the world's
history. A man's greatness must always be measured, in the first
place, by the consensus of opinion in his own country; the judgment of
foreigners can only be allowed to have a secondary value. Especially
is this true when the critics are not only foreigners, but belong to a
totally different order of civilisation from the men whose greatness
they would appraise. For even if they can keep their minds free from
purely national bias of the unreasoning sort, they will naturally look
for such attributes as are highly prized among themselves, and feel
disappointed if these are not much in evidence. They will be apt to see
certain defects too plainly, whereas they may easily overlook or fail
to appreciate to the full those very qualities on which the title to
greatness is mainly based. These errors and prejudices will, doubtless,
tend to disappear as more intimate knowledge is gained and the
essential unity of human nature shows itself beneath the accidents of
custom and environment. But the process will always be slow. The name
of Confucius may be deemed sufficiently familiar in the West to render
unnecessary any revision of the popular verdict which has already been
passed on him. But are his judges equally familiar with the teaching
which his name represents? The name of Shakespeare was well enough
known to Frenchmen in the time of Voltaire. Yet how many generations
had to pass ere they began to recognise his true greatness? The
parallel between dramatist and social reformer may seem strained, but
it is not drawn at random. In both cases, wide differences of language
and the inadequacy of translations to bridge the gap, lie at the root
of the trouble.

No great man has suffered more than Confucius from the stupidity, the
misstatements and the misrepresentations, from the lack of sympathy
and generosity, and, in some points, from the pure ignorance of his
critics. Early travellers arriving from the West, amongst a people
utterly alien to themselves in almost every detail--language,
dress, habits, modes of thought, ethical ideals and general view of
life--would have done well to walk very warily and, in the Confucian
phrase, "to reserve their judgment" on what they saw and heard around
them. But patience and discrimination were the very last virtues
which these inquisitive newcomers had a mind to practise; and,
unluckily, the extraordinary fame of the national sage marked him out
as one of the earliest victims to their thirst for the marvellous.
On the strength of Chinese evidence, readily forthcoming and eagerly
swallowed, the most exaggerated accounts of this new luminary were
poured into the ears of Europe, and it may well be imagined that these
enthusiastic reports suffered no diminution in the telling. Confucius
was the prince of philosophers, the wisest and most consummate of
sages, the loftiest moralist, the most subtle and penetrating intellect
that the world had ever seen. He was a statesman, a bard, an historian
and an antiquary rolled into one. His sagacity put the most illustrious
of ancient and modern philosophers to shame. He was the greatest and
noblest representative of the greatest, happiest, and most highly
civilised people on the face of the earth. Such extravagant eulogy
could only pave the way for disillusionment. When, after the lapse of
a hundred years or so, foreigners had painfully acquired sufficient
knowledge of the language to enable them to begin translating, after
a fashion, parts of the Classics said to have been composed by this
glorious sage, or at least containing the choicest pearls of his
wisdom still extant, it is not altogether surprising that the results
did not come up to the general expectation. Reactionist in, and it
soon became the fashion to decry the once much-lauded philosopher.
His sayings, which had been extolled as the very epitome of wisdom,
were now voted jejune and commonplace. His teaching was found to be
shallow, disjointed, unsatisfying. He was blamed for his materialistic
bias, for his rigid formalism, for his poverty of ideas, for his lack
of spiritual elevation. Comparisons, much in his disfavour, were
drawn between him and the founders of other world-systems of religion
and ethics. All this before the circumstances of his career had been
studied, before the surface of contemporary Chinese history had been so
much as scratched, before the host of native commentators and critics
had been consulted, or their existence even become known; above all,
before the very book which contained his authentic sayings had been
translated with anything approaching to exactness or understanding, or
with a faint realisation of its numerous difficulties and pit-falls.

Such was still the deplorable state of things when Legge set to work
on his translation of the Confucian Canon, which when completed many
years later, with its exhaustive prolegomena, notes and appendices,
formed a truly wonderful monument of research and erudition. With
its publication, Chinese scholarship was carried at once to a higher
plane, and foreign study of Confucian doctrine began in earnest.
The heavy accumulations of ignorance and error were in large part
removed, and the figure of the great Teacher began at last to emerge
from the "obliterating sands of time." His sayings were no longer read
as interesting but desultory fragments of conversation, but studied
in relation to the events of his life. From various Chinese sources,
the chief of which were the Analects themselves and Ss-ma Chien's
biography, Legge managed to compile a good and coherent account of
the sage's life, work and wanderings, which was an enormous advance
on anything that had been done before, and is not likely, even in the
future, to undergo any considerable addition or amendment. There are
many minor points which may be disputed, and many long blanks which
may never be filled up, but taken as a whole, the chronology and the
leading events of the life of Confucius must now be considered as
finally settled.

If Legge is on firm ground where hard facts are concerned, it is far
otherwise when he comes to draw inferences from these facts, to sum up
the salient principles of Confucian ethics, and to pass judgment on the
character of Confucius himself. His pronouncements on these points,
too hastily accepted as final, need to be carefully re-examined and,
as I shall hope to show, largely modified if not totally reversed. His
opinion, of course, was based chiefly on his own interpretation of the
more important sayings in the Analects, in translating which he had
the oral help of native scholars, besides the benefit of voluminous
standard commentaries. Thus equipped for his task, it cannot but appear
strange that he, admittedly a great sinologue, should have gone so
far astray as to miss the very core and essence of the doctrines to
the elucidation of which he devoted most of his life. The explanation
may lie in the fact that he was a Christian missionary in the first
place, and only secondly a scientific student; he had come to teach
and convert the heathen, not to be taught or converted by them. This
preconceived idea acted as a drag on the free use of his understanding,
and prevented him from entering whole-heartedly into his subject. We
are told that the Master himself had "no foregone conclusions," but
Legge's whole attitude to Confucianism bespoke one comprehensive and
fatal foregone conclusion--the conviction that it must at every point
prove inferior to Christianity. A certain inelasticity of mind showed
itself also in the way in which he approached the work of translation.
He was too apt to look upon a Chinese word as something rigid and
unchanging in its content, which might be uniformly rendered by a
single English equivalent. Delicate shades of meaning he too often
ruthlessly ignored. Now there is a certain number of Chinese terms
which mirror Chinese ideas, but have really no absolute equivalent
in English at all, and must therefore be translated with the aid of
circumlocution, and in such a way as to suit the context and the
general spirit of the passage. It is in such terms, unfortunately,
that the very essence and inner significance of the Confucian teaching
are contained. Obviously, if proper equivalents are not given, the
whole sense of the passages in which they occur will be lost or
violently distorted. Worse still, the judgments laboriously built up
on such rotten foundations will be hopelessly vitiated. Here, indeed,
we have an object-lesson of the importance, clearly recognised by
Confucius himself, of "defining terms" and making "words harmonise
with things." Indispensable as such a process is for any investigation
in which language plays a part, it is doubly so when words have to be
transplanted, as it were, from their native soil to one differing from
it in almost every conceivable quality. Such an operation can only be
successful if carried out with the utmost delicacy and care, and no
amount of erudition can supply the want of that instinctive feeling
for the right word which is the translator's choicest gift. The scope
of the present work forbids my entering into details, but some broad
examples of failure in this respect will be noted later on.

Of the life of Confucius only the barest sketch can be given here,
but stress may be laid on one or two points which it is important to
bear in mind. Confucius was born at a time when the feudal system,
established several centuries earlier by the founder of the Chou
dynasty, was showing unmistakable signs of disruption and decay. It
is almost certain that China had been feudally governed from the very
earliest times, but Wu Wang placed the whole system on a seemingly
firmer basis than ever. He divided his realm into a large number of
vassal states, which he bestowed upon his own kith and kin who had
helped him to the throne. Thus the Empire really came to resemble the
huge united family which Chinese political theorists declare it to be,
and for a short time all seems to have worked smoothly. But as the
bonds of kinship grew looser, the central government gradually lost
all effective control over its unruly children, and the various states
were soon embroiled in perpetual feuds and struggles among themselves,
besides being usually at loggerheads with the parent dynasty. The state
of things that ensued may be likened (though on a far larger scale) to
several Wars of the Roses going on at the same time, or better still,
to the turbulence of the later days of the Holy Roman Empire, when the
fealty of its members had become merely nominal. Matters were further
complicated in many of the states by the upgrowth of large and powerful
families which often attempted either by insidious methods or by open
violence to wrest the supreme authority into their own hands. Thus in
Lu, the comparatively small state to which Confucius belonged, there
were three such families, the Chi, the Mng, and the Shu; the heads of
these clans, of whom we hear a good deal in the Analects, had already,
by the time of Confucius, reduced their lawful prince (or duke, as
he is generally called) to a condition of virtual dependency. On the
other hand, they themselves were sometimes threatened by the lawless
behaviour of their own officers, such as the ambitious chariot-driver,
Yang Huo,[1] who thought nothing of seizing towns or even the person
of his own chief, in order to hold him to ransom. Thus, though the
period of the "Warring States" is not usually reckoned as beginning
until after the death of Confucius, the date is a purely arbitrary one,
inasmuch as his whole life long disturbances were rife and military
operations well-nigh incessant throughout the length and breadth of
China. In the midst of the prevailing disorder, Confucius comported
himself with an admirable mixture of dignity, tact and outspoken
courage. Wisely opposing the dangerous tendency to decentralisation,
and upholding the supreme authority of the Emperor as against his too
powerful vassals, he heartily disapproved of the illegal usurpations
of the dukes, the great families and the soldiers of fortune that
preyed one upon the other, and did not shrink on occasion from
expressing his disgust in unequivocal terms. But knowing the futility
of protests unbacked by force, he kept himself aloof for the most
part, and devoted himself to a long course of study and teaching,
gathering, it is said, as many as three thousand disciples around him.
This is a palpable exaggeration, but there can be no doubt that he had
become a marked man and gained great fame as a moralist and teacher
many years before he actually took office. In 501 B.C., at the age of
fifty, he at last made his entry on the political stage by accepting
the governorship of a small town in Lu. Here he is said to have been
eminently successful in the work of reform, and he rapidly rose to be
the most trusted adviser of Duke Ting, who on one occasion at least
owed his life to the courage and address of his minister. But it was
not long ere the weak and fickle character of the ruler, carefully
manipulated by rivals to Confucius, brought about a catastrophe. The
neighbouring state of Chi, jealous of the new prosperity of Lu under
the rgime of the sage, cunningly sent as a gift to the prince a
band of beautiful women, trained in song and dance, and a number of
magnificent horses, in order to distract his mind from the serious
cares of state. The plotters had evidently taken the measure of their
victim, for the artifice succeeded, and Confucius felt compelled to
resign. Then began the weary years of wandering from state to state, in
which we cannot follow him here, except to note a sagacious prophecy
uttered by a friendly official on the frontier of Wei. Coming out from
an interview with Confucius, he comforted the woebegone disciples by
telling them that their Master's divine mission was now only just
beginning.[2] It may, indeed, be that the ensuing period of homeless
exile, hardships and danger, did more to spread the fame of the great
reformer than either the few brilliant years of office or those spent
as a teacher in the comparative seclusion of Lu. For one thing, it
could not but inspire and fortify his followers to observe that the
lofty principles which a sudden accession to power had failed to
corrupt, were equally capable of standing the test of adversity. His
serene and courageous bearing in many a strange and perilous situation
proved that the conception of a "higher type of man" was for him no
empty ideal, but the worthy object of practical endeavour. It is sad,
however, to reflect that the best years of his life had passed before
the call came which resulted in his return. Had it not been so long
delayed, he would doubtless have thrown himself once more into the
arena of public affairs, and begun rebuilding the fabric of good
government which had been so rudely shattered thirteen years before.
His patience would have been equal to the task; but he was now an old
man, worn out by years of travel, privation and anxiety, at a time of
life when the physical frame begins to demand a certain measure of
quiet and repose. Hence, though he may be said to have returned to his
native state with flying colours, he took no further active part in its
administration, but devoted the rest of his life to literary labours
which have added materially to his fame. Such were the collecting
and editing of certain old national ballads known to us as the Odes,
and the penning of the Spring and Autumn Annals of Lu, which may be
regarded as the first real record of authentic facts, as opposed to the
mere string of speeches and eulogies which we find in the miscalled
Book of History.

To this closing period, too, are to be referred most of the sayings
given in the present volume. These, together with the invaluable
biography by Ss-ma Ch'ien, which is largely built upon them, form the
only really reliable source of information about Confucius and his
doctrines. The Chinese title _Lun Y_ may be rendered "Conversations"
or "Discussions," but neither is a very apt description of the work,
which contains very little discussion in the ordinary sense. It
consists in fact almost wholly of detached _obiter dicta_, or replies
to questions put by various disciples on subjects chiefly moral or
personal. These sayings were once supposed to have been collected and
committed to writing by the immediate disciples of Confucius, but Legge
has shown sufficient reason to believe that they were transmitted
orally at first, and did not take the form in which we have them
until at least two generations after the Master's death. Nor must it
be imagined that they represent the _ipsissima verba_ of Confucius.
No man could have made offhand remarks in such a crisp, concise and
epigrammatic style. A translation, in which brevity has again and again
to be sacrificed to smoothness and lucidity, hardly allows the European
reader to form any idea of the glittering compactness of these sayings
in the original. So far from having been uttered impromptu, they
appear to have been repeatedly ground and polished, and shorn of every
redundancy, until they shone like diamonds fresh from the hands of the
cutter. At the same time, as expressing the essence of what the Master
thought and the substance of what he said, it is with good reason that
they are to be found inscribed on hundreds of thousands of scrolls
and tablets in every corner of the Empire. These gems, however, are
unsorted. As in most Chinese philosophical works, there is very little
attempt at orderly arrangement; even such a rough classification as
will be found in this volume is absent. This is not necessarily to be
regarded as a defect: jewels jumbled in a heap often have a charm which
they lack when strung symmetrically into a necklace. The only danger
is that unwary readers, looking in vain for a beginning, a middle
and an end, may jump to the conclusion that Confucius himself was
merely a master of casual apophthegms; they may very easily miss the
connecting principles which serve to bind the Confucian teachings into
one rounded system. Even the disciples seem to have been in danger of
overlooking the whole in their admiration of the parts. It needed the
penetration of Tsng Tz to tell them that the Master's Way was, after
all, simple in its diversity, and might be summed up in two words: duty
to oneself and charity to one's neighbour. Unhappily, owing to the
misinterpretation of these important words, the beautiful simplicity of
the Confucian doctrine has long passed unrecognised.

For what has been, and is perhaps even now, the prevailing conception
of Confucius in the West? Does not the name conjure up in most minds
the figure of a highly starched philosopher, dry, formal, pedantic,
almost inhuman in the unimpeachable correctness of his personal
conduct, rigid and precise in his notions of ceremonial, admirable
no doubt in his sentiments, but always more a man of words than of
deeds? He has been constantly accused of laying undue weight on things
external, of undervaluing natural impulses of the heart. "Propriety,"
says Legge, "was a great stumbling-block in the way of Confucius. His
morality was the result of the balancings of his intellect, fettered by
the decisions of men of old, and not the gushings of a loving heart,
responsive to the promptings of Heaven, and in sympathy with erring and
feeble humanity." It is high time that an effective protest was made
against such an amazing piece of misrepresentation. With bitter truth
we may retort that "propriety"--that is, the Chinese word _li_ which
has been cruelly saddled with this absurd rendering--has indeed been
a stumbling-block, but a stumbling-block not so much to Confucius as
to Dr. Legge himself. The whole tenor of the Master's teaching cries
aloud against such wilful and outrageous distortion. Any one who reads
the sayings carefully will soon discover that this accusation is not
only libellous but grotesque in its remoteness from the truth. If there
is one thing more than another which distinguishes Confucius from the
men of his day, it is the supreme importance which he attached to
_jn_, the feeling in the heart, as the source of all right conduct,
the stress which he laid on the internal as opposed to the external,
and even on motives rather than outward acts, except in so far as
these might be taken as an index to character. Over and over again
he gave proof of the highest and noblest moral courage in ignoring
the narrow rules of conventional morality and etiquette when these
conflicted with good feeling and common sense, and setting up in their
stead the grand rule of conscience which, by asserting the right of
each individual to judge such matters for himself, pushed liberty to
a point which was quite beyond the comprehension of his age. So far
from being "fettered by the decisions of men of old," it was his hand
that valiantly essayed to strike the fetters of bigotry and prejudice
from the necks of his countrymen. But whilst declining to be bound by
the ideas and the standards of others, he was not blind to the danger
of liberty degenerating into license. The new fetters, therefore,
that he forged for mankind were those of an iron self-discipline and
self-control, unaccompanied, however, by anything in the shape of
bodily mortification, a practice which he knew to be at once more showy
and less troublesome than the discipline of the mind.

Another charge not infrequently heard is one of a certain repellent
coldness of temperament and stiffness of demeanour. The warrant for
such a statement is not so readily forthcoming, unless indeed it is
to be found in the stiff and repellent style which characterises some
translations of his sayings. In the Analects we are told the exact
opposite of this. The Master, we read there, was uniformly cheerful
in demeanour, and he evidently unbent to quite an unusual extent with
his disciples, considering the respect and deference universally shown
to age and learning in China. Is it at all conceivable that a man of
cold and unlovable temper should have attracted round him hundreds
of disciples, with many of whom he was on terms of most intimate
intercourse, meeting them not only in the lecture-room, as modern
professors meet their classes, but living with them, eating, drinking,
sleeping and conversing with them, until all their idiosyncrasies,
good or bad, were better known to him than to their own parents? Is it
explicable, except on the ground of deep personal affection, that he
should have been followed into exile by a faithful band of disciples,
not one of whom is known ever to have deserted or turned against him?
Is coldness to be predicated of the man who in his old age, for once
losing something of his habitual self-control, wept passionately for
the death of his dearly loved disciple Yen Hui, and would not be
comforted?

But it has been reserved for the latest English translator of the
Analects, the Rev. Mr. Jennings, to level some of the worst charges
at his head. To begin with, he approvingly quotes, as Legge's final
opinion on Confucius, words occurring in the earliest edition of the
Chinese Classics to the effect that he is "unable to regard him as a
great man," quite heedless of the fact that the following stands in
the edition of 1893 (two years before his own translation appeared):
"But I must now leave the sage. I hope I have not done him injustice;
the more I have studied his character and opinions, the more highly
have I come to regard him. _He was a very great man_, and his influence
has been on the whole a great benefit to the Chinese, while his
teachings suggest important lessons to ourselves who profess to belong
to the school of Christ." This summing-up, though certainly unexpected
in view of much that has gone before, does partly atone for the unjust
strictures which Dr. Legge felt it necessary to pass on Confucius
at an earlier period, though it may require many years entirely
to obliterate their effect. What I wish to emphasise at present,
however, is the unfairness of quoting an early and presumably crude
and ill-considered opinion in preference to the latest and maturest
judgment of an authority who at no time can be said to err On the side
of over-partiality for his subject.

But this is not all. For after pointing out, truly enough, that
Confucius cannot well be blamed for "giving no impulse to religion,"
inasmuch as he never pretended to make this his aim, Mr. Jennings goes
on to pick some holes on his own account, and incontinently falls
into exactly the same error that he had previously rebuked in Dr.
Legge. "In his _reserve_ about great and important matters, while
professing to teach men, he is perhaps most to blame, and in his
holding back what was best in the religion of the ancients." What these
great and important matters were, is not made very clear, but if, as
seems probable, the phrase is simply another way of referring to "the
religion of the ancients," it can only be repeated that religion was
a subject which he disliked to discuss and certainly did not profess
to teach, as is plainly indicated in the Analects. And the reason why
he refrained from descanting on such matters was that, knowing nothing
of them himself, he felt that he would have been guilty of hypocrisy
and fraud had he made a show of instructing others therein. Would that
a like candour distinguished some of our own professed teachers of
religion!

The last accusation against Confucius is the most reckless of all.
"There is," according to Mr. Jennings, "a certain _selfishness_ in
his teaching, which had the effect of making those who came under his
influence soon feel themselves great and self-satisfied." As only the
feeblest of evidence is produced to support this wild statement, it
will not be necessary to consider it at any length, though we may ask
in passing whether Yen Hui, the disciple who profited most from his
Master's teaching and best exemplified it, is depicted as exhibiting
this alleged self-satisfaction in a peculiarly noticeable degree. For
an answer to this question the reader may be referred to Tsng Tz's
remarks on p. 128.

The truth is, though missionaries and other zealots have long attempted
to obscure the fact, that the moral teaching of Confucius is absolutely
the purest and least open to the charge of selfishness of any in
the world. Its principles are neither utilitarian on the one hand
nor religious on the other, that is to say, it is not based on the
expectation of profit or happiness to be gained either in this world or
in the next (though Confucius doubtless believed that well-being would
as a general rule accompany virtuous conduct). "Virtue for virtue's
sake" is the maxim which, if not enunciated by him in so many words,
was evidently the corner-stone of his ethics and the mainspring of
his own career. Not that he would have quite understood the modern
formula, or that the idea of virtue being practised for anything but
its own sake would ever have occurred to his mind. Virtue resting on
anything but its own basis would not have seemed to him virtue in the
true sense at all, but simply another name for prudence, foresight,
or cunning. Yet material advantage, disguised as much as you will,
but still material advantage in one form or another, is what impels
most men to espouse any particular form of religion. Hence it is
nothing less than a standing miracle that Confucianism, which makes
no promise of blessings to be enjoyed in this life or the next, should
have succeeded without the adjunct of other supernatural elements than
that of ancestor-worship. Even this was accepted by Confucius as a
harmless prevailing custom rather than enjoined by him as an essential
part of his doctrine. Unlike Christianity and Mahometanism, the Way
preached by the Chinese sage knows neither the sanction of punishment
nor the stimulus of reward in an after-life. Even Buddhism holds out
the hope of Nirvana to the pure of heart, and preaches the long torment
of successive rebirths to those who fall short of perfect goodness.
No great religion is devoid of elevated precepts, or has ever failed
to mould numbers of beautiful characters to attest the presence of
something good and great within it. But in every case the element
of supernaturalism, which is of course inseparable from a religion
properly so called, introduces a new motive for men's actions and makes
it no longer possible for virtue to be followed purely for its own
sake, without thought of a hereafter. Thus, if we assent to Comte's
famous law of the Three States, Confucianism really represents a more
advanced stage of civilisation than biblical Christianity. Indeed, as
Mr. Carey Hall has recently pointed out in an article on the subject,
Confucius may be regarded as the true fore-runner runner of Comte in
his positivist mode of thought.

His whole system is based on nothing more nor less than the knowledge
of human nature. The instincts of man are social and therefore
fundamentally good, while egoism is at bottom an artificial product and
evil. Hence the insistence on altruism which we find in the sayings
of Confucius, the injunction to "act socially," to live for others in
living for oneself. The most important word in the Confucian vocabulary
is _jn_, which in the following extracts is translated "virtue" only
for want of a better term. Our English word "virtue" has so many
different shades of meaning and is withal so vague, that in using it,
the idea of altruism is often hardly present to our mind. But in _jn_
the implication of "social good" emerges much more distinctly. Its
connotation has no doubt extended gradually until it seems often to be
rather a compendium of all goodness than any one virtue in particular.
But this development only means that the word is following in the track
of the thing itself. For let a man be but thoroughly imbued with the
altruistic spirit, and he may be termed "good" without qualification,
since all other virtues tend to flow from unselfishness.

The Confucian theory of man's social obligations rests first and
foremost on the fact that he forms part of a great social machine--an
aggregation of units, each of which is called a family. The family, in
Chinese eyes, is a microcosm of the Empire, or rather, since the family
is chronologically prior to the State, it is the pattern on which the
greater organism has moulded itself. The feudal system under which
Confucius lived naturally accentuated the likeness. The Emperor had,
in theory at least, paternal authority over his feudal princes, who
in turn, standing to one another in the relation of elder and younger
brothers, were regarded as the fathers of their respective peoples.
Now, the way to ensure that a machine as a whole may run smoothly and
well, is to see that each part shall fulfil its own function in proper
subordination to the rest. How is this result achieved in the family?
Obviously through the controlling will of the father, who has supreme
authority over all the other members. But this authority is not by any
means the mere brute force of a tyrant. It is based firstly on the
natural order of things, whereby the father is clearly intended to be
the protector of his children; and secondly, as a consequence of this,
on the love and respect which will normally spring up in the minds of
the children for their protector. Such is the genesis of filial piety,
which plays so large a part in Chinese ethics. It is quite untrue,
however, to say with Mr. Jennings, that no corresponding parental
duties are recognised by Confucius, as the following anecdote may
serve to show. During the sage's short period of office as Minister
of Crime, a father came to him bringing some serious charge against
his son. Confucius kept them both in prison for three months, without
making any difference in favour of the father, and then let them go.
The Minister Chi Huan remonstrated with him for this, and reminded him
of his saying, that filial duty was the first thing to be insisted on.
"What hinders you now from putting this unfilial son to death as an
example to all the people?" Confucius' reply was, that the father had
never taught his son to be filial, and that therefore the guilt really
rested with him.

For the harmonious working of a family, then, we need respect for
authority on one side, and self-sacrifice on the other. The father's
object must be entirely altruistic--the good of his family. Then
only will he be doing his duty as a father, just as a son is not
doing his duty unless he shows honour and obedience to his parents.
The all-important element which makes possible the working of the
family machine, the lubricating oil that eases the bearings, is not
merely filial piety without any corresponding feeling on the part
of the parent, but rather a certain subtle principle of harmony and
self-control permeating every member of the family group, which
restrains egoistic propensities and promotes the common good. This is
the Chinese term _li_, which in this sense of a quality of the soul
is hardly translatable by any single word or combination of words,
but is certainly not to be rendered by any such atrocious phrase as
"the rules of propriety."[3] Now Confucius saw that the same general
principles which govern the family are applicable also to that greatest
of families, the State. Here we have the Emperor, in whose hands the
supreme authority must lie, exercising functions exactly analogous to
those of the father of a family. But if his is the supreme authority,
his must also be the supreme responsibility. Veneration and respect
are his due, but only because he identifies himself with the good of
the people. In public affairs, just as in the home, there must be
that same principle of harmony to regulate the relations of governor
and governed, otherwise the machine will not work. There must be _li_
here as well, but as it is not possible for the sovereign to maintain
with his subjects the personal intimacy which unites a father and
his sons, it is necessary to fall back upon symbols, and to give
outward and visible expression to the inward sentiments of loyalty and
respect which should animate the breast of each member of the nation.
These symbols are the rites and ceremonies of which Confucius was
considered such a past-master. He saw indeed their full importance
as symbols, but he also knew that, divorced from the inward feeling,
they were meaningless and without value. In this way it is easy to see
how the word _li_, as a human attribute, acquired its various shades
of meaning, from the harmony in the soul which prompts action in
accordance with true natural instincts, down to ordinary politeness and
good manners--also an indispensable lubricant in the lesser dealings of
life between man and man.

It was in the family again that Confucius found a natural force at work
which he thought might be utilised as an immense incentive to virtue.
This was the universal human proneness to imitation. Knowing that
personal example is the most effective way in which a father can teach
his sons what is right, he unhesitatingly attributed the same powerful
influence to the personal conduct of the sovereign, and went so far as
to declare that if the ruler was personally upright, his subjects would
do their duty unbidden; if he was not upright, they would not obey,
whatever his bidding. "The virtue of the prince," he said, "is like
unto wind; that of the people, like unto grass. For it is the nature of
grass to bend when the wind blows upon it." It must be admitted that
Confucius has in this particular somewhat overshot the mark and formed
too sanguine an estimate of the force of example. It would be unfair,
however, to base our argument on the analogy of modern democratic
states, where the controlling power is split up into several branches,
and the conspicuousness of the monarch is much diminished. Not that
even the constitutional sovereign of to-day may not wield a very
decided influence in morals. But this influence was much greater while
the king retained full despotic power, and greatest of all in feudal
times, when the successive gradations of rank and the nice arrangement
of a hierarchy of officials, each accountable to the one above him,
were specially designed to convey and filter it among all classes of
the community. Had Confucius been able to find a prince who would have
acted consistently on Confucian principles, the results might have been
almost as grand as he anticipated. The experiment was tried, we must
remember, on a small scale, when Confucius himself became governor of
a town in the State of Lu. And although one must be chary of accepting
all the extravagant tales which gathered round his brief official
career, it seems indisputable that this political theory, unlike many
others, proved reasonably successful in actual practice.

Of course the weak point is that every king cannot be a Confucius,
and unless some practical method can be devised of electing rulers
on the ground of merit alone, it is impossible to ensure that their
conduct shall serve as a pattern to their people. "Rotten wood cannot
be carved," the Master himself once remarked, and he found bitter
confirmation of his saying in Duke Ting of Lu. Nothing could ever have
been made out of such utterly weak and worthless material. And he
afterwards spent thirteen years of his life in the fruitless search
for a sovereign who would correspond even faintly to his ideal. Such
unswerving devotion to the abstract cause of right and justice and
good government cannot but puzzle those who have been taught to regard
Confucius as the very type and embodiment of materialistic wisdom and
practical utilitarianism. But in truth, strange though it may sound,
he was a great idealist who gained his hold on his countrymen by
virtue rather of his noble imaginings and lofty aspirations than of
any immediate results or tangible achievements. By the men of his own
day he was more often than not considered a charlatan and an impostor.
It is remarkable that even the two Taoist recluses and the eccentric
Chieh Y (p. 122) should have condemned him as a visionary and a
"crank." Similar was the impression he made on the gate-keeper who
asked a disciple if his Master was the man "who was always trying to
do what he knew to be impossible." This playful sarcasm is really the
best commentary on his career, and one that pays him unintentionally
the greatest honour. Though often disheartened by the long and bitter
struggle against adverse circumstance and the powers of evil, he never
gave over in disgust. Therein lay his greatness. "Wer immer strebend
sich bemht, Den knnen wir erlsen," sing the angels in _Faust_, and
no man ever toiled for the good of his fellow-creatures with greater
perseverance or with less apparent prospect of success. In this, the
truest sense, he could say that his whole life had been a prayer (p.
87). He succeeded in that he seemed to fail. He never achieved the
Utopian object of reforming all mankind by means of a wise and good
sovereign. On the contrary, after his death confusion grew worse
confounded, and the din of arms rose to a pitch from which it did not
subside until after the momentous revolution which swept away the
Chou dynasty and established a new order of things in China. In a
radically individualistic and liberty-loving country like China, the
feudal system was bound sooner or later to perish, even as it perished
in a later day among ourselves. But throughout the anarchy of that
terrible period, the light kindled by Confucius burned steadily and
prepared men's minds for better things. His ideal of government was
not forgotten, his sayings were treasured like gold in the minds of
the people. Above all, his own example shone like a glorious beacon,
darting its rays through the night of misery and oppression and
civil strife which in his lifetime he had striven so earnestly to
remove. And so it came about that his belief in the political value of
personal goodness was in some sort justified after all; for the great
and inspiriting pattern which he sought in vain among the princes of
his time was to be afforded in the end by no other than himself--the
"throneless king," who is for ever enshrined in the hearts of his
countrymen. It is absurd, then, to speak of his life as a failure.
Measured by results--the almost incalculably great and far-reaching
consequences which followed tardily but irresistibly after he was
gone--his life was one of the most successful ever lived by man. Three
others, and only three, are comparable to it in world-wide influence:
Gautama's self-sacrificing sojourn among men, the stormy career of
the Arab Prophet, and the "sinless years" which found their close on
Golgotha.



[1] See p. 121.

[2] See p. 118.

[3] See note on p. 60.




LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL DISCIPLES


The proper names occurring in the Analects present some difficulty to
the European reader, as one and the same person is often referred to
in several different ways--by his surname and personal name, by his
"style," or by a combination of the two, while among intimates the
personal name only is employed. Mr. Ku has on this account eliminated
almost all proper names from his translation, using a periphrasis
instead. But by this method one misses much of the characterisation
which is such an attractive feature of the Analects. I have judged
it better to give the names of the principal disciples exactly as
they appear in the Chinese, and to provide a table of their various
appellations for easy reference. An asterisk denotes the name most
frequently used.

   Surname and           Style.        Mixed Appellation.
  Personal Name.

    Yen Hui            Tz Yan         Yen Yan.*
    Min Sun  }         Tz Chien       Min Tz-chien,*
    (Min Tz)}
    Jan Kng           Po Niu*          Jan Po-niu.
    Jan Yung           Chung Kung*
    Jan Chiu          Tz Yu           Jan Yu.*
    Chung Yu           Tz Lu*}
                       Chi Lu }
    Tsai Y            Tz Wo           Tsai Wo.*
    Tuan-mu Tz       Tz Kung*
    Yen Yen            Tz Y*          Yen Yu.
    Pu Shang           Tz Hsia*
    Chuan-sun Shih     Tz Chang*
    Tsng Shn  }      Tz Y
    (Tsng Tz*)}
    Fan Hs            Tz Chih        Fan Chih.*
    Ss-ma Kng        Tz Niu          Ss-ma Niu.*
    Kung-hsi Chih     Tz Hua          Kung-hsi Hua.*
    Yu Jo    }         Tz Jo
    (Yu Tz*)}




GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS


The Master said: In ruling a country of a thousand chariots there
should be scrupulous attention to business, honesty, economy, charity,
and employment of the people at the proper season.

A virtuous ruler is like the Pole-star, which keeps its place, while
all the other stars do homage to it.

People despotically governed and kept in order by punishments may avoid
infraction of the law, but they will lose their moral sense. People
virtuously governed and kept in order by the inner law of self-control
will retain their moral sense, and moreover become good.

Duke Ai[1] asked, saying: What must I do that my people may be
contented?--Confucius replied: Promote the upright and dismiss all
evil-doers, and the people will be contented. Promote the
evil-doers and dismiss the upright, and the people will be discontented.

Chi Kang Tzu[2] asked by what means he might cause his people to be
respectful and loyal, and encourage them in the path of virtue. The
Master replied: Conduct yourself towards them with dignity, and you
will earn their respect; be a good son and a kind prince, and you will
find them loyal; promote the deserving and instruct those who fall
short, and they will be encouraged to follow the path of virtue.

Some one, addressing Confucius, said: Why, Sir, do you take no part in
the government?--The Master replied: What does the Book of History say
about filial piety?--Do your duty as a son and as a brother, and these
qualities will make themselves felt in the government. This, then,
really amounts to taking part in the government. Holding office need
not be considered essential.

The people can be made to follow a certain path, but they cannot be
made to know the reason why.

Tzu Kung asked for a definition of good government. The Master replied:
It consists in providing enough food to eat, in keeping enough
soldiers to guard the State, and in winning the confidence of the
people.--And if one of these three things had to be sacrificed, which
should go first?--The Master replied: Sacrifice the soldiers.--And if
of the two remaining things one had to be sacrificed, which should
it be?--The Master said: Let it be the food. From the beginning, men
have always had to die. But without the confidence of the people no
government can stand at all.

Ching, Duke of the Chi State, questioned Confucius on the art of
government. Confucius replied: Let the sovereign do his duty as a
sovereign, the subject his duty as a subject, the father his duty as a
father, and the son his duty as a son.--A good answer! said the Duke;
for unless sovereign and subject, father and son do their respective
duties, however much grain there may be in the land, I could obtain
none to eat.

Tzu Chang put a question about the art of governing. The Master said:
Devote yourself patiently to the theory, and conscientiously to the
practice, of government.

Chi Kang Tz asked Confucius for advice on the subject of government.
Confucius replied: To govern is to keep straight.[3] If you, Sir, lead
the people straight, which of your subjects will venture to fall out of
line?

Chi Kang Tz, being vexed by robbers, asked Confucius for his advice.
Confucius replied, saying: If you, sir, can check your own cupidity,
there will be no stealing, even though rewards should be offered for
theft.

Chi Kang Tz questioned Confucius on a point of government, saying:
Ought not I to cut off the lawless in order to establish law and order?
What do you think?--Confucius replied: Sir, what need is there of the
death penalty in your system of government? If you showed a sincere
desire to be good, your people would likewise be good. The virtue of
the prince is like unto wind; that of the people, like unto grass. For
it is the nature of grass to bend when the wind blows upon it.

Tz Lu asked for a hint on the art of governing. The Master replied:
Take the lead and set the example of diligent toil.--Asked for a
further hint, he said: Be patient and untiring.

Chung Kung, being Prime Minister to the head of the Chi clan, asked for
advice on governing. The Master said: Make a point of employing your
subordinates, overlook trifling mistakes, raise to office worthy and
able men.--But, said Chung Kung, how am I to discover these worthy men
and single them out for promotion?--Promote those that you know, was
the reply. As for those that you do not know, will not their claims be
brought before you by others?

Tz Lu said: The Prince of Wei is waiting, Sir, for you to take up
the reins of government. Pray what is the first reform you would
introduce?--The Master replied: I would begin by defining terms and
making them exact.[4]--Oh, indeed! exclaimed Tzu Lu. But how can
you possibly put tilings straight by such a circuitous route?--The
Master said: How unmannerly you are, Yu! In matters which he does not
understand, the wise man will always reserve his judgment. If terms are
not correctly defined, words will not harmonise with things. If words
do not harmonise with things, public business will remain undone. If
public business remains undone, order and harmony will not flourish.
If order and harmony do not flourish, law and justice will not attain
their ends. If law and justice do not attain their ends, the people
will be unable to move hand or foot. The wise man, therefore, frames
his definitions to regulate his speech, and his speech to regulate his
actions. He is never reckless in his choice of words.

Fan Chih asked to be taught the art of husbandry. The Master said:
Any farmer can teach you that better than I can. He then asked to be
taught gardening. The Master said: Any gardener will teach you that
better than I can. Fan Chih having gone out, the Master said: What a
small-minded man is Fan Hs! If the ruler is addicted to modesty and
self-control, his people will not permit themselves to be irreverent.
If the ruler loves justice and duty, his people will not venture to be
unruly. If the ruler loves sincerity and good faith, the people will
not be slow to respond. Such being his qualities, the people will flock
to him from all quarters, with their babes strapped to their backs.
What need for him to know the art of husbandry?[5]

The Master said: If the ruler is personally upright, his subjects will
do their duty unbidden; if he is not personally upright, they will not
obey, whatever his bidding.

When the Master went to Wei, Jan Yu drove his carriage. The Master
said: What an abundant population!--Jan Yu said: Now that the people
are so abundant, what is the next thing to be done?--Enrich them, said
Confucius.--And having enriched them, what then?--Teach them, was the
reply.

The Master said: If a country had none but good rulers for a hundred
years, crime might be stamped out and the death-penalty abolished. How
true this saying is!

If a kingly sovereign were to appear, by the end of one generation
natural goodness would prevail.

If a man can reform his own heart, what should hinder him from taking
part in government? But if he cannot reform his own heart, what has he
to do with reforming others?

Duke Ting[6] asked if there was a single sentence by which a country
might be made to flourish. Confucius answered: No single sentence can
be expected to have such a virtue as this. But there is the common
saying: "To be a good king is difficult; to be a good minister is not
easy." He who realises the difficulty of being a good king--has he not
almost succeeded in making his country prosper by a single sentence?
--Is there a single sentence, continued the Duke, by which a country
can be ruined?--Confucius answered: No such power can reside in any
single sentence. But there is a saying: "I have no joy in kingly rule,
I rejoice only because none can oppose my will." Now if the king's will
is good, and none opposes it, all may be well; but if it is not good,
and yet none opposes it, has he not almost succeeded in ruining his
country be a single sentence?

The Duke of Sh[7] asked about the conditions of good government. The
Master said: Government is good when it makes happy those who live
under it and attracts those who live far away.

Tz Hsia, when governor of Ch-fu,[8] asked for advice on government.
The Master said: Do not try to do things in a hurry. Do not be intent
on small gains. What is done quickly is not done thoroughly; and if
small gains are considered, great things remain unaccomplished.

Tz Lu asked about the service due to a prince. The Master said: Use no
deceit, but if you oppose him, oppose him openly.

The Master said: If the ruler cherishes the principle of self-control,
the people will be docile to his commands.[9]

Shun[10] was one who did nothing, yet governed well. For what, in
effect, did he do? Religiously self-observant, he sat gravely on his
throne, and that is all.[11]

In serving your prince, make the actual service your first care, and
only put the emolument second.

The head of the Chi clan was on the point of attacking the small
principality of Chuan-y. Jan Yu and Chi Lu came to see Confucius,
and said: Our lord is going to have trouble with Chuan-y.--Confucius
said: Is it not you, Chiu, who are to blame in this? The ancient
kings long ago made Chuan-y the centre of the worship of the Eastern
Mng mountain, and moreover it is situated within the territory of
Lu. Its ruler has independent priestly functions.[12] What right have
you to attack it?--Jan Yu replied: It is the will of our master;
we, his ministers, have neither of us any wish to act thus.--Chiu,
said Confucius, Chou Jn[13] had a saying: "If you are capable of
displaying energy, hold office; if not, resign." Of what use is that
minister likely to be, who does not sustain his master in the presence
of danger, or support him when about to fall? Besides, what you say
is wrong. If a tiger or a wild buffalo escapes from its cage, if a
tortoise-shell or jade ornament is smashed in its casket, whose fault
is it, pray?--Jan Yu replied: But Chuan-y is strongly fortified, and
close to our own town of Pi. If we do not take it now, it will cause
trouble to our descendants in a later generation.--Confucius rejoined:
Chiu, an honest man hates your hypocrite who will not openly avow his
greed, but tries instead to excuse it. I have heard that the ruler of
a state or of a clan is troubled not by the smallness of its numbers
but by the absence of even-handed justice; not by poverty but by the
presence of discontent; for where there is justice there will be no
poverty; where there is harmony there will be no lack in numbers;
where there is content there will be no revolution. This being the
case then, if outlying communities resist your authority, cultivate
the arts of refinement and goodness in order to attract them; and
when you have attracted them, make them happy and contented. Now you
two, Yu and Chiu, are aiding and abetting your master; here is an
outlying community which resists your authority, and you are unable
to attract it. Partition and collapse are imminent in your own State,
and you are unable to preserve it intact. And yet you are planning
military aggression within the borders of your country! Verily I fear
that Chi-sun's [14]troubles will come, not from Chuan-y, but from the
interior of his own palace.

When the Master came to Wu-chng, he heard the sound of singing and
stringed instruments. He was pleased, but said with a smile: Is it
necessary to take a pole-axe to kill a fowl?--Tz Yu replied: Some
time ago, Sir, I heard you say that the study of true principles made
the ruler beneficent and men of the lower class easy to govern.--My
children, said the Master, Yen is right. What I said was only in
jest.[15]

Tz Chang asked Confucius, saying: What are the essentials of good
government?--The Master said: Esteem the five excellent, and banish the
four evil things; then you will become fit to govern.--Tz Chang asked:
What are the five excellent things?--The Master replied: The wise and
good ruler is benevolent without expending treasure; he lays burdens
on the people without causing them to grumble; he has desires without
being covetous; he is serene without being proud; he is awe-inspiring
without being ferocious.--He is benevolent without expending treasure:
what does that mean?--The Master replied: He simply follows the course
which naturally brings benefit to the people.[16] Is he not thus
benevolent without expending treasure? In imposing burdens, he chooses
the right time and the right means, and nobody can grumble. His desire
is for goodness, and he achieves it; how should he be covetous? The
wise and good ruler never allows himself to be negligent, whether he is
dealing with many men or with few, with small matters or with great.
Is this not serenity without pride? He has his cap and robe properly
adjusted, and throws a noble dignity into his looks, so that his
gravity inspires onlookers with respect. Is he not thus awe-inspiring
without being ferocious?--Tz Chang then asked: What are the four evil
things?--The Master said: Cruelty:--leaving the people in their native
ignorance, yet punishing their wrong-doing with death. Oppression:--
requiring the immediate completion of tasks imposed without previous
warning. Ruthlessness:--giving vague orders, and then insisting on
punctual fulfilment. Peddling husbandry:--stinginess in conferring the
proper rewards on deserving men.[17]



[1] _Ai_ was the honorary epithet of the Duke of Lu who was reigning
during the last years of Confucius' life.

[2] Chi Kang Tzu succeeded to the headship of the great Chi family in
491, when Chi Huan died, by whom he was advised to recall Confucius
from his long wanderings. The sage, however, did not return until eight
years later.

[3] The point of the original lies partly in the fact that the Chinese
words for "govern" and "straight" are similar in form and identical in
sound.

[4] The hidden meaning of this saying is made clear by the context
to be found in Ss-ma Chien's biography of Confucius. The Prince of
Wei at this time was the young man mentioned on p. 128 as holding the
throne against his own father. By so doing he had in some sort inverted
the relationship which should have subsisted between them, and each was
in a false position, the father being deprived of his proper parental
dignity, and the son no longer "doing his duty as a son" (see p. 41).
Confucius then is administering a veiled rebuke to the young ruler, for
in saying that the first reform necessary is the correct definition
of names, he implies in effect that the terms "father" and "son,"
among others, should be made to resume their proper significance. An
alternative rendering of _chng ming_ as "rectification of the written
character," though backed by the great authority of M. Chavannes, can
only be described as feeble and far-fetched, and has been ably confuted
by Herr Franke in the _T'oung Pao_ for July, 1906.

[5] Confucius is of course merely insisting on the principle of
division of labour, and not by any means depreciating the value of
husbandry or other useful arts. It is not the ruler's business to make
himself proficient in these, because the task of governing and setting
an example to the governed will claim all his attention. Compare
Plato's disapproval of , and Confucius' remarks on his
own skill in various arts (p. 88).

[6] The weak ruler of the Lu State (510-494 B.C.), who lost the
services of Confucius by his infatuation in accepting the insidious
gift of eighty beautiful singing-girls from the Chi State. See
Introduction, p. 16.

[7] Sh was a district of the Chu State, which Confucius visited in
488 B.C. The following anecdote, told by Tan Kung, is a striking
illustration of the above saying. Travelling with his disciples,
the Master came across a woman weeping and wailing beside a grave,
and inquired the cause of her grief. "Alas!" she replied. "My
father-in-law was killed here by a tiger; after that, my husband; and
now my son has perished by the same death."--"But why, then, do you
not go elsewhere?"--"The government here is not harsh," answered the
woman.--"There!" cried the Master, turning to his disciples, "remember
that. Bad government is worse than a tiger."

[8] A small city in Lu.

[9] Legge translates: "When rulers love to observe the rules of
propriety (!), the people respond readily to the calls on them for
service." All the other translators seem likewise to have missed the
point, which is elsewhere insisted on by Confucius--that no man is fit
to govern others who cannot govern himself. On the meaning of _li_, see
Introduction, pp. 30 _seqq._, and note on p. 60.

[10] A legendary Emperor.

[11] This saying might have come straight from the mouth of a Taoist
philosopher. Nor is it the only place where Confucius seems to advocate
quietism. Cf. p. 108.

[12] Literally, "a minister of the altars to the spirits of the land
and grain"; i.e. a direct vassal of the Emperor, and responsible only
to him.

[13] An ancient historiographer, of whom very little is known.

[14] The head of the Chi clan mentioned above.

[15] WuChng means "Martial city," so called from its impregnable
position. Tz Yu, when appointed governor, had succeeded in weaning the
people from their warlike propensities, and in introducing the milder
arts of peace. This is what made the Master glad, though he could not
help being amused at the application of the loftiest principles to such
a tiny community. About ancient Chinese music we know unfortunately
next to nothing, but it seems to have played as important a part under
the Chou dynasty as in Plato's ideal State.

[16] That is to say, the ruler will always keep the welfare of his
people in view, but without indulging in indiscriminate largess. The
ever-increasing doles of money and corn with which the Roman Emperors
were obliged to buy the favour of the populace would thus have fallen
under the condemnation of Confucius.

[17] The "four evil things" really turn out to be reducible to two,
namely (1) Cruelty--covering the first three; and (2) Meanness.




INDIVIDUAL VIRTUE


The Master said: Is he not a princely man[1]--he who is never vexed
that others know him not?

True virtue[2] rarely goes with artful speech and insinuating looks.

At home, a young man should show the qualities of a son; abroad, those
of a younger brother. He should be circumspect but truthful. He should
have charity in his heart for all men, but associate only with the
virtuous. After thus regulating his conduct, his surplus energy should
be devoted to literary culture.

In the matter of food and lodging, the nobler type of man does not seek
mere repletion and comfort. He is earnest in his affairs and cautious
in his speech, and frequents virtuous company for his own improvement.
He may be called one truly bent on the study of virtue.[3]

Mng I Tz[4] asked for a definition of filial piety. The Master said:
It consists in there being no falling off.[5]--Fan Chih was driving
the Master's carriage some time after, when the latter told him,
saying: Mng I Tz asked me about filial piety, and I answered that it
consisted in there being no falling off.--Fan Ch'ih said: What did you
mean?--The Master replied: That parents should be served in the proper
spirit while living, buried with the proper rites after death, and
worshipped thereafter with the proper sacrifices.

Mng Wu Po[6] asked for a definition of filial piety. The Master said:
There is filial piety when parents are spared all anxiety about their
children except when they happen to fall sick.[7]

Tz Yu put a question on the subject of filial piety. The Master said:
The filial piety of to-day reduces itself to the mere question of
maintenance. Yet this is something in which even our dogs and horses
have a share.[8] Without the feeling of reverence, what is there to
distinguish the two cases?

Tz Hsia also asked about filial piety. The Master said: It can hardly
be gauged from mere outward acts.[9] When there is work to be done,
to relieve one's elders of the toil; or when there is wine and food,
to cause them to partake thereof--is _this_ to be reckoned filial
piety?[10]

Tz Kung inquired about the higher type of man. The Master replied: The
higher type of man is one who acts before he speaks, and professes only
what he practises.

The Master said: The higher type of man is catholic in his sympathy
and free from party bias; the lower type of man is biassed and
un-sympathetic.

A man without charity in his heart--what has he to do with ceremonies?
A man without charity in his heart--what has he to do with music?[11]

Lin Fang inquired as to the prime essential in ceremonial observances.
The Master said: Ah, that is a great question indeed! In all rites,
simplicity is better than extravagance; in mourning for the dead,
heartfelt sorrow is better than punctiliousness.

The Master said: The true gentleman is never contentious. If a spirit
of rivalry is anywhere unavoidable, it is at a shooting-match. Yet
even here he courteously salutes his opponents before taking up
his position, and again when, having lost, he retires to drink the
forfeit-cup. So that even when competing he remains a true gentleman.

It is the spirit of charity which makes a locality good to dwell in. He
who selects a neighbourhood without regard to this quality cannot be
considered wise.

Only he who has the spirit of goodness within him is really able either
to love or to hate.

The princely man never for a single instant quits the path of virtue;
in times of storm and stress he remains in it as fast as ever.

The nobler sort of man in his progress through the world has neither
narrow predilections nor obstinate antipathies. What he follows is the
line of duty.

The nobler sort of man is proficient in the knowledge of his duty; the
inferior man is proficient only in money-making.

In serving his father and mother, a son may use gentle remonstrance;
if he sees that they pay no heed, he should not desist, but merely
increase in deference; if his pains are thrown away, he must show no
resentment.

While one's parents are alive, one should not travel to a distance; if
one must travel, it should be in a fixed direction.[12]

The age of one's parents should always be kept in mind--on the one
hand, as a subject for rejoicing; on the other, as a cause for alarm.

The wise man will be slow to speak but quick to act.

Tz Chang asked, saying: The Prime Minister Tz Wn[13] held office
three times, but showed no joy; he lost it three times, but testified
no concern. When he ceased to be Prime Minister, he was careful to
explain the political situation to his successor. What is your opinion
of him?--

The Master said: He was loyal and conscientious.[14]--Had he not the
highest degree of moral virtue?--That I do not know; how can one judge
of his moral virtue?--Tz Chang continued: When Tsui Tz[15] slew
the Prince of Chi, Chn Wn Tz, though the possessor of ten teams
of war-horses, forsook his wealth and turned his back on the country.
Having come to another state, he said: "Here they are as bad as our own
minister Tsui Tz," and departed. And he repeated this proceeding each
time that he came to a new state.[16] What is your opinion of him?--The
Master said: He was pure and incorruptible.--Had he not the highest
degree of virtue?--I cannot say; how is one to judge?

The Master said: When the solid outweighs the ornamental, we have
boorishness; when the ornamental outweighs the solid, we have
superficial smartness. Only from a proper blending of the two will the
higher type of man emerge. All men are born good. He who loses his
goodness and yet lives is lucky to escape.

Better than one who knows what is right is one who is fond of what is
right; and better than one who is fond of what is right is one who
delights in what is right.

Fan Chih asked in what wisdom consisted. The Master said: Make
righteousness in human affairs your aim, treat all supernatural beings
with respect, but keep aloof from them--then you may be called wise.
Asked about moral virtue, he replied: The virtuous man thinks of
the difficult thing[17] first, and makes material advantage only a
secondary consideration. This may be said to constitute moral virtue.

The Master said: The man of knowledge finds pleasure in the sea,
the man of virtue finds pleasure in the mountains.[18] For the man
of knowledge is restless and the man of virtue is calm. The man of
knowledge is happy, and the man of virtue is long-lived.

The higher type of man, having gathered wide objective knowledge from
the branches of polite learning, will regulate the whole by the inner
rule of conduct,[19] and will thus avoid overstepping the limit.

That virtue is perfect which adheres to a constant mean. It has long
been rare amongst men.

Tz Kung asked: What would you say of the man who conferred benefits
far and wide on the people and was able to be the salvation of all?
Would you pronounce him a man of moral virtue?--Of moral virtue? said
the Master. Nay, rather, of divine virtue.[20] Even Yao and Shun were
still striving to attain this height.

The man of moral virtue, wishing to stand firm himself, will lend
firmness unto others; wishing himself to be illuminated, he will
illuminate others. To be able to do to others as we would be done
by[21]--this is the true domain of moral virtue.

It has not been my lot to see a divine man; could I see a princely
man, that would satisfy me. It has not been my lot to see a thoroughly
virtuous man; could I see a man possessing honesty of soul, that would
satisfy me. Is it possible there should be honesty of soul in one who
pretends to have what he has not; who, when empty, pretends to be
overflowing; who, when in want, pretends to be in affluence?

The higher type of man is calm and serene; the inferior man is
constantly agitated and worried.

With sincerity and truth unite a desire for self-culture. Lay down
your life rather than quit the path of virtue. Enter not the state
which is tottering to its fall. Abide not in the state where sedition
is rampant. When law obtains in the Empire, let yourself be seen; when
lawlessness reigns, retire into obscurity. In a state governed on right
principles, poverty and low station are things to be ashamed of; in an
ill-governed state, riches and rank are things to be ashamed of.

The man of wisdom does not vacillate; the man of natural goodness does
not fret; the man of valour does not fear.

Yen Yan inquired as to the meaning of true goodness. The Master said:
The subdual of self, and reversion to the natural laws governing
conduct--this is true goodness. If a man can for the space of one day
subdue his selfishness and revert to natural laws, the whole world will
call him good. True goodness springs from a man's own heart. How can it
depend on other men?--Yen Yan said: Kindly tell me the practical rule
to be deduced from this.--The Master replied: Do not use your eyes,
your ears, your power of speech or your faculty of movement without
obeying the inner law of self-control.[22]--Yen Yan said: Though I am
not quick in thought or act, I will make it my business to carry out
this precept.

Chung Kung inquired as to the meaning of true goodness. The Master
said: When out of doors, behave as though you were entertaining a
distinguished guest; in ruling the people, behave as though you were
officiating at a solemn sacrifice; what you would not wish done to
yourself, do not unto others.[23] Then in public as in private life
you will excite no ill-will. Chung Kung said: Though I am not quick in
thought or act, I will make it my business to carry out this precept.

Ss-ma Niu inquired as to the meaning of true goodness. The Master
said: The truly good man is slow of speech.[24]--Slowness of speech!
Is this what goodness consists in?--The Master said: Does not the
difficulty of deciding what it is right to _do_ necessarily imply
slowness to _speak_?

Ss-ma Niu asked for a definition of the princely man. The Master said:
The princely man is one who knows neither grief nor fear.--Absence of
grief and fear! Is this the mark of a princely man?--The Master said:
If on searching his heart he finds no guilt, why should he grieve? of
what should he be afraid?

Tz Chang asked how to attain exalted virtue. ... The Master said: Make
conscientiousness and truth your guiding principles, and thus pass on
to the cultivation of duty to your neighbour. This is exalted virtue.

The Master said: The nobler sort of man emphasises the good qualities
in others, and does not accentuate the bad. The inferior sort does the
reverse.

Tz Chang asked: What must a man do in order to be considered
distinguished?--The Master said: What do you mean by the term
"distinguished"?--Tz Chang replied: I mean one whose fame fills both
his own private circle and the State at large.--The Master said: That
is notoriety, not distinction. The man of true distinction is simple,
honest, and a lover of justice and duty. He weighs men's words, and
observes the expression of their faces.[25] He is anxious to put
himself below others. Such a one is truly distinguished in his private
and his public life. As to the man who is merely much talked about, he
puts on an appearance of charity and benevolence, but his actions belie
it. He is self-satisfied and has no misgivings. Neither in private nor
in public life does he achieve more than notoriety.

Tz Kung asked a question about friendship. The Master said: Be
conscientious in speaking to your friend, but tactful in your efforts
to guide him aright. If these fail, stop. Do not court a personal
rebuff.

The Duke of Sh addressed Confucius, saying: We have an upright man
in our country. His father stole a sheep, and the son bore witness
against him.--In our country, Confucius replied, uprightness is
something different from this. A father hides the guilt of his son, and
a son hides the guilt of his father. It is in such conduct that true
uprightness is to be found.

Fan Chih asked a question about moral virtue. The Master said: In
private life, show self-respect; in the management of affairs, be
attentive and thorough; in your dealings with others, be honest and
conscientious. Never abandon these principles, even among savages.

The Master said: The nobler sort of man is accommodating but not
obsequious; the inferior sort is obsequious but not accommodating.

The nobler sort of man is easy to serve yet difficult to please. Who
seeks to please him in wrongful ways will not succeed. In exacting
service from others, he takes account of aptitudes and limitations.
The baser sort of man is difficult to serve yet easy to please. Who
seeks to please him in any wrongful way will assuredly succeed. And he
requires absolute perfection in those from whom he exacts service.

The nobler sort of man is dignified but not proud; the inferior man is
proud but not dignified.

Hsien said: To refrain from self-glorification, to subdue feelings of
resentment, to control selfish desire--may this be held to constitute
perfect virtue?--The Master said: These things may certainly be
considered hard to achieve, but I am not so sure that they constitute
perfect virtue.[26]

The Master said: A man of inward virtue[27] will have virtuous words
on his lips, but a man of virtuous words is not always a virtuous man.
The man of perfect goodness[27b] is sure to possess courage, but the
courageous man is not necessarily good.

Can true love be anything but exacting? How can our sense of duty allow
us to abstain from admonition?

The nobler sort of man tends upwards; the baser sort tends downwards.

The princely type of man is modest in his speech, but liberal in his
performance.

The princely man has three great virtues, which I cannot claim for
myself. He is truly benevolent, and is free from care; he is truly
wise, and is free from delusions; he is truly brave, and is free from
fear.--Nay, replied Tz Kung, these virtues are our Master's own.[27]

The Master said: Is not he a sage who neither anticipates deceit nor
suspects bad faith in others, yet is prompt to detect them when they
appear?

Some one asked: How do you regard the principle of returning good for
evil?--The Master said: What, then, is to be the return for good?
Rather should you return justice for injustice, and good for good.[28]

Tz Lu asked about the conduct of the princely man.[29] The Master
said: He cultivates himself so as to gain in self-respect.--Does he
rest content with that?--He cultivates himself, was the reply, so as to
give happiness to others.--And is he content with that?--He cultivates
himself so as to confer peace and prosperity on the whole people.

By self-cultivation to confer peace and prosperity on the whole
people!--was not this the object which Yao and Shun still laboured to
attain?

Tz Kung asked for advice on the practice of moral virtue. The Master
replied: If an artisan wants to do his work well, he must begin by
sharpening his tools. Even so, among the great men of your country, you
should serve the wise and good, and make friends of men who have this
moral virtue.

The Master said: The higher type of man makes a sense of duty the
groundwork of his character, blends with it in action a sense of
harmonious proportion, manifests it in a spirit of unselfishness, and
perfects it by the addition of sincerity and truth. Then indeed is he a
noble character.

The higher type of man seeks all that he wants in himself; the inferior
man seeks all that he wants from others.

The higher type of man is firm but not quarrelsome; sociable, but not
clannish.

The wise man does not esteem a person more highly because of what he
says, neither does he undervalue what is said because of the person who
says it.

Tz Kung asked, saying: Is there any one maxim which ought to be acted
upon throughout one's whole life?--The Master replied: Surely the maxim
of charity[30] is such:--Do not unto others what you would not they
should do unto you.

The nobler sort of man pays special attention to nine points. He is
anxious to see clearly, to hear distinctly, to be kindly in his looks,
respectful in his demeanour, conscientious in his speech, earnest in
his affairs; when in doubt, he is careful to inquire; when in anger, he
thinks of the consequences; when offered an opportunity for gain, he
thinks only of his duty.

Tz Chang asked Confucius a question about moral virtue. Confucius
replied: Moral virtue simply consists in being able, anywhere and
everywhere, to exercise five particular qualities. Asked what these
were, he said: Self-respect, magnanimity, sincerity, earnestness and
benevolence. Show self-respect, and others will respect you;[31]
be magnanimous, and you will win all hearts; be sincere, and men
will trust you; be earnest, and you will achieve great things; be
benevolent, and you will be fit to impose your will on others.

Tz Lu asked: Docs not the princely man[32] value courage?--The Master
said: He puts righteousness first. The man of high station[33] who has
courage without righteousness is a menace to the State; the common man
who has courage without righteousness is nothing more than a brigand.

Tzu Kung asked: Has the nobler sort of man any hatreds?--The Master
replied: He has. He hates those who publish the faults of others; he
hates men of low condition who vilify those above them; he hates those
whose courage is unaccompanied by self-restraint; he hates those who
are audacious but narrow-minded. And you, Tz, he added, have you
also your hatreds?--I hate, replied the disciple, those who think
that wisdom consists in prying and meddling; courage, in showing no
compliance; and honesty, in denouncing other men.



[1] This is the much-discussed _chn tz_, an expression of which the
stereotyped English equivalent is "the superior man." But in this there
is, unhappily, a tinge of blended superciliousness and irony absolutely
foreign to the native phrase, which in my opinion makes it unsuitable.
"Princely man" is as nearly as possible the literal translation, and
sometimes, as we shall see, it actually means "prince." But in the
majority of cases the connotation of rank or authority is certainly
not explicit, and as a general rendering I have preferred "the higher
type of man," "the nobler sort of man," or sometimes more simply, "the
good man." Perhaps the nearest approximation in any European language
is to be found in the Greek   , because that implies high
mental and moral qualities combined with all the outward bearing of a
gentleman. Compare also Aristotle's  , who is however rather
more abstract and ideal.

[2] _Jn_, the term here translated "virtue," is perhaps the most
important single word in the Analects, and the real corner-stone
of Confucian ethics. Its primary meaning, in accordance with the
etymology, is "humanity" in the larger sense, i.e. natural goodness
of heart as shown in intercourse with one's fellow-men. Hence it
is sometimes best translated "loving-kindness" or "charity" in the
biblical sense, though in many cases a more convenient, if vaguer,
rendering is "virtue," "moral virtue," or even, as in Legge, "perfect
virtue."

[3] Literally, "he may be called a lover of learning." But "learning"
in the mouth of Confucius is generally to be understood as study of
the rules of right conduct with a view to their practical application.
The object of all learning was to enable a man to develop the natural
goodness within him, so as to lead a life of virtuous culture. It was
not pursued solely for its own sake, nor had it become, as with us,
divorced from all ethical significance.

[4] The chief of the house of Mng, one of the three great families of
Lu, and (according to Ss-ma Chien) a disciple of Confucius.

[5] The reply is enigmatical, but it is clear from what follows that
this, and not, as Legge translates, "disobedience," is the true meaning.

[6] The eldest son of Mng I Tz.

[7] It is astonishing that Chu Hsi should have tried to improve on
the old commentators here, and almost equally astonishing that Legge
should have followed him, with this result: "The Master said, Parents
are anxious lest their children should be sick" (and therefore children
should take care of their persons)!

[8] Here again it is almost incredible that Legge should have adopted
such a ridiculous interpretation as the following--without the
authority, this time, of Chu Hsi: "The filial piety of nowadays means
the support of one's parents. But dogs and horses likewise are able
to do something in the way of support." The image conjured up by this
sentence is grotesque, to say the least.

[9] Literally, "colour difficult." This famous sentence, a
stumbling-block to native and foreigner alike, surely marks the extreme
limit to which conciseness can be carried in Chinese. "The difficulty
is with the countenance" is the lame translation offered by Legge,
and later scholars have mostly followed in his footsteps, even Mr. Ku
Hung-ming failing badly for once. Where all have gone astray is in
taking the "difficulty" to exist in the mind of the would-be filial
son, instead of being that felt by the onlooker who wishes to gauge
the genuineness of the quality in others. Only a few months ago, a new
and ingenious interpretation was suggested by my father, Professor
H. A. Giles, namely: "To define it is difficult"; but after much
consideration I am led to prefer the rendering in the text, inasmuch as
the word _s_ is quite commonly used to denote the external as opposed
to the internal, form as opposed to essence.

[10] The answer of course is--No; outward acts do not constitute filial
piety, unless prompted by a genuine duteous feeling in the heart.

[11] A notable utterance, which may be commended to those who have been
taught to regard Confucius as a man of ceremonies and outward show.

[12] In order that the parents may know where their son is.

[13] Of the Chu State.

[14] The root idea of this word _chung_ is loyalty to _oneself_,
devotion to principle, or, as Mr. Ku Hung-ming well translates it,
conscientiousness. Loyalty or fidelity to the sovereign is only an
extended sense. Here the two ideas appear to be blended, but in a
famous passage to be noted further on (p. 118) much trouble has
resulted from ignoring the first and fundamental meaning.

[15] A high officer in Chi, the state adjoining Lu.

[16] The fact that Chn Wn Tz could not reconcile it with his
conscience to settle in any of the states which he visited throws a
lurid light on the disorder prevailing in the Empire at this period
(547 B.C.). Murder and usurpation were evidently the rule rather than
the exception.

[17] That is to say, the virtuous act, which he will perform for its
own sake, regardless of consequences.

[18] Each finds pleasure in that part of Nature which resembles himself.

[19] As may be inferred from its composition, the character _li_
originally had sole reference to religious rites, whence however
it came to be applied to every sort of ceremonial, including the
ordinary rules of politeness, the etiquette of society, the conduct
befitting all stations of life, and moreover to the state of mind
of which such conduct is the outcome. This state of mind is one of
equably adjusted harmony and self-restraint, and it is in this sense
of an inward principle of proportion and self-control that the word
is frequently used in the Analects. Why such a vile phrase as "the
rules of propriety" was ever coined to express this subtle conception,
and retained in every context, however inappropriate, must remain
an insoluble mystery. Is it surprising that one of the greatest
of world-teachers should still be waiting to come into his full
heritage, when his sayings are made to suggest nothing so much as the
headmistress of a young ladies' seminary?

[20] It is interesting to observe that Confucius allows a grade of
heroic and almost divine virtue even above that which constitutes
complete goodness for all practical purposes, just as Aristotle places
his    above the .

[21] It is only fair to mention that the above is not an exact
translation of the words in the Chinese text, though I believe their
import to be what I have set down. The point is too technical and
abstruse to be discussed here.

[22] See note on p. 60. This is the solemn nonsense dished up by Legge:
"Look not at what is contrary to propriety; listen not to what is
contrary to propriety; speak not what is contrary to propriety; make no
movement which is contrary to propriety."

[23] Confucius here, as in general, suits his reply to the questioner.
In answering Yen Yan, the model disciple, he had gone to the very
root of the matter, making it clear that the essence of true goodness
has little or nothing to do with externals. To Chung Kung, who was
less advanced and doubtless somewhat lacking in grace or dignity
of demeanour, he gives more superficial advice, but winds up by
enunciating the Golden Rule, which is the best practical manner of
manifesting inward goodness of heart.

[24] There seems to be a play on this word which cannot be brought out
in translation.

[25] This probably means that he will not rely on words alone in
judging of character.

[26] Being too purely negative.

[27] It is almost impossible, here and in other passages, to make any
real distinction of meaning between _te_, the manifestation of eternal
principles in the soul of man, and _jn_, natural goodness of heart,
though the former, being more universal and abstract, may be said to
include the latter, which generally implies a certain relation to one's
fellow-men.

[28] The principle of returning good for evil, which is here apparently
represented as a well-known ethical doctrine, was first enunciated, so
far as we know, by Lao Tz. Confucius rejects this vain idealism, and
advocates the much sounder and more practical basis for society given
in the text.

[29] Here chn tz seems almost to denote an actual prince, not merely
a man with princely qualities.

[30] Legge translates _shu_ "reciprocity," apparently for no other
reason than to explain the maxim that follows. But it really stands
for something higher than the strictly utilitarian principle of _do ut
des_. Both here and in another famous passage (see p. 118) it is almost
equivalent to _jn_, goodness of heart, only with the idea of altruism
more explicitly brought out. It connotes sympathetic consideration for
others, and hence the best rendering would seem to be "loving-kindness"
or "charity." The concluding maxim is really nothing more nor less than
the Golden Rule of Christ, though less familiar to us in its negative
form.

[32] The Chinese have a proverb: "A man must insult himself before
others will."

[33] A good example of the fluctuating content of the term _chn tz_,
which in the disciple's question implies morality without reference to
rank, and in the Master's reply rank and authority without definite
moral qualities.




CONFUCIUS' ESTIMATE OF OTHERS


The Master said: I may talk all day to Hui without his putting in
a word of criticism or dissent--just as though he were deficient
in understanding. But after he has left me, I find, on examining
his private conduct, that he knows for all that how to exemplify my
teaching. No! Hui is not deficient in understanding.

Tz Kung asked, saying: What, Sir, is your opinion of me?--I would
liken you, Tz, replied the Master, to a vessel limited in its
function.--What sort of vessel? asked Tz Kung.--A richly ornamented
sacrificial vessel, was the reply.[1]

Some one remarked that Yung had goodness of heart but no cleverness of
speech.--The Master said: Of what use is cleverness of speech? Those
who are always ready to assail others with their tongue are sure to
make themselves disliked. As to Yung's goodness of heart I have no
certain knowledge; but how would he benefit by having cleverness of
speech?

The Master said: My teaching makes no head-way. How and if I were to
board a raft and float away over the sea? My friend Yu would come with
me, I feel sure.--Tz Lu, hearing this, was glad. The Master continued:
Yu surpasses me in his love of daring, but he lacks discretion and
judgment.

Mng Wu Po asked whether Tz Lu had true moral virtue. The Master
replied: I do not know.--- Asked a second time, the Master said:
Yu might be trusted to organise the military levies of a large and
powerful State, but whether he is possessed of true virtue I cannot
say.--And what is your opinion with regard to Chiu?--The Master said:
Chiu might be entrusted with the government of a district numbering a
thousand households or a hundred war-chariots, but whether he has true
virtue I cannot say.--And Chih, what of him?--The Master said: Chih
might be employed to stand in his official dress at a royal levee and
converse with the visitors and guests; whether he has true virtue I
cannot say.[2]

The Master addressing Tz Kung said: Which of the two is the better
man, you or Hui?--Tz Kung replied: How can I venture to compare myself
with Hui? Hui hears one point and promptly masters the whole. I hear
one point and am only able to feel my way to a second.--The Master
agreed: No, you are not equal to Hui; neither of us two[3] is equal to
Hui.

Tsai Y used to sleep during the day. The Master said: Rotten wood
cannot be carved, walls made of dirt and mud cannot be plastered:
--what is the good of reprimanding Y? At first, he continued, my way
of dealing with others was to listen to their words and to take their
actions upon trust. Now, my way is to listen to what they say and then
to watch what they do. This change in me is owing to Y.

The Master said: I have never yet met a really strong character.--Some
one suggested Shn Chng.--The Master said: Chng is a slave to his
passions. How can he possess strength of character?

Tz Kung said: I am anxious to avoid doing to others that which I
would not have them do to me. The Master said: Tz, you have not got
as far as that.

The Master said of Tz Chan[4] that he had four of the qualities of
the princely man:--in his personal demeanour he was grave, in serving
those above him he was attentive, in his care for the people he was
kind, in his ordering of the people he was just.

The Master said: Yen P'ing[5] knows the art of associating with his
friends: however old the acquaintance may be, he always treats them
with the same respect.

Ning Wu Tz's[6] behaviour was wise so long as his country was well
governed; when revolution came, his behaviour was stupid. His wisdom
may be equalled by others, but his stupidity is beyond all imitation.

Po I and Shu Chi[7] never remembered old injuries, and therefore
their enemies were few.

Who will say that Wei-sheng Kao[8] was an upright man? When asked by
somebody for some vinegar, he went and begged it of a neighbour, and
gave this to the man who had asked him.

For the space of three months together Hui[9] would not deviate in
spirit from the path of perfect virtue. My other disciples may attain
this height once in a day or in a month, but that is all.

Po Niu[10] lying sick unto death, the Master went to visit him. He
clasped his hand through the window and said: He is dying. Such is
fate. Alas! that such a man should have such an illness, that such a
man should have such an illness!

The Master said: Hui was indeed a philosopher! Other men living as he
did, in a miserable alley, with a single dish of food and a single bowl
of drink, could not have endured the distress. But Hui was invariably
cheerful. He was a philosopher indeed!

Jan Chiu said: It is not that I have no joy in my Master's teaching,
it is my strength that fails me.--The Master replied: Those whose
strength fails them fall fainting by the way. What you do is to set up
bounds which you will not attempt to pass.

The Master said: Mng Chih-fan is no braggart. Once after a defeat,
when he was bringing up the rear, he whipped his horse as he was about
to enter the city gate, and cried: It is not courage that makes me
last, it is my horse that won't gallop fast enough.[11]

The Master addressing Yen Yan said: It is only you and I who would be
content to accept public employment when it was offered to us, and to
retire into obscurity when we were dismissed.--Tz Lu then said: If
you, Sir, had the conduct of three legions, whom would you associate
with yourself in the command?--I would not, replied the Master, choose
a man who would attack a tiger unarmed, cross a river without a boat,
or sacrifice his life without a moment's regret. Rather should it be
one who would not embark on an enterprise without anxiety, and who was
accustomed to lay his plans well before putting them into execution.[12]

The Master said: Tai Po may be said to have reached the summit of
virtue. Having resolutely renounced the Imperial throne, he put it out
of the people's power to glorify his act of renunciation![13]

In the Emperor Y[14] I find no loophole for censure. His own food
and drink were plain, but his offerings to the ancestral spirits
showed extreme piety. His own garments were poor, but his robes and
cap of state were extremely fine. His own dwelling was humble, but
he spent all his strength on the construction of public canals and
water-courses. I find no loophole for censure in Y.

After the word had gone forth, Hui was never backward in his deeds.

The Master speaking of Yen Yan said: Ah, what a loss! I used to see
him ever progressing and never coming to a standstill.

The Master said: Yu, I fancy, is a man who would stand up, dressed in
shabby garments quilted with hemp, among people attired in furs of fox
and badger, and not be ashamed. "Hating none and courting none, how
can he be other than good?"[15]--As Tz Lu kept constantly humming
over this line, the Master said: This rule of conduct is not enough by
itself to constitute goodness.

The Master said: None of those who accompanied me on the journey to the
states of Chn and Tsai come to learn from me now.[16] Distinguished
for their virtuous conduct were Yen Yan, Min Tz-chien, Jan Po-niu
and Chung Kung; for their skill in speaking, Tsai Wo and Tz Kung; for
their administrative powers, Jan Yu and Chi Lu; for their literary
attainments, Tz Yu and Tz Hsia.

Hui does not help me[17]--he takes such delight in everything I say.

What noble piety[18] is that of Min Tz-chien! Other men speak of him
in exactly the same terms as his own parents and his own brethren.

When Yen Yan died, the Master wept with passionate grief, so
that those who were with him said: Master, your sorrow is too
passionate.--Is it too passionate? he replied. Whose death should be a
cause for violent grief, if not this man's?

On one occasion there were standing in attendance on the Master Min
Tz, looking gentle and mild; Tz Lu, looking upright and soldierly;
Jan Yu and Tz Kung, looking frank and affable. The Master was pleased.
"A man like Yu," he remarked, "will not come by a natural death."[19]

The Master said: Why is Yu playing his martial music at my door?--The
disciples began to lose their respect for Tz Lu, whereupon the Master
said: Yu has ascended the steps of the temple, though he has not yet
reached the inner sanctuary.

Tz Kung asked which was the man of greater worth, Shih or Shang. The
Master replied: Shih exceeds and Shang falls short.--Then Shih is the
better of the two?--The Master said: To exceed is as bad as to fall
short.

The head of the Chi clan was already richer than Chou Kung, yet Chiu
kept levying taxes for him and adding to his wealth.--He is no disciple
of mine, said the Master. My children, you may beat the drum and attack
him.[20]

The Master said: Hui reaches the verge of perfection, yet he is often
in great want. Tz does not resign himself to the will of Heaven,
yet his worldly goods continue to increase. His judgments, however,
frequently hit the mark.

Tz Lu asked if he should at once put the precepts which he heard into
practice.--The Master said: There are your father and elder brothers
to consult first; why should you be so impatient to act on what you
hear?--Jan Yu asked the same question, and the Master said: Yes, act
at once according to the instruction that is given to you.--Kung-hsi
Hua then said: When Yu asked if he should put the precepts which he
heard into practice, you replied, Sir, that he had his father and elder
brothers to consult first. When Chiu asked the same question, you
said:

"Act at once according to the instruction that is given to you." Now I
am puzzled, and beg for an explanation.--The Master replied: Chiu is
apt to hang back, therefore I press him on. Yu has eagerness enough for
two, therefore I hold him back.

Chi Tz-jan[21] asked if Chung Yu and Jan Chiu could be termed great
ministers. The Master said: I thought you had something extraordinary
to ask about, and now it turns out to be a question about Yu and
Chiu. What men call a great minister is one who serves his prince
according to the principles of truth and virtue, and when that is
impossible, resigns. Yu and Chiu, however, can only be termed ordinary
officials.--Which is as much as to say that they will always obediently
follow their master's will?--The Master replied: They would not follow
him so far as to commit parricide or regicide.

The Master said: Yu is the man to settle a long litigation in a few
words.

Tz Kung was fond of weighing other men's merits and defects. The
Master said: Surely Tzu must be a very great sage! Personally, I have
no time for this.





[1] It is said elsewhere in the Analects (see p. 94) that "the higher
type of man is unlike a vessel designed for some special use," which
means that his moral capacity is not narrow and limited. Tz Kung,
then, it seems, had not fully grasped the higher principles of
morality, was wanting in breadth of mind and the larger outlook on
life. His aptitudes, however, were excellent so far as they went, and
the Master compliments him hero on his proficiency in things relating
to religious ceremonial.

[2] Confucius probably wished to impress upon his questioner that
true moral virtue (fen) was deeply implanted in the soul, and not to
be gauged offhand from the presence or absence of certain superficial
signs.

[3] It is passing strange that the clumsy "I grant you" for _wu y ju_
(I and you) should have found favour with translators. Wade even goes
one better, by translating: "I award you this praise, Hui does not
equal you "!

[4] Prime Minister of the Chng State in the sixth century B.C. When he
had ruled for three years, so great was the change effected that "doors
were not locked at night, and lost articles were not picked up on the
highway." Confucius wept when he heard of his death.

[5] Minister in the neighbouring state of Chi.

[6] A minister of the Wei State in the seventh century B.C. In the
revolution referred to the prince was driven from his throne, but
afterwards reinstated through the "stupidity," that is to say, the
unwavering loyalty and devotion of Ning.

[7] These were brothers, celebrated for their protest against the
overthrow of the Yin dynasty. Rather than live under the rule of the
new sovereign, the great and virtuous Wu Wang, they wandered away
into the mountains to perish of cold and hunger. This fidelity to the
cause of Chou Hsin, one of the bloodiest and most infamous tyrants in
history, seems a shade more quixotic than the conduct of those who
espoused for so long the fallen fortunes of the house of Stuart.

[8] This was a young man who, if legend may be trusted, died more
heroically than he lived. He agreed to meet a girl under a bridge, but,
woman-like, she failed to keep her appointment. Though the water was
rising rapidly, her lover waited on, unwilling to quit his post, and
finally clung to a pillar until he was drowned.

[9] This is the man whom Confucius, according to Wade (see p. 73),
ranked below Tz Kung!

[10] Po Niu is said to have been suffering from leprosy, and therefore
he would not allow visitors to enter his room.

[11] Few will see anything harmful in this anecdote as told by
Confucius. Yet it is actually made to figure in the general charge
of insincerity and untruthfulness brought against him by Legge. "The
action was gallant," he says, "but the apology for it was weak and
unnecessary. And yet Confucius saw nothing in the whole but matter for
praise." In the first place, Legge entirely ignores the possibility
that Mng Chih-fan was really speaking the truth. But even if it were
otherwise, Confucius' only comment is that he was "no braggart." Surely
it is an overstrained morality that could be offended by this.

[12] Compare Moltke's motto: "Erst wgen, dann wagen." Tz Lu was noted
for his reckless bravery. Evidently jealous of the praise bestowed
on Yen Yan, he makes a delightfully artless attempt to secure some
recognition for himself, but only draws down a reproof. The Master's
relations with this vain, impulsive, good-hearted disciple often remind
one of those subsisting between Dr. Johnson and Goldsmith.

[13] Tai Po was the direct heir to his father's throne, but knowing
that the latter wished to be succeeded by his youngest son (the father
of the future Wn Wang, the virtual founder of the Chou dynasty), he
went into voluntary exile among the barbarous tribes of the south, but
kept the motives of his conduct to himself, and thus obtained no credit
for his self-sacrifice.

[14] The "Great Y," who in the reign of the Emperor Yao laboured
incessantly for eight years to control the disastrous inundations of
the Yellow River, himself became Emperor after the death of Yao's
successor Shun, and founded the Hsia dynasty (2205-1766 B.C.).

[15] A quotation from the Book of Poetry, a collection of some 300
ancient ballads said to have been selected and arranged by Confucius
himself, and hence raised to the dignity of a "classic."

[16] This must have been said by Confucius after his return from exile,
when many of his followers were dead or in other parts of the Empire.
Ch'en and Ts'ai are particularly mentioned because it was on the road
between these two small states that he met with the most perilous
adventure of his life, being surrounded by hostile troops and cut off
from all supplies for the space of seven days (see p. 115). It is not
quite clear whether the next sentence should not be taken as a note
added by the compiler, giving the names of those who were with the
Master on this journey.

[17] By criticism or questioning. Cf. p. 71.

[18] On hsiao, occurring in another treatise, Mr. Ku Hung-ming has the
following note: "The word in the text does not mean merely a filial
son, but has the meaning of the Latin 'pius'--pious in its full sense,
reverential to God, dutiful to parents, good, faithful and orderly in
all the relations of life."

[19] "This prediction was verified. When Confucius returned to Lu from
Wei, he left Tz Lu and Tz Kao engaged there in official service.
Troubles arose. News came to Lu, B.C. 479, that a revolution was in
progress in Wei, and when Confucius heard it, he said, 'Chai will come
here, but Yu will die,' So it turned out. When Tz Kao saw that matters
were desperate he made his escape, but Tz Lu would not forsake the
chief who had treated him well. He threw himself into the mle and was
slain."--Legge, _Life of Confucius_.

[20] This was the disciple by whoso agency Confucius was finally
restored to Lu. But Confucius was the last man to let private
considerations stand in the way when public interests were involved
and a crying evil had to be redressed. "Beating the drum" has no
reference, as Legge thinks, to "the practice of executing criminals in
the market-place." It was simply the recognised signal in warfare for
advancing to the attack, gongs being used to sound the retreat.

[21] A member of the ambitious family which was scheming to get the
whole power of the dukedom into its own hands. The two disciples here
mentioned had recently been enlisted in its service, and Chi Tz-jan is
anxious to find out how far they can be relied upon in case of need.
Confucius sees through his nefarious designs.




CONFUCIUS ON HIMSELF

The Master: I will not be grieved that other men do not know me: I will
be grieved that I do not know other men.

At fifteen, my mind was bent on learning. At thirty, I stood firm. At
forty, I was free from delusions. At fifty, I understood the laws of
Providence. At sixty, my ears were attentive to the truth. At seventy,
I could follow the promptings of my heart without overstepping the mean.

Tz Kung was for doing away with the customary sacrifice of a sheep on
the first day of the month. The Master said: Ah, Tz, you grudge the
loss of a sheep, but I grudge the loss of a ceremony.

The Master said: In any hamlet of a dozen houses you will surely find
men as honest and conscientious as myself, though they may not be so
devoted to ethical study.

The Master having gone to visit Nan Tz,[1] Tz Lu was displeased.
Thereupon Confucius swore a solemn oath, saying: In whatsoever I have
sinned, may I be abominable in the sight of God!

The Master said: My function is to indicate rather than to originate.
Regarding antiquity as I do with trust and affection, I would venture
to compare myself with our ancient patriarch Png Tsu.[2]

The unpretentious hiving of wisdom, patient self-cultivation, and
untiring instruction of others--to which of these can I make any claim?

The failure to cultivate virtue, the failure to examine and analyse
what I have learnt, the inability to move towards righteousness after
being shown the way, the inability to correct my faults--these are the
causes of my grief.

Alas! what a falling-off is here! Long is it since I dreamt of Chou
Kung.[3]

There is no one, from the man who brings me dried meat as payment
upwards, to whom I have refused my instruction.

I do not expound my teaching to any who are not eager to learn; I do
not help out any one who is not anxious to explain himself; if, after
being shown one corner of a subject, a man cannot go on to discover the
other three, I do not repeat the lesson.

If the pursuit of riches were a commendable pursuit, I would join in
it, even if I had to become a chariot-driver for the purpose. But
seeing that it is not a commendable pursuit, I engage in those which
are more to my taste.[4]

The Duke of Sh questioned Tz Lu about Confucius. Tz Lu made no
reply. The Master said to him afterwards: Why did you not say: "He
is a man whose zeal for self-improvement is such that he forgets to
eat; whose happiness in this pursuit is so great that he forgets his
troubles and does not perceive old age stealing upon him"?

The Master said: In me, knowledge is not innate. I am but one who loves
antiquity, and is earnest in the study of it.

If I am walking with two other men, each of them will serve as my
teacher. I will pick out the good points of the one and imitate them,
and the bad points of the other and correct them in myself.

My disciples, do you think that I have any secrets? I have no secrets
from you. It is my way to do nothing without communicating it to you,
my disciples.

There are men, I daresay, who act rightly without knowing the reason
why, but I am not one of them. Having heard much, I sift out the good
and practise it; having seen much, I retain it in my memory. This is
the second order of wisdom.[5]

In literary accomplishments I am perhaps equal to other men; but I have
not yet succeeded in exhibiting the conduct of the princely man in my
own person.

To divine wisdom and perfect virtue I can lay no claim. All that can
be said of me is that I never falter in the course which I pursue
and am unwearying in my instruction of others--this and nothing
more.--Kung-hsi Hua said: But those are just the qualities that we,
your disciples, are unable to acquire.

The Master being grievously sick, Tz Lu proposed the offering up of
a prayer.--Is there a precedent for this? asked the Master.--Tz Lu
replied: There is. In the Eulogies[6] it is written: "We pray unto you,
O spirits of Heaven and Earth."--The Master said: My prayers began long
ago.[7]

The Master was passing through a by-street when a man of the district
shouted: Great is Confucius the philosopher! Yet for all his wide
learning, he has nothing which can bring him fame.--On hearing this,
the Master turned to his disciples and said: What shall I take up?
Shall I take up charioteering or shall I take up archery? I will take
up charioteering!

The Master said: The ancient rites prescribe linen as the material for
a ceremonial cap, but nowadays silk is used as being more economical.
In this matter I fall in with the general custom. According to the
ancient rites, the Prince is to be saluted from below the dais, but
nowadays the salutation takes place above. This is presumptuous, and
therefore, though infringing thereby the general custom, I adopt the
humbler position.[8]

A high officer asked Tz Kung, saying: Surely your Master is a divine
Prophet? What a variety of accomplishments he seems to possess!--Tz
Kung replied: Truly he must be a Prophet, so richly has he been endowed
by God. And he has also perfected himself in various arts.--The Master,
being told of this, said: Does His Excellency really know me now for
what I am? Being of low condition as a boy, I did become skilled in
various arts--but these are base accomplishments after all. If asked
whether the higher type of man has many such accomplishments, I should
say, Not many.[9]

The Master said: Am I possessed of true knowledge? Not so. But if an
ignorant fellow from the lower class comes to me with a question, I
will discuss the subject from end to end, and set it fully before him.

Tz Kung said to Confucius: If you had a lovely jewel, would you hide
it away in a casket, or would you try to sell it for a good price?--
The Master replied: Oh, certainly I would sell it, but I would wait
until a price was offered.[10]

The Master said: Out of doors, to tender faithful service to prince and
ministers; at home, to be duteous towards father and elder brothers;
to observe the rites of mourning with the utmost care; to avoid being
overcome with wine:--which of these virtues have I?

In matters pertaining to ceremonies and music, the ancients were more
or less uncivilised in comparison with the refinement of a later age.
Nevertheless, in practice I take the earlier period as my guide.[11]

As an arbiter in litigation I am no better than other men. But surely
the grand object to achieve is that there shall be no litigation at
all.[12]

Wei-sheng Mou,[13] addressing Confucius, said: Chiu, why is it you
keep hopping about thus from place to place? Is it not in order to
show off your fine rhetoric?--Confucius replied: I do not allow myself
to indulge in fine rhetoric; no, it is because I consider obstinacy a
fault.[14]

The Master said: There are none who know me for what I am.--Tz Kung
said: How is it, Sir, that none know you?--The Master replied: I make
no complaint against Heaven, neither do I blame my fellow-men. In the
study of virtue I begin at the bottom and tend upwards.[15] Surely
Heaven knows me for what I am.

Tz, do you look upon me as a man who has studied and retained a
mass of various knowledge?--I do, he replied. Am I wrong?--You are
wrong, said the Master. All my knowledge is strung on one connecting
thread.[16]

I used to spend whole days without food and whole nights without sleep,
in order to meditate.

But I made no progress. Study, I found, was better.

Pi Hsi[17] sent an invitation to Confucius, and the Master wished to
go. Tz Lu, however, said: Once upon a time, Sir, I heard you say
that the nobler sort of man would not enter into intimacy with one
who laid himself out to do wrong. Now Pi Hsi has raised the standard
of rebellion in Chung-mou. How can you think of going thither?--True,
replied the Master. Those were my words. But is there not a saying:
"The hard may be rubbed without losing its substance; the white may be
steeped without losing its purity"? Am I then a bitter gourd--fit only
to be hung up and not eaten?




[1] The wife of the Duke of Wei, notorious for her intrigues, and even
accused of incest. Needless to say, Chinese commentators are at great
pains to explain away this incident in the life of the sage.

[2] A grandson of the legendary Emperor Chuan Hs. He is said to have
been over 800 years old when he disappeared into the west in the
eleventh century B.C. The last words in the text are taken by some to
mean "our patriarchs Lao Tz and Png Tsu"--Lao Tz being the founder
of Taoism, who is also, by the way, alleged to have disappeared at an
advanced age into the west.

[3] One of the most revered names in Chinese history. The younger
brother of Wu Wang, he helped materially by his wise counsels to
establish the dynasty of Chou. He drew up a legal code, purified the
morals of the people, and devoted himself wholly to the welfare of
the State. Confucius in the reforming zeal of his younger days had
an ardent desire to see the principles and institutions of Chou Kung
brought into general practice.

[4] Legge and others (including even Mr. Ku Hung-ming) make the sense
out to be: "If there were any prospect of my being successful in the
search for riches, I would not hesitate to pursue them by any means
in my power." Thus translated, the Master's saying is grotesquely at
variance with the whole trend of his conduct and the essential spirit
of his teaching. Curiously enough, too, there is nothing in the Chinese
itself, so far as I can see, to justify such a startling interpretation.

[5] That is to say, the wisest men are those who act intuitively,
without having to find their way by any conscious mental process.
Confucius disclaims any such intuitive perception of right and wrong
in his own case, and confesses that he is obliged to rely largely on
objective experience, as acted upon by the critical and receptive
powers of his mind. The saying has a distinctly Taoist flavour.

[6] It is not known exactly what these were--a collection of prayers, a
book of rituals for the dead, or panegyrics on the departed.

[7] Confucius speaks of prayer in the sense made familiar to us by
Coleridge's line: "He prayeth best who loveth best." In this higher
sense his whole life had been one long prayer, and he refuses any
mediation between himself and God. Could antagonism to the ritualistic
spirit be carried much farther than this?

[8] This saying well illustrates the Master's attitude in regard to
ceremonies. He was no stickler for mere outward conformity to rule, so
long as the inner meaning of the ceremony was not affected. Now the
salutation of the Prince was simply intended to be a way of expressing
heart-felt loyalty and respect, and it was only because the new
position seemed less respectful that Confucius opposed the change.

[9] See note on p. 44.

[10] Question and answer are of course parabolical. The enthusiastic
young disciple thinks that his Master, in taking no steps to obtain
official employment, is guilty of "hiding his jewel in a casket," or,
as we should say, "his light under a bushel." Confucius, however, had
a great sense of the responsibility of office, and was loth to thrust
himself forward uninvited. His chance came at last after fifteen years
of waiting, when Duke Ting appointed him governor of the town of
Chung-tu.

[11] Another proof, if one were needed, that Confucius' instincts were
all for simplicity and not elaboration in ceremonies.

[12] Said by Confucius when he was Minister of Justice in Lu.

[13] Evidently an older man, from his use of the personal name, not to
speak of his disrespectful tone.

[14] Confucius, like other great men, was not exempt from the usual
fate of seeing his actions derided and his motives misunderstood. Here
we have a gibe thrown at his wandering from state to state, for the
purpose, it is insinuated, of making a living by his wits. The answer
is, that to have remained in Lu or any other state where he was plainly
not wanted, would have been merely stupid persistency.

[15] This accounts for men taking no notice of him. Most so-called
sages start with grandiose ideals and high-flown utterances, in order
to attract attention.

[16] This is rightly considered to be one of the moat important of the
Master s sayings, because it gives the clue to his whole philosophy and
view of life. The "connecting thread," as we learn from another passage
(see p. 118), is simply the moral life, which consists in being true
to oneself and good to one's neighbour. Confucius wished to impress
upon his disciple that he was no mere amasser of knowledge nor lover
of learning for learning's sake. The one thing necessary, in his eyes,
was to be able to lead, in the highest sense of the word, a moral life,
and this was the real object of all learning, the end and aim of all
knowledge. Throughout the Analects, as we have already seen, the usual
word for "learning" always means or implies the study of virtue, the
striving after self-improvement. Like Socrates, Confucius was purely
a moral philosopher, and would certainly have rejected the sharp
distinction we draw nowadays between mental and moral science.

[17] A rebellious official in the Chin State. On more than one occasion
in his career, Confucius made it plain that he declined to be bound
by narrow convention or hampered by the fear of what people might say
of him. To keep clear of bad associates was no doubt an excellent
principle, but Confucius may have seen some justification for Pi Hsi's
course of action, and in any case he was no longer of an age to be
easily corrupted by evil communications. Knowing that rules were never
meant to be so rigid as to admit of no exceptions, he felt it his
primary duty to go where he could do good. Cf. the visit to Nan Tz (p.
83), the mere idea of which would have horrified an ordinary teacher of
morality.




MISCELLANEOUS SAYINGS

The Master said: To learn, and to practise on occasion what one has
learnt--is this not true pleasure? The coming of a friend from a
far-off land--is this not true joy?

Make conscientiousness and sincerity your grand object. Have no friends
not equal to yourself. If you have done wrong, be not ashamed to make
amends.

Observe the bent of a man's will when his father is alive, and his
actions after his father is dead. If during the three years of mourning
he does not swerve from his father's principles, he may be pronounced a
truly filial son.

The Odes[1] are three hundred in number, but their purport may be
summed up in a word:--Have no depraved thoughts.

Observe a man's actions; scrutinise his motives; take note of the
things that give him pleasure. How then can he hide from you what he
really is?

Acquire new knowledge whilst thinking over the old, and you may become
a teacher of others.

The higher type of man is not like a vessel which is designed for some
Special use.[2]

Study without thought is vain; thought without study is perilous.

Absorption in the study of the supernatural is most harmful.

Yu, shall I tell you what true knowledge is? When you know, to know
that you know, and when you do not know, to know that you do not
know--that is true knowledge.

Tz Chang was studying with a view to official preferment. The Master
said to him: Among the various things you hear said, reserve your
judgment on those which seem doubtful, and give cautious utterance
to the rest: then you will seldom fall into error. Among the various
things you see done, set aside those which seem dangerous, and
cautiously put the others into practice: then you will seldom have
occasion for repentance. If you seldom err in your speech, and seldom
have to repent of your actions, official preferment will come of itself.

The Master said: I do not see how a man without sincerity can be good
for anything. How can a cart or carriage be made to go without yoke or
cross-bar?

To sacrifice to a spirit with which you have nothing to do, is mere
servility.

To shirk your duty when you see it before you, shows want of moral
courage.

Some one inquired as to the meaning of the Great Sacrifice. The Master
said: I do not know. He who knew its meaning would find it as easy to
govern the Empire as to look upon this (pointing to his palm).[3]

Wang-sun Chia[4] asked, saying: What means the adage, "Better be civil
to the kitchen-god than to the god of the inner sanctum"?--The Master
replied: The adage is false. He who sins against Heaven can rely on the
intercession of none.

The Master said: He who serves his prince with all the proper ceremony
will be accounted by men a flatterer.

It is bootless to discuss accomplished facts, to protest against things
past remedy, to find fault with things bygone.

How am I to regard one who has rank without liberality, who performs
ceremonies without reverence, who approaches the rites of mourning
without sorrow?

Men's faults are characteristic.[5] It is by observing a man's faults
that one may come to know his virtues.

Having heard the True Way in the morning what matters it if one should
come to die at night?

The scholar who is bent on studying the principles of virtue, yet is
ashamed of bad clothes and coarse food, is not yet fit to receive
instruction.

Instead of being concerned that you have no office, be concerned to
think how you may fit yourself for office. Instead of being concerned
that you are not known, seek to be worthy of being known.

When you see a good man, think of emulating him; when you see a bad
man, examine your own heart.

The ancients hesitated to give their thoughts utterance: they were
afraid that their actions might not be equal to their words.

Few are those who err on the side of self-restraint.[6]

Virtue cannot live in solitude: neighbours are sure to grow up around
it.[7]

Chi Wn Tz[8] used to reflect thrice before he acted. When told of
this, the Master said: Twice would do.

The Master said: Alas! I have never met a man who could see his own
faults and arraign himself at the bar of his own conscience.

Tz Hua having been sent on a mission to the Chi State, Jan Chiu
begged for a gift of grain for his mother. The Master said: Give her a
peck.--The disciple asking for more, he said:

Give her then a bushel.--But Jan Chiu eventually gave her as much as
five hundredweight of grain. Then the Master rebuked him, saying: When
Chih went to the Chi State, he was conveyed by a team of sleek horses
and was wearing costly fur garments. Now I have heard that the princely
man succours the distressed, but will not add to the opulence of the
wealthy.

Yan Ss, having been made governor of a district, was presented with
nine hundred measures of grain.[9] He declined them. The Master said:
Do not decline them. May they not be distributed among the villages and
townships of your neighbourhood?

The Master said: Who can go out of a house except by the door? In life,
why not pass likewise through the door of virtue?[10]

You may speak of higher subjects to those who rise above the average
level of mankind, but not to those who fall below it.

With coarse food to eat, water to drink, and the bended arm as a
pillow, happiness may still exist. Wealth and rank unrighteously
obtained seem to me as insubstantial as floating clouds.

The inhabitants of Hu-hsiang were unconversable people, and when
a young man from those parts came to see Confucius, the disciples
hesitated to let him in. But the Master said: When a man comes to me, I
accept him at his best, not at his worst. Why make so much ado? When a
man washes his hands before paying a visit, and you receive him in that
clean state, you do not thereby stand surety for his always having been
clean in the past.

The Master said: Is virtue then so remote? I have only to show a desire
for virtue, and lo! it is here.

The Master said: Prodigality begets arrogance,[11] parsimony begets
niggardliness. But it is better to be niggardly than arrogant.

Without due self-restraint,[12] courtesy becomes oppressive, prudence
degenerates into timidity, valour into violence, and candour into
rudeness.

Love of daring and dread of poverty lead to sedition. The man without
natural virtue, if pursued by the hatred of society, will become a
desperado.

If a man is proud and avaricious, though his other qualities may
embrace all that was fine in the character of Chou Kung, they are not
worth taking into account.

It is not easy to find a man who after three years of
self-cultivation[13] has not reached happiness.

He who is out of office should not meddle in the government.

Hot-headedness without honesty; ignorance without ingenuousness;
simplicity without sincerity:--such characters I do not understand.[14]

Pursue the study of virtue as though you could never reach your goal,
and were afraid of losing the ground already gained.

The Master said: I have not met one whose love of virtue was equal to
his love of sensual beauty.

Though in making a mound I should stop when but one more basketful of
earth would complete it, the fact remains that I _have_ stopped. On the
other hand, if in levelling it to the ground I advance my work by but
one basketful at a time, the fact remains that I _am_ advancing.[15]

Alas! there are sprouting crops which never come into ear. There are
others which, having come into ear, never ripen into grain.

We ought to have a wholesome respect for our juniors. Who knows
but that by-and-by they may prove themselves equal to the men of
to-day? It is only when they reach the age of forty or fifty without
distinguishing themselves that we need no longer be afraid of them.

Words of just admonition cannot fail to command a ready assent. But
practical reformation is the thing that really matters. Words of kindly
advice cannot fail to please the listener. But subsequent meditation on
them is the thing that really matters. I can make nothing of the man
who is pleased with advice but will not meditate on it, who assents to
admonition but does not reform.

A great army may be robbed of its leader, but nothing can rob one poor
man of his will.

It is only when the cold season comes that we know the pine and cypress
to be evergreens.[16] Let a pupil join with you in self-cultivation
before you let him approach the general truths of philosophy, but let
him approach these general truths before he is allowed to form his
character for good. He should have formed his character for good before
he is allowed to make exceptions to a general rule.

When Yen Yan died, the Master said: Alas! God has forsaken me, God has
forsaken me!

On the death of Yen Yan, the disciples wanted to give him a sumptuous
funeral, but the Master said, Better not.[17] Nevertheless, the
disciples did give him a sumptuous funeral, whereupon the Master said:
Hui looked upon me as his father, yet I have not been able to treat him
as my son. The fault is not in me, but in you, my disciples.

Chi Lu inquired concerning men's duty to spirits. The Master replied:
Before we are able to do our duty by the living, how can we do it by
the spirits of the dead?--Chi Lu went on to inquire about death. The
Master said: Before we know what life is, how can we know what death
is?

Tz Chang asked a question about clearness of mental vision. The Master
said: He whose mind is proof against the slow-soaking poison of slander
and the sharp stings of calumny, may be called clear-sighted, and
far-seeing as well.

The Master said: A man may know the three hundred odes by heart, but
if he proves himself incapable when given a post in the government, or
cannot make a speech unaided when sent on a foreign mission, of what
use to him is all his learning?

Tz Kung asked, saying: What may be said of a man who is beloved by all
his fellow-townsmen?--The Master replied: That is not enough to go
upon.--What of one who is hated by all his fellow-townsmen?--The Master
replied: Neither is that enough to go upon. It would be otherwise if,
among his fellow-townsmen, the good loved him and the wicked hated him.

The Master said: A good man must have trained the people for seven
years before they are fit to go to war.

To take an untrained multitude into battle is equivalent to throwing
them away.

In a well-governed country, speak boldly and act boldly. In a country
where lawlessness prevails, let your actions be bold but your speech
tactful.

It is harder to be poor without murmuring, than to be rich without
arrogance.

The men of olden times who studied virtue had only their own
improvement in view; those who study it now have an eye to the applause
of others.

Refusal to instruct one who is competent to learn entails the waste of
a man. Instruction of one who is incompetent to learn entails waste of
words. The wise man is he who wastes neither men nor words.

Those whose care extends not far ahead will find their troubles near at
hand.

He who requires much from himself and little from others will be secure
from hatred.

If a man is not in the habit of asking, "What do you make of this? what
do you make of that?" I can make nothing of him.

Hopeless indeed is the case of those who can herd together all day long
without once letting their conversation reach a higher plane,[18] but
are content to bandy smart and shallow wit.

When a man is generally detested, or when he is generally beloved,
closer examination is necessary.[19]

It is the man that is able to develop his virtue, not virtue that
develops the man.[20]

The real fault is to have faults and not try to amend them.

Where there is education, there is no distinction of class.

Men who differ in their principles cannot help each other in their
plans.

If language is lucid, that is enough.

There are three errors to be avoided in the presence of a great man.
The first is precipitancy--speaking before it is your turn to speak;
the second is bashfulness--not speaking when your turn comes; and the
third is heedlessness--speaking without observing the countenance of
the listener.

There are three impulses against which the nobler sort of man is on his
guard. In the period of youth, when the heyday in the blood has not yet
subsided, he guards against lustfulness; in the prime of life, when
the physical frame is vigorous and strong, he guards against pugnacity;
in old age, when the vital forces are in their decline, he guards
against the greed of gain.[21]

The highest class of men are they whose knowledge is innate; next to
these are they whose knowledge is acquired by study[22]; after them
come those who are dull-witted, yet strive to learn; while those who
are dull-witted and will make no effort to learn are the lowest of the
people.

"When you see the good, act as though you could never quite come up
with it; when you are brought face to face with evil, act as though you
were trying the heat of boiling water":--I have heard some such saying
as this, and I have seen men live up to it. "Dwell in retirement,
in order to work out your aims; practise righteousness, in order to
apprehend the Truth":--such a saying I have heard, but I have never
seen a man live up to it.[23]

Men's natures are alike; it is their habits that carry them far apart.

Only two classes of men never change: the wisest of the wise and the
dullest of the dull.

Speaking to Tz Lu, the Master said: Have you ever heard, Yu, of the
six shadows which attend six several virtues?--No, he replied.--Sit
down, then, and I will tell you. Love of goodness without the will
to learn[24] casts the shadow called foolishness. Love of knowledge
without the will to learn casts the shadow called instability. Love of
truth without the will to learn casts the shadow called insensibility.
Love of candour without the will to learn casts the shadow called
rudeness. Love of daring without the will to learn casts the shadow
called turbulence. Love of firmness without the will to learn casts the
shadow called eccentricity.

Ceremonies, forsooth! Can ceremonies be reduced to a mere matter
of silken robes and jade ornaments? Music, forsooth! Can music be
reduced to a mere matter of bells and drums?[25] Men who are grave
and stern in appearance, but inwardly weak and unprincipled--are they
not comparable to the lowest class of humanity--sneaking thieves that
break into houses by night?

Your goody-goody people are the thieves of virtue.

The Master said: Would that I could do without speaking!--Tz Kung
said: If our Master never spoke, how could we, his disciples, transmit
his doctrines?--The Master replied: Does God speak? The four seasons
hold on their course, and all things continue to live and grow. Yet,
tell me, does God speak?

Girls and servants are the most difficult people to handle. If you
treat them familiarly, they become disrespectful; if you keep them at a
distance, they resent it.



[1] The rather inappropriate name given by foreigners to the songs or
ballads contained in the _Shih Ching_ or Book of Poetry (see note on p.
78). Confucius is said to have selected these three hundred odd pieces
from a much larger pre-existing mass of material, but his language here
hardly strikes us as that likely to be used by a man speaking of his
own compilation.

[2] That is to say, he is not limited in his functions like a vessel or
implement, not "born" or a man of one idea. Cf. note on p. 71.

[3] Every ceremonial rite being symbolical of some portion of the
world's harmony, and the Great Sacrifice being the head and fount as it
were of all the rest, it follows that the man who could penetrate its
profound symbolism would have the whole system of morals and government
unrolled before his eyes.

[4] Prime Minister of the Wei State, who suspected Confucius of coming
to seek office, and took this means of hinting that the real power lay
with himself and not with the Duke.

[5] After some hesitation, I have adopted this clever rendering of
Mr. Ku Hung-ming, as being the only one that fits well with the next
sentence.

[6] A few other renderings of this sentence will illustrate at once the
elasticity of the Chinese language, and the difficulty of making it
flow into European moulds.--LEGGE: "The cautious seldom err." WADE: "It
seldom happens that a man errs through excess of moderation." JENNINGS:
"Those who keep within restraints are seldom losers." KU HUNG-MING: "He
who wants little seldom goes wrong."

[7] I.e. virtue begets virtue.

[8] A member of the great Chi family, who held office in Lu.

[9] The proper allowance for an officer in his station.

[10] As being, in the end, the moat natural and least troublesome route
to take.

[11] It is impossible to find an exact equivalent for this negative
expression "non-yieldingness," "non-humility." But the dominant
idea is one of _selfishness_, and therefore such renderings as
"insubordination" (Legge), "frowardnes" (Wade), "excess" (Ku
Hung-ming), are rather wide off the mark.

[12] For note on _li_, see p. 60. Here again it is the inner sense of
moral proportion and harmony, which prevents any quality from being
carried to excess. Not a translator but has come to grief over this
word, though Mr. Ku is not so far off with "judgment." That, however,
makes of it an intellectual principle rather than what it realty is--a
moral sense.

[13] Literally, "learning." See notes on pp. 53 and 91.

[14] The commentators seem right in their explanation, that a man's
defects are usually redeemed by certain corresponding qualities; when
even these are absent, the case is hopeless.

[15] This is the best I can make of a vexed passage. Legge's
translation is poor, but he is right with regard to the lesson
intended--"that repeated acquisitions individually small will
ultimately amount to much, and that the learner is never to give over."

[16] Men are known in time of adversity.

[17] Because the family was very poor and could ill afford to bear the
expense. It is not the least of this great man's titles to fame that he
resolutely opposed the tide of popular sentiment in this matter, and
could see the iniquity of sacrificing the living to the dead, even when
the funeral of his dearly beloved disciple was in question. The moral
courage of such an attitude in a country like China, where religion
is largely connected with the propitiation of spirits, can hardly be
overestimated.

[18] Literally, "reach righteousness."

[19] Before subscribing to the popular judgment. Cf. saying on p. 103.

[20] I.e. mere passivity, as advocated by the Taoists, will not do.

[21] These numerical categories are hardly more than a conventional
form into which the Chinese are fond of throwing ethical and other
teaching. Needless to say, they are not to be considered as exhaustive.

[22] Confucius, as we have seen (p. 86), puts himself in this second
class.

[23] The difference lies in the _set purpose_ of studying virtue in a
systematic way, and not merely doing right when occasion offers.

[24] "The will to learn" is a necessarily vague rendering of the
equally vague original. It means here a desire for moral culture, which
is nothing else than the development of that inner sense of harmony
and proportion (_li_) referred to on p. 99. Good instincts, according
to Confucius, are not enough to produce virtues, unless they are
supplemented by careful cultivation of this moral sense.

[25] A magnificent array of vestments and chalices will no more
constitute a true ceremony than a number of musical instruments alone,
without the brain of a composer, can produce music. The whole value
of a ceremony is determined by the state of mind of the person who
performs it.




PERSONALIA


In his moments of leisure, the Master's manner was uniformly cheerful
and smiling.

If the Master happened to be dining beside one who was in mourning for
his parents, he never ate a full meal. He never sang on any day in the
course of which he had been bewailing a death.

The Master would never talk about prodigies, feats of strength, crime,
or supernatural beings.[1]

The Master made four things the subject of his teaching: a knowledge of
literature and the arts, conduct, conscientiousness and truthfulness.[2]

The Master fished with a line but not with a net. When he went out with
bow and arrow, he only shot at birds on the wing.

If the Master happened to be with singers, and they sang a piece well,
he would get them to repeat it, when he would also join in the song
himself.

The Master was affable, yet grave; stern, but not fierce; attentive in
his behaviour, and yet calm.

The Master seldom spoke of money-making, of the laws of Providence, or
of moral virtue.[3]

There were four words of which the Master barred the use: he would have
no "shall's," no "must's," no "certainly's," no "I's".[4]

Whenever the Master saw a person in mourning, or in official robes, or
one who was blind, he would at once rise from his seat, even though the
other were his junior; or if he passed them in the street, he would
quicken his step.[5]

Once when the Master was lying seriously ill, Tz Lu got the disciples
to act the part of Ministers of State.[6] In an interval of his
sickness, Confucius said: What a long time Yu has been keeping up
this imposture! In pretending to have ministers attendant on me when
I have none, whom am I deceiving? Am I deceiving God? But apart from
that, is it not better that I should breathe my last in the arms of my
disciples, than that I should die in the midst of officials? And after
all, though I may not be accorded the honour of a public funeral, I am
not dying out on the high road.

The Master wished to settle among the nine eastern tribes. Some one
said: How can you? They are savages.--The Master replied: If a higher
type of man dwelt in their midst, how could their savage condition last?

Confucius in his native village was simple and unassuming. He gave the
impression of being no great speaker. In the ancestral temple and at
Court he spoke fluently, but with a certain reserve.

At Court, he spoke to the ministers of lower rank with frankness
and affability. To those of higher rank he spoke quietly, but with
decision. In the presence of his Sovereign, he seemed full of awe, but
at the same time grave and collected.

When employed by the Prince in the reception of distinguished visitors,
his expression would change, and his legs seemed to bend under him.
Standing in the presence of the visitors, he saluted them with clasped
hands, turning about from right to left, and keeping the skirt of his
robe properly adjusted, back and front. He then hastened forward with
arms extended like the wings of a bird. When a visitor departed, he
would report in that sense to the Prince, saying: "The visitor is not
looking back."[7]

When he entered the gate of the palace, he seemed to bend his body as
though the gate were not large enough to let him pass. He did not stand
in the middle of the doorway, nor in passing through did he set foot
on the threshold. When he passed the Prince's throne, his expression
seemed to change, his legs seemed to bend under him, and words seemed
to fail him. Holding up his robe with both hands, he ascended the dais,
his body slightly bent, and holding his breath as though he dared not
breathe. When he came out from his audience and had descended the first
step, his countenance lost its anxious expression, and he looked serene
and happy. When he reached the bottom of the steps, he hastened away
with his arms outstretched like wings; but when he got back to his
place, he still seemed full of awe.

He carried the Prince's regalia with body slightly bent, as though he
could hardly support its weight; he raised it to the height of his
head, and lowered it again to the height of his chest. His countenance
indicated nervousness, and he dragged his feet as though something held
them to the ground.

In offering presents as an ambassador, his appearance was sedate.

At a private audience, he wore a pleased look.

He would not eat meat that was clumsily cut, or served without its
proper sauce. Although there might be an abundance of meat, he never
let it exceed in quantity the vegetable food. In wine alone he laid
down for himself no particular limit, but he never reached the stage of
intoxication. He took ginger at every meal. He did not eat much. When
eating, he did not converse; when in bed, he did not speak. Even though
he had nothing but coarse rice and vegetable soup, he would always
reverently offer some to the ancestral spirits.

He would not sit on a mat[8] that was placed awry.

On one occasion, Chi Kang Tz having sent him some medicine, he bowed
as he received it, saying: Not being familiar with this drug, I would
not venture to try it.

His stables having been burnt down, the Master on his return from the
Court said: Has any one been hurt?--He did not ask about the horses.[9]

If the Prince sent him a present of cooked meat, he would sit down to
taste it on a properly placed mat. If the Prince sent him a present of
raw meat, he would have it cooked and offer it in sacrifice. If the
Prince sent him a live animal, he would keep it alive.

When the Prince summoned him to his presence, he would go on foot
without waiting for his carriage.

If any of his friends died who was without a home or relations, he
would say: I will see to the funeral.

In bed, he did not lie like a corpse. In his home life, his manner was
not too formal.

At the sight of a person in mourning, though it might be an intimate
acquaintance, he would always look grave. On meeting an official in
uniform, or a blind man, however ragged, he would always show him some
mark of respect.

When a rich banquet was set before him, he would show his appreciation
in his looks, and rise to return thanks.

He would change countenance at a thunderclap or a sudden squall of wind.

When in his carriage, he would not look behind him, talk rapidly, or
point with his finger.[10]

Duke Ling of Wei asked Confucius about the disposition of troops
in warfare. Confucius answered: I know something about the arts of
peace,[11] but I have never studied the art of war. And on the morrow
he departed. But when he came to the State of Chn, he was cut off
from supplies,[12] and his followers were so enfeebled that they could
hardly stand. Tz Lu indignantly sought the Master's presence, saying:
Is it for the princely man to feel the pinch of privation?--The Master
replied: Assuredly privation may come his way, but it is only the
baser type of man who under it grows demoralised and reckless.

Mien, a blind musician,[13] having called on Confucius, the Master said
to him when he came to a flight of steps: "Here are the steps"; and
when he came to the mat which was spread for him: "Here is your mat."
When all the visitors were seated, the Master told him who they were,
saying: So-and-so is sitting here, so-and-so is sitting there. After
Mien had gone, Tz Chang asked, saying: Is it the proper thing to speak
thus to a musician?--The Master replied: Assuredly it is right to give
this help to a blind man.

The people of Chi sent a band of singing-girls as a present to the
Duke of Lu, and Chi Huan Tz accepted the gift. For three days after
that no Court was held, and Confucius departed.[14]




[1] Under these circumstances, it is easy to imagine how edified he
would be by the modern daily press, which subsists almost entirely on
these very topics.

[2] I am unable to improve on this rendering, which is borrowed from
Mr. Ku Hung-ming.

[3] This statement--at least as regards moral virtue (jn)-- seems
hopelessly at variance with the evidence of the Analects. Perhaps
no more is meant than that he was unwilling to dogmatise on such a
delicate subject. On p. 72, for instance, he refuses to judge whether
certain disciples have true moral virtue or not.

[4] This is Mr. Jennings's interpretation, and it seems to me the
simplest and best.

[5] Thus showing, says a commentator, his sympathy with sorrow, his
respect for rank, his tenderness for the afflicted. Quickening his pace
was also a mark of respect.

[6] Just as though Confucius had his own Court and entourage, like a
feudal prince. This probably happened during his exile in some foreign
state, where the chance of his obtaining a public funeral would
doubtless be proportionate to the display made by his followers.

[7] "The ways of China, it appears, were much the same anciently as
now. A guest turns round and bows repeatedly in leaving, and the host
cannot return to his place till these salutations are ended."--LEGGE.

[8] The Chinese of that date dispensed with chairs, as the Japanese
have done up to the present time.

[9] The point is, that in his solicitude for others Confucius never
thought of his own loss, not that he was indifferent to the suffering
of animals.

[10] Some of the minute details given above cannot but strike us as
rather ridiculous. Two points, however, must be borne in mind: (1)
that the customs and ceremonial belonging to any one age or country
will always at first sight appear strange and laughable to the men of
any other age and country; (2) that Confucius himself cannot be held
responsible for the excessive zeal which prompted admiring disciples to
portray his personal habits with such embarrassing fidelity. How many
philosophers would come equally well through such an ordeal?

[11] Literally, "dish and platter business," i.e. things pertaining to
sacrificial worship.

[12] By order of the Duke.

[13] Blind men and musicians were almost convertible terms in ancient
China: that is to say, all musicians were blind, and the majority of
blind men took to music for a profession.

[14] The famous episode hero briefly related was the turning-point of
the sage's career. Through the weakness of his prince and the jealousy
of the rival minister Chi Huan Tz, he was suddenly dislodged from
the pinnacle of his fame and condemned to thirteen years of homeless
wandering.




CONFUCIUS AS SEEN BY OTHERS


Tz Chin asked Tz Kung, saying: Whenever our Master comes to
any new country, he is sure to find out all about its method of
government. Does he seek this information himself, or is it voluntarily
proffered?--Tz Kung replied: Our Master gains his information because
he is so genial and good, so full of deference, modesty and regard for
others. In seeking information, how differently does he behave from
ordinary men!

The Master having gone up into the Grand Temple, asked questions about
everything. Some one remarked: Who says that the son of the citizen
of Tsou has any knowledge of ceremonial observances? He comes to the
Temple and asks about everything he sees.--Hearing the remark, the
Master said: This in itself is a ceremonial observance.

The prefect of the frontier in the town of I[1] asked to be introduced
to Confucius, saying: I have never failed to obtain an audience of any
sage who has visited these parts.--He was thereupon introduced by the
Master's followers, and on coming out he said: My sons, why grieve at
your Master's fall from power? The Empire has long been lying in evil
ways, but now God is going to make Confucius his herald to rouse the
land.[2]

The Master said: Shn, a single principle runs through all my
teaching.[3]--Tsng Tz answered, Yes.--When the Master had gone out,
the disciples asked, saying: What principle does he mean?--Tsng Tz
said: Our Master's teaching simply amounts to this: loyalty to oneself
and charity to one's neighbour.[4]

Yen Yan heaved a deep sigh and said: The more I look at our Master's
teaching, the higher it seems. The more I test it, the more reliable
it appears. I am gazing at it in front of me, when lo! it is suddenly
behind me. Our Master knows how to draw men after him by regular steps.
He broadens our outlook by means of polite learning, and restrains our
impulses by means of inward self-control. Even if I wished to stop, I
could not do so; yet after I have exhausted all my efforts in pursuit
of the goal, there still remains something inaccessible rising up
beyond; and though I would fain make towards it, I cannot find the way.

Tz Lu once passed the night in Shih-men, where the gate-keeper said
to him: Where do you come from?--Tz Lu replied: From the school of
Confucius.--Oh, is he not the man, said the other, who is trying to do
what he knows to be impossible?[5]

Chn Kang asked Po Yu,[6] saying: Have you ever received any secret
teaching from your father?--He replied: No. But once, when I was
passing hurriedly through our hall, I met my father standing alone, and
he said: Have you studied the Odes?--I replied, Not yet.--He said: If
you do not study the Odes, you will have no conversation.--Thereupon
I withdrew and studied the Odes. Another day I met him again standing
alone as I hastened through the hall, and he said: Have you studied the
Book of Rites?[7]--I replied: Not yet.--He said: If you do not study
the Book of Rites, you will have no stability of character.--I withdrew
and studied the Book of Rites. These are the two pieces of instruction
I have received.--Chn Kang went away rejoicing and said: I asked
about one thing and have learned three--something thing about the
Odes, something about the Rites, and also that the higher type of man
has no secrets even with his own son.

Yang Huo wished to have an interview with Confucius, but Confucius
would not go to see him. He therefore sent Confucius a sucking-pig
as a present.[8] Confucius, however, chose a time when the other was
out, to go and pay his respects. But he happened to fall in with him
on the road. Thereupon Yang Huo addressed Confucius, saying: Come with
me. I have something to say to you. Can he be called truly benevolent,
who hugs his jewel to his bosom and allows his country to drift into
confusion?--He cannot, was the reply.--Can he be called truly wise, who
wishes to engage in public affairs, yet loses several opportunities of
doing so?--He cannot.--Well, rejoined Yang Huo, the days and months
are fleeting by, and the years will not wait for us.--True, replied
Confucius; I will presently take office.[9]

The eccentric Chieh Y[10] of the Chu State passed Confucius'
carriage, singing: O phnix! O phnix! How has thy virtue fallen!
The past need no longer be a subject of reproof, but against the future
it is still possible to provide. Desist, desist! Great is the danger
of those who now engage in government.--Confucius alighted, wishing to
speak with him, but Chieh Yu hastened rapidly away, and he was unable
to get speech of him.

Chang Ch and Chieh Ni[11] were working together in the fields
when Confucius passed by and sent Tz Lu to ascertain from them the
whereabouts of the ford. Chang Ch asked: Who is that man holding
the reins?--That is Confucius, replied Tz Lu.--Is it Confucius of
the Lu State?--Yes.--Then surely _he_ is the man to know where the
ford is.[12]--Tz Lu then questioned Chieh Ni. Chieh Ni said: Who are
you, Sir?--I am Chung Yu.--Are you a disciple of Confucius of the Lu
State?--He replied: I am.--The whole Empire, said Chieh Ni, is rushing
head-long to destruction, and who is there that will reform it? As for
you, instead of following a man who withdraws from prince after prince
in succession, would it not be better to follow a man who has withdrawn
from the world altogether?--And he went on hoeing without a pause. Tz
Lu went back and reported these remarks, whereupon the Master looked
surprised and said: We cannot join the company of birds and beasts. If
I am not to associate with these men of the ruling class, with whom am
I to associate?[13] If right principles prevailed in the Empire, then
indeed there would be no need for me to reform it.

Shu-sun Wu-shu,[14] speaking to the ministers at Court, said: Tz Kung
is a greater sage than Confucius.--Tz-fu Ching-po[15] repeated this
to Tz Kung, who said: Let me use the simile of a house surrounded by
a wall. My wall rises only to the height of a man's shoulders, so that
any one can look over and see the excellence of the building within.
But my Master's wall is many fathoms in height, so that one who fails
to find the gate of entry cannot see the beauties of the temple nor
the rich apparel of the officiating priests. It may be that only a few
will succeed in finding the gate. Need we, then, be surprised at His
Excellency's remark?

Shu-sun Wu-shu was disparaging Confucius. Tz Kung said: It is no good.
Confucius is proof against detraction. The wisdom of other men is like
hills and mountain-peaks, which however high can still be scaled. But
Confucius is like the sun or the moon, which can never be reached by
the foot of man. A man may want to cut himself off from their light,
but what harm will that do to the sun or the moon? It only shows very
plainly that he has no notion of the measurement of capacity.



[1] This was on the borders of the Wei State, whither Confucius, with
a small band of disciples, was retiring, heavy of heart, after his
discomfiture in Lu.

[2] Literally, "is going to use him as a bell with a wooden
clapper"--this being the instrument used in making announcements or to
call the people together. The friendly prefect's prophecy was to be
fulfilled more wonderfully than ever he could have imagined. Never,
perhaps, in the history of the human race has one man exerted such an
enormous influence for good on after generations.

[3] Legge's rendering, "My doctrine is that of an all-pervading unity,"
is quite untenable, and no other translator has followed him here. The
logic of the passage obviously requires the meaning given above.

[4] This saying should be compared with those on pp. 91 and 69. It is
generally acclaimed as the best epitome of Confucian teaching, yet
it was reserved for Mr. Ku Hung-ming, a Chinaman, to give the first
correct translation of it in English. The two important words are
_chung_ and _shu_, "conscientiousness" and "charity," for which see
notes on pp. 58 and 69. Legge's version, "To be true to the principles
of our nature and the benevolent exercise of them to others," though
ponderous, would seem to have hit the true meaning, had he not spoilt
it by a note to the effect that shu is "duty-doing on the principle of
reciprocity." It has nothing on earth to do with reciprocity, being
in fact that disinterested love of one's neighbour which was preached
five hundred years later in Palestine. The other precept, embodied in
the word chung, is exactly Shakespeare's "To thine own self be true"--a
noble moral conception for which, obscured as it has been by bungling
translators, Confucius has never yet received full credit.

[5] The age in which Confucius lived was so given over to the forces of
disorder, militarism and intrigue, and the chances of a moral reformer
were regarded as so hopeless, that it was a common thing for men of
principle to retire from public affairs altogether, and either lead
the sequestered life of a hermit or take to some mean employment for a
living. The gate-keeper here is said to have been one of this class.
Confucius, however, was made of sterner stuff, and it may be claimed
that he did ultimately, through sheer force of character, succeed in
achieving the "impossible."

[6] The "style" or familiar name of Kung Li, the only son of Confucius.

[7] _Li_ here is obviously the name of a book, and not "the rules
of propriety" or even "the arts," as Legge and Mr. Ku Hung-ming
respectively take it. At the same time, we must be careful not to
identify it with the now existing _Li Chi_ or Book of Rites, which did
not take shape until a much later period.

[8] Because etiquette would require an acknowledgment of the gift at
the donor's house.

[9] This episode is probably to be referred to the year 502 B.C., when
Yang Huo, the nominal subordinate of Chi Huan Tzu (himself of usurping
tendencies, see Introduction, p. 15), was in open rebellion and seemed
likely to become master of the whole state of Lu. He was anxious to
enlist the prestige of a man like Confucius on his side, but the latter
steadily refused to countenance his schemes. In the following year,
Yang Huo was ejected from the state, and gratitude impelled the Duke to
offer a governorship to Confucius.

[10] Apparently a Taoist, who pinned his faith to Lao Tz's newly
enunciated doctrine of inaction.

[11] Also Taoist recluses.

[12] This is said to be a sneer at the restlessness which kept
Confucius wandering all over the country, so that no place could be
unfamiliar to him.

[13] The idea is, "Every man to his own trade. Why should I not then
busy myself with government--the subject to which I have devoted my
life?" I do not agree with Legge that the compiler of this chapter
could not have been a disciple of the sage. Confucius successfully
refutes the _laisser-faire_ argument of the hermit, who would dissuade
him from reform on the strange and unsatisfactory ground that the
world's affairs were in a thoroughly bad state. To any one but a Taoist
it would be evident that this was the very time for reform.

[14] A leading member of one of the three great families in the Lu
State.

[15] A high official.




SAYINGS OF THE DISCIPLES


Yu Tz said: It is seldom that good sons and brothers are given to
insubordinate conduct. That those who dislike insubordinate conduct
should be ready to foment sedition, is something absolutely unknown.
The wise man attends to the root; for if this be properly set, virtue
will spring from it. And what is the root of all goodness but filial
piety and fraternal love?

Tsng Tz said: There are three points on which I daily examine
myself:--Have I been conscientious in working for others? Have I been
truthful in my intercourse with my friends? Have I practised what I
preach?

Tz Hsia said: The man who can appreciate moral worth and disengage
his mind from sensual passion; who can put forth his utmost strength
to serve his parents, and lay down his life to serve his prince; who
speaks sincerely in his intercourse with friends:--such a man, though
the world may call him untaught, has in my opinion received the best
and highest education.

Tz Kung said: What do you say of the poor man who refuses to flatter,
and of the rich man who is free from pride?--They are well enough,
replied the Master; but better still is the poor man who is cheerful,
and the rich man who cherishes the inner principle of harmony and
self-control.--Tz Kung said: One must "cut and then carve, chisel and
then polish," as the Odes have it. Does not this passage illustrate
what you say?--The Master exclaimed: Here is somebody at last with whom
I can really discuss the Odes. Refer him to any old verse, and he will
see its application.[1]

Tz Hsia asked, saying: What is the meaning of the passage:

    "What dimples in her witching smile!
    What lovely eyes, clear white and black!
    Simplicity sets off her ornaments"?

The Master replied: You must have a plain background before you can lay
on the colours.--Rules of ceremony then require a background?--Ah!
exclaimed the Master, Shang always seizes my drift. Here at any rate is
some one with whom I can discuss the Odes.[2]

Tz Yu said: Too much fault-finding with princes entails disgrace; with
friends, it brings estrangement.

The Master wanted to employ Ch'i-tiao K'ai in the business of
government, but the latter said: No, I cannot yet sufficiently trust
myself.--The Master was pleased with the reply.

Once when Yen Yan and Chi Lu were standing by, the Master said: Come,
tell me, each of you, the wish of your hearts.--Tz Lu said: I should
like to have carriages and horses and fine fur garments, and share them
with my friends; nor would I mind if they were worn out in this way.--
Yen Yan said: My wish is to make no parade of goodness and no display
of toilsome service rendered.[3]--Tz Lu then said: I should like, Sir,
to hear your own wishes. The Master said: To comfort the aged, to win
the confidence of my friends, to love and cherish the young.

The Master said: Yung might well be made a prince.[4] Chung Kung asked
a question about Tz-sang Po-tz. The Master replied: He is a good
man on the whole, though easy-going.--Chung Kung rejoined: Is it not
excusable for a man who is strict in his own habits to be easy-going in
dealing with the people under him? But if he becomes easy-going in his
own habits as well as in his practice abroad, this is surely too much
of a good thing.--The Master said: Yung's words are true.

Jan Yu asked: Is our Master for or against the Prince of Wei?[5]--Oh,
said Tz Kung, I will ask him that.--He went in and said: What sort of
men were Po I and Shu Ch'i?[6]--They were two ancient worthies, was the
reply.--Did they ever repine? he asked.--They made perfect virtue their
aim, and they attained it. Why then should they repine?--Tz Kung went
out again and said: Our Master is not for the Prince.

Tsng Tz said: Ability asking instruction of incompetence, abundance
sitting at the feet of insufficiency, a man of every virtue who thought
he had none, solid in character yet making himself out a cypher,
trespassed against but never retaliating--such was the humble state of
mind in which my late friend[7] spent his life.

Tsng Tz said: If a man can safely be entrusted with the care of a
young orphan prince, or with the government of a large province, and if
the approach of a great emergency cannot shake his resolution, is he
not a man of the princely type? Of the princely type he is indeed!

The authorities of Lu were proposing to reconstruct the Long Treasury.
Min Tz-chien said: Why not restore it, rather, in the ancient style?
Why is it necessary to renovate it altogether?--The Master said: This
man is no talker, but when he does speak, he speaks to the purpose.

Ss-ma Niu lamenting said: All other men have brothers; I alone have
none.--Tz Hsia said to him: I have heard it said that life and death
are divine dispensations, that wealth and rank depend on the will
of God. The higher type of man is unfailingly attentive to his own
conduct, and shows respect and true courtesy to others. Thus all within
the four seas[8] are his brethren. How then should he grieve at having
no brothers?

Chi Tz-chng[9] said: The higher type of man is possessed of solid
qualities, and that is all. What has he to do with the ornamental?--Tz
Kung replied: I am sorry, Sir, to hear you say such a thing about the
higher type of man; for a four-horse chariot cannot overtake the spoken
word.[10] The value of the ornament and the value of the substance are
closely connected. Stripped of hair, the hide of a tiger or a leopard
is very like the hide of a dog or a sheep.

Duke Ai asked Yu Jo, saying: It has been a year of famine. My exchequer
is Low. What am I to do?--Yu Jo replied: Why not collect tithes?--Why,
said the Duke, with a tax of two-tenths I still have not enough. How am
I to make one-tenth do?--If the people have plenty, was the reply, how
can the Prince alone be in want? But if the people are in want, how can
the Prince alone have plenty?[11]

Tsng Tz said of the higher type of man that his culture tended to
bring him into communion with friends, and his friendships tended to
heighten his altruism.

The disciples of Tz Hsia asked Tz Chang about the principles
which should govern friendship. Tz Chang said: What is Tz Hsia's
opinion?--They replied: Tz Hsia says, Associate with those who come
up to your standard; reject all those who do not.--This, said Tz
Chang, is different from what I have been taught. The nobler sort of
man honours the virtuous and wise, but he admits to his society all
men without distinction. He admires the good, but he also pities the
weaker brethren. Am I a man of great wisdom and goodness?--then who is
there among my fellow-men that I will not bear with? Or am I neither
wise nor good?--then other men will reject me. How can one justify this
rejection of others?[12]

Tz Hsia said: The inferior type of man always tries to gloss over his
faults.

Tz Hsia said: The wise man will gain the confidence of the people
before laying burdens upon them; otherwise, they will consider it
oppression. He will gain the confidence of his sovereign before
censuring his actions; otherwise, the latter will consider it mere
libel and abuse.

Tz Hsia said: He who does not transgress the larger principles of
virtuous conduct may be excused for disregarding the boundary line in
matters of smaller import.

Tz Yu said: The followers and disciples of Tz Hsia are trained
well enough in sprinkling and sweeping the floor, in responding and
answering questions, in entering and leaving a room. But these are mere
accessories. Of fundamentals they are totally ignorant. How can this be
considered enough?--Tz Hsia, hearing of these remarks, said: Ah! Yen
Yu is mistaken. It is not the way of the wise teacher to distinguish
between subjects of first-class importance, which must be taught, and
subjects of secondary importance, which may be neglected. He cultivates
minds just as he would cultivate plants, each species requiring
separate treatment. It cannot be the wise man's way to produce
confusion and error. He only is inspired who teaches methodically,
having a beginning and an end.

Tz Hsia said: Let the official who has time to spare devote it to
study; let the student who has time to spare devote it to public
affairs.

Tz Yu said: The rites of mourning should not extend beyond the
expression of heartfelt grief.

The chief of the Mng family having appointed Yang Fu to be Criminal
Judge, the latter went to Tsng Tz for advice. Tsng Tz said: Our
rulers have lost their way, and the people have long been scattered and
distracted. When you discover the facts of a crime, be not moved with
joy but rather with pity and grief.

Tz Kung said: The mistakes of a great and good man are like eclipses
of the sun and moon: his failing is seen by all, and when he repairs
it, all look up to him with awe.



[1] Tz Kung, who had passed from poverty to affluence, wished to
draw attention to his own freedom from the vices characteristic of
each state, but his Master recommends the pursuit of virtue in a
more positive form. The quotation from the Odes merely enforces the
necessity of unceasing labour in the matter of self-improvement.
Confucius was always delighted with an apt illustration from his
favourite book.

[2] The Chinese of the above is as usual extremely concise. For several
turns of phrase I am indebted to Mr. Jennings's translation.

[3] Literally, "display toil." The meaning seems to be that of the
Tacitean phrase "exprobrare beneficia."

[4] Literally, "one who faces south"--the customary position for
royalty enthroned.

[5] The reigning duke, who had succeeded his grandfather and was now
opposing his father's attempts to return from exile and secure the
throne. See p. 43.

[6] See note on p. 74.

[7] The disciple Yen Hui.

[8] Believed to constitute the boundaries of the habitable earth, like
Homer's Ocean-river. Hence the phrase is used as a synonym for the
Chinese Empire.

[9] A minister in the Wei State.

[10] A proverb.

[11] A rebuke to the Prince for his greed in a time of distress.

[12] Each pedagogue has seized only one side of the truth. We need not
reject any of our fellow-men, and yet show discrimination in the choice
of our associates. See the first saying on p. 53, where Confucius,
clearer-headed than his disciples, puts the matter in a nutshell.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SAYINGS OF CONFUCIUS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.
