 



                                  Works of Voltaire

                                    Table of Contents

 

  Azolan

  Candide

  From Love to Friendship

  In Camp Before Philippsburg, July 3, 1734

  Letters on England

  Mahomet

  Micromegas

  On the Death of Adrienne Lecouvreur

  The History of Peter the Great, Emperor of Russia

  The Origin of Trades

  The Padlock

  Thelema and Macareus

  To a Lady Very Well Known to the Whole Town

  To Her Royal Highness, the Princess of

  To the Queen of Hungary

  Voltaire's Philosophical Dictionary

  Voltaire's Romances Complete Work

  Zadig or the Book of FateAzolan

 

  Voltaire

  Azolan

  Published in 1901

  Translated by William F. Fleming


  AT VILLAGE lived, in days of yore,

  A youth bred in Mahomet's lore;

  His well-turned limbs were formed with grace,

  With blooming beauty glowed his face;

  His name was Azolan, with care

  The Koran he had written fair;

  Was on its study ever bent,

  To get it all by heart he meant.

  From the most early youth his breast

  By zeal for Gabriel was possessed;

  This minister of the most high

  Descended to him from the sky.

  "The zeal that in thy bosom glows,"

  Said he, "thy guardian Gabriel knows:

  To Gabriel gratitude is dear,

  To make your fortune I'm come here;

  You'll in short time as first divine

  Of Medina and Mecca shine;

  This, next to his place who is chief

  Of all who hold the true belief,  Is the most high and wealthy station

  In holy Mahomet's donation.

  When you your duties once begin,

  Honors on all sides will pour in;

  But you a solemn oath must make

  The whole sex female to forsake;

  To lead a life most chaste, and ne'er

  But through a grate to view the fair."

  Too hastily the beauteous boy,

  That he church treasures might enjoy,

  Fell easily into the snare,

  Nor of his folly was aware.

  Our new-made imam was elate,

  Seeing himself become so great;

  His joy the salary enhanced,

  Which was immediately advanced

  by a clerk of important air,

  Who with him still went share and share.

  No joy can dignity supply,

  Nor wealth, should love his aid deny.

  Amina fair by chance he spies,

  With youthful bloom and charming eyes;

  He loves Amina, she in turn

  For him feels love's flame equal burn.

  Each morning as the day returned,

  The youth, who with love's flames still burned,

  Being by his cursed oath enchained,  Of his sad slavery complained,

  Avowing freely in his heart,

  That he had played a foolish part.

  "Then, Medina, farewell," he cried,

  "Mecca, vain pomp and foolish pride;

  Amina, mistress of my breast,

  We'll both live in my village blessed."

  From heaven the archangel made descent,

  Severely to reproach him bent:

  The tender lover thus replies:

  "Do but behold my mistress' eyes;

  I find of me you've made a jest,

  I'm by your contract quite distressed;

  With all you gave I'll freely part,

  I ask alone Amina's heart.

  The prudent and the sacred lore

  Of Mahomet I must adore;

  Love's joys he grants to the elect,

  Nay, he allows them to expect

  Aminas and eternal love,

  In his bright Paradise above.

  To heaven again, dear Gabriel, go,

  My zeal for you shall still o'erflow;

  To the empyrean then repair;

  Without my love I'd not go there."Candide

 

  Voltaire

  Candide

  Published in 1918


  BONI AND LIVERIGHT, INC.

  PUBLISHERS NEW YORK

  Copyright, 1918, by Boni & Liveright, Inc.

  Printed in the United States of America 


  TABLE

  INTRODUCTION

  CHAPTER I.

  How Candide was brought up in a Magnificent Castle, and how he was

expelled thence

  CHAPTER II.

  What became of Candide among the Bulgarians

  CHAPTER III.

  How Candide made his escape from the Bulgarians, and what afterwards

became of him

  CHAPTER IV.

  How Candide found his old Master Pangloss, and what happened to them

  CHAPTER V.

  Tempest, Shipwreck, Earthquake, and what became of Doctor Pangloss,

Candide, and James the Anabaptist

  CHAPTER VI.

  How the Portuguese made a Beautiful Auto-da-fé, to prevent any furtherEarthquakes: and how Candide was publicly whipped

  CHAPTER VII.

  How the Old Woman took care of Candide, and how he found the Object

he loved

  CHAPTER VIII.

  The History of Cunegonde

  CHAPTER IX.

  What became of Cunegonde, Candide, the Grand Inquisitor, and the Jew

  CHAPTER X.

  In  what  distress  Candide,  Cunegonde,  and  the  Old  Woman  arrived  at

Cadiz; and of their Embarkation

  CHAPTER XI.

  History of the Old Woman

  CHAPTER XII.

  The Adventures of the Old Woman continued

  CHAPTER XIII.

  How  Candide  was  forced  away  from  his  fair  Cunegonde  and  the  Old

Woman

  CHAPTER XIV.

  How Candide and Cacambo were received by the Jesuits of Paraguay

  CHAPTER XV.

  How Candide killed the brother of his dear Cunegonde

  CHAPTER XVI.

  Adventures of the Two Travellers, with Two Girls, Two Monkeys, and the

Savages called Oreillons

  CHAPTER XVII.

  Arrival of Candide and his Valet at El Dorado, and what they saw there

  CHAPTER XVIII.  What they saw in the Country of El Dorado

  CHAPTER XIX.

  What happened to them at Surinam and how Candide got acquainted with

Martin

  CHAPTER XX.

  What happened at Sea to Candide and Martin

  CHAPTER XXI.

  Candide and Martin, reasoning, draw near the Coast of France

  CHAPTER XXII.

  What happened in France to Candide and Martin

  CHAPTER XXIII.

  Candide and Martin touched upon the Coast of England, and what they

saw there

  CHAPTER XXIV.

  Of Paquette and Friar Giroflée

  CHAPTER XXV.

  The Visit to Lord Pococurante, a Noble Venetian

  CHAPTER XXVI.

  Of a Supper which Candide and Martin took with Six Strangers, and who

they were

  CHAPTER XXVII.

  Candide's Voyage to Constantinople

  CHAPTER XXVIII.

  What happened to Candide, Cunegonde, Pangloss, Martin, etc.

  CHAPTER XXIX.

  How Candide found Cunegonde and the Old Woman again

  CHAPTER XXX.

  The Conclusion  INTRODUCTION


  Ever since 1759, when Voltaire wrote "Candide" in ridicule of the notion

that this is the best of all possible worlds, this world has been a gayer place

for readers. Voltaire wrote it in three days, and five or six generations have

found that its laughter does not grow old.

  "Candide" has not aged. Yet how different the book would have looked if

Voltaire had written it a hundred and fifty years later than 1759. It would

have been, among other things, a book of sights and sounds. A modern writer

would have tried to catch and fix in words some of those Atlantic changes

which broke the Atlantic monotony of that voyage from Cadiz to Buenos

Ayres.  When  Martin  and  Candide  were  sailing  the  length  of  the

Mediterranean we should have had a contrast between naked scarped Balearic

cliffs and headlands of Calabria in their mists. We should have had quarter

distances, far horizons, the altering silhouettes of an Ionian island. Colored

birds would have filled Paraguay with their silver or acid cries.

  Dr. Pangloss, to prove the existence of design in the universe, says that

noses were made to carry spectacles, and so we have spectacles. A modern

satirist would not try to paint with Voltaire's quick brush the doctrine that he

wanted to expose. And he would choose a more complicated doctrine than

Dr. Pangloss's optimism, would study it more closely, feel his destructive

way about it with a more learned and caressing malice. His attack, stealthier,

more flexible and more patient than Voltaire's, would call upon us, especially

when his learning got a little out of control, to be more than patient. Now and

then  he  would  bore  us.  "Candide"  never  bored  anybody  except  William

Wordsworth.

  Voltaire's men and women point his case against optimism by starting

high and falling low. A modern could not go about it after this fashion. He

would not plunge his people into an unfamiliar misery. He would just keep

them in the misery they were born to.

  But such an account of Voltaire's procedure is as misleading as the plaster

cast of a dance. Look at his procedure again. Mademoiselle Cunégonde, the

illustrious Westphalian, sprung from a family that could prove seventy-onequarterings, descends and descends until we find her earning her keep by

washing  dishes  in  the  Propontis.  The  aged  faithful  attendant,  victim  of  a

hundred acts of rape by negro pirates, remembers that she is the daughter of a

pope, and that in honor of her approaching marriage with a Prince of Massa-

Carrara all Italy wrote sonnets of which not one was passable. We do not

need to know French literature before Voltaire in order to feel, although the

lurking parody may escape us, that he is poking fun at us and at himself. His

laughter at his own methods grows more unmistakable at the last, when he

caricatures  them  by  casually  assembling  six  fallen  monarchs  in  an  inn  at

Venice.

  A modern assailant of optimism would arm himself with social pity. There

is  no  social  pity  in  "Candide."  Voltaire,  whose  light  touch  on  familiar

institutions opens them and reveals their absurdity, likes to remind us that the

slaughter  and  pillage  and  murder  which  Candide  witnessed  among  the

Bulgarians was perfectly regular, having been conducted according to the

laws and usages of war. Had Voltaire lived to-day he would have done to

poverty  what  he  did  to  war.  Pitying  the  poor,  he  would  have  shown  us

poverty as a ridiculous anachronism, and both the ridicule and the pity would

have expressed his indignation.

  Almost  any  modern,  essaying  a  philosophic  tale,  would  make  it  long.

"Candide" is only a "Hamlet" and a half long. It would hardly have been

shorter if Voltaire had spent three months on it, instead of those three days. A

conciseness to be matched in English by nobody except Pope, who can say a

plagiarizing  enemy  "steals  much,  spends  little,  and  has  nothing  left,"  a

conciseness  which  Pope  toiled  and  sweated  for,  came  as  easy  as  wit  to

Voltaire. He can afford to be witty, parenthetically, by the way, prodigally,

without saving, because he knows there is more wit where that came from.

  One of Max Beerbohm's cartoons shows us the young Twentieth Century

going at top speed, and watched by two of his predecessors. Underneath is

this  legend:  "The  Grave  Misgivings  of  the  Nineteenth  Century,  and  the

Wicked  Amusement  of  the  Eighteenth,  in  Watching  the  Progress  (or

whatever it is) of the Twentieth." This Eighteenth Century snuff-taking and

malicious, is like Voltaire, who nevertheless must know, if he happens to

think of it, that not yet in the Twentieth Century, not for all its speed mania,

has any one come near to equalling the speed of a prose tale by Voltaire."Candide" is a full book. It is filled with mockery, with inventiveness, with

things  as  concrete  as  things  to  eat  and  coins,  it  has  time  for  the  neatest

intellectual clickings, it is never hurried, and it moves with the most amazing

rapidity. It has the rapidity of high spirits playing a game. The dry high spirits

of this destroyer of optimism make most optimists look damp and depressed.

Contemplation of the stupidity which deems happiness possible almost made

Voltaire happy. His attack on optimism is one of the gayest books in the

world.  Gaiety  has  been  scattered  everywhere  up  and  down  its  pages  by

Voltaire's lavish hand, by his thin fingers.

  Many propagandist satirical books have been written with "Candide" in

mind, but not too many. To-day, especially, when new faiths are changing the

structure of the world, faiths which are still plastic enough to be deformed by

every disciple, each disciple for himself, and which have not yet received the

final  deformation  known  as  universal  acceptance,  to-day  "Candide"  is  an

inspiration to every narrative satirist who hates one of these new faiths, or

hates every interpretation of it but his own. Either hatred will serve as a

motive to satire.

  That  is  why  the  present  is  one  of  the  right  moments  to  republish

"Candide." I hope it will inspire younger men and women, the only ones who

can be inspired, to have a try at Theodore, or Militarism; Jane, or Pacifism; at

So-and-So, the Pragmatist or the Freudian. And I hope, too, that they will

without  trying  hold  their  pens  with  an  eighteenth  century  lightness,  not

inappropriate to a philosophic tale. In Voltaire's fingers, as Anatole France

has said, the pen runs and laughs.


  Philip Littell.


  CHAPTER I

  HOW CANDIDE WAS BROUGHT UP IN A MAGNIFICENT CASTLE,

AND HOW HE WAS EXPELLED THENCE.


  In a castle of Westphalia, belonging to the Baron of Thunder-ten-Tronckh,

lived a youth, whom nature had endowed with the most gentle manners. His

countenance was a true picture of his soul. He combined a true judgment withsimplicity of spirit, which was the reason, I apprehend, of his being called

Candide. The old servants of the family suspected him to have been the son

of  the  Baron's  sister,  by  a  good,  honest  gentleman  of  the  neighborhood,

whom that young lady would never marry because he had been able to prove

only seventy-one quarterings, the rest of his genealogical tree having been

lost through the injuries of time.

  The Baron was one of the most powerful lords in Westphalia, for his castle

had  not  only  a  gate,  but  windows.  His  great  hall,  even,  was  hung  with

tapestry. All the dogs of his farm-yards formed a pack of hounds at need; his

grooms  were  his  huntsmen;  and  the  curate  of  the  village  was  his  grand

almoner. They called him "My Lord," and laughed at all his stories.

  The Baron's lady weighed about three hundred and fifty pounds, and was

therefore  a  person  of  great  consideration,  and  she  did  the  honours  of  the

house  with  a  dignity  that  commanded  still  greater  respect.  Her  daughter

Cunegonde was seventeen years of age, fresh-coloured, comely, plump, and

desirable. The Baron's son seemed to be in every respect worthy of his father.

The Preceptor Pangloss[1] was the oracle of the family, and little Candide

heard his lessons with all the good faith of his age and character.

  Pangloss was professor of metaphysico-theologico-cosmolo-nigology. He

proved admirably that there is no effect without a cause, and that, in this best

of all possible worlds, the Baron's castle was the most magnificent of castles,

and his lady the best of all possible Baronesses.

  "It is demonstrable," said he, "that things cannot be otherwise than as they

are;  for  all  being  created  for  an  end,  all  is  necessarily  for  the  best  end.

Observe,  that  the  nose  has  been  formed  to  bear  spectacles-thus  we  have

spectacles. Legs are visibly designed for stockings-and we have stockings.

Stones were made to be hewn, and to construct castles-therefore my lord has

a magnificent castle; for the greatest baron in the province ought to be the

best lodged. Pigs were made to be eaten-therefore we eat pork all the year

round. Consequently they who assert that all is well have said a foolish thing,

they should have said all is for the best."

  Candide listened attentively and believed innocently; for he thought Miss

Cunegonde extremely beautiful, though he never had the courage to tell her

so. He concluded that after the happiness of being born of Baron of Thunder-ten-Tronckh, the second degree of happiness was to be Miss Cunegonde, the

third  that  of  seeing  her  every  day,  and  the  fourth  that  of  hearing  Master

Pangloss, the greatest philosopher of the whole province, and consequently of

the whole world.

  One day Cunegonde, while walking near the castle, in a little wood which

they called a park, saw between the bushes, Dr. Pangloss giving a lesson in

experimental natural philosophy to her mother's chamber-maid, a little brown

wench,  very  pretty  and  very  docile.  As  Miss  Cunegonde  had  a  great

disposition  for  the  sciences,  she  breathlessly  observed  the  repeated

experiments of which she was a witness; she clearly perceived the force of

the  Doctor's  reasons,  the  effects,  and  the  causes;  she  turned  back  greatly

flurried, quite pensive, and filled with the desire to be learned; dreaming that

she might well be a sufficient reason for young Candide, and he for her.

  She met Candide on reaching the castle and blushed; Candide blushed

also; she wished him good morrow in a faltering tone, and Candide spoke to

her without knowing what he said. The next day after dinner, as they went

from  table,  Cunegonde  and  Candide  found  themselves  behind  a  screen;

Cunegonde  let  fall  her  handkerchief,  Candide  picked  it  up,  she  took  him

innocently by the hand, the youth as innocently kissed the young lady's hand

with  particular  vivacity,  sensibility,  and  grace;  their  lips  met,  their  eyes

sparkled,  their  knees  trembled,  their  hands  strayed.  Baron  Thunder-ten-

Tronckh passed near the screen and beholding this cause and effect chased

Candide from the castle with great kicks on the backside; Cunegonde fainted

away; she was boxed on the ears by the Baroness, as soon as she came to

herself;  and  all  was  consternation  in  this  most  magnificent  and  most

agreeable of all possible castles.


  CHAPTER II

  WHAT BECAME OF CANDIDE AMONG THE BULGARIANS.


  Candide,  driven  from  terrestrial  paradise,  walked  a  long  while  without

knowing  where,  weeping,  raising  his  eyes  to  heaven,  turning  them  often

towards the most magnificent of castles which imprisoned the purest of noble

young ladies. He lay down to sleep without supper, in the middle of a fieldbetween two furrows. The snow fell in large flakes. Next day Candide, all

benumbed, dragged himself towards the neighbouring town which was called

  Waldberghofftrarbk-dikdorff, having no money, dying of hunger and fatigue,

he  stopped  sorrowfully  at  the  door  of  an  inn.  Two  men  dressed  in  blue

observed him.

  "Comrade," said one, "here is a well-built young fellow, and of proper

height."

  They went up to Candide and very civilly invited him to dinner.

  "Gentlemen," replied Candide, with a most engaging modesty, "you do me

great honour, but I have not wherewithal to pay my share."

  "Oh, sir," said one of the blues to him, "people of your appearance and of

your merit never pay anything: are you not five feet five inches high?"

  "Yes, sir, that is my height," answered he, making a low bow.

  "Come, sir, seat yourself; not only will we pay your reckoning, but we will

never suffer such a man as you to want money; men are only born to assist

one another."

  "You are right," said Candide; "this is what I was always taught by Mr.

Pangloss, and I see plainly that all is for the best."

  They begged of him to accept a few crowns. He took them, and wished to

give them his note; they refused; they seated themselves at table.

  "Love you not deeply?"

  "Oh yes," answered he; "I deeply love Miss Cunegonde."

  "No," said one of the gentlemen, "we ask you if you do not deeply love the

King of the Bulgarians?"

  "Not at all," said he; "for I have never seen him."

  "What! he is the best of kings, and we must drink his health."

  "Oh! very willingly, gentlemen," and he drank.

  "That is enough," they tell him. "Now you are the help, the support, the

defender, the hero of the Bulgarians. Your fortune is made, and your glory is

assured."  Instantly they fettered him, and carried him away to the regiment. There

he was made to wheel about to the right, and to the left, to draw his rammer,

to return his rammer, to present, to fire, to march, and they gave him thirty

blows with a cudgel. The next day he did his exercise a little less badly, and

he received but twenty blows. The day following they gave him only ten, and

he was regarded by his comrades as a prodigy.

  Candide, all stupefied, could not yet very well realise how he was a hero.

He resolved one fine day in spring to go for a walk, marching straight before

him, believing that it was a privilege of the human as well as of the animal

species  to  make  use  of  their  legs  as  they  pleased.  He  had  advanced  two

leagues when he was overtaken by four others, heroes of six feet, who bound

him and carried him to a dungeon. He was asked which he would like the

best,  to  be  whipped  six-and-thirty  times  through  all  the  regiment,  or  to

receive at once twelve balls of lead in his brain. He vainly said that human

will is free, and that he chose neither the one nor the other. He was forced to

make a choice; he determined, in virtue of that gift of God called liberty, to

run the gauntlet six-and-thirty times. He bore this twice. The regiment was

composed  of  two  thousand  men;  that  composed  for  him  four  thousand

strokes, which laid bare all his muscles and nerves, from the nape of his neck

quite down to his rump. As they were going to proceed to a third whipping,

Candide, able to bear no more, begged as a favour that they would be so good

as to shoot him. He obtained this favour; they bandaged his eyes, and bade

him  kneel  down.  The  King  of  the  Bulgarians  passed  at  this  moment  and

ascertained the nature of the crime. As he had great talent, he understood

from  all  that  he  learnt  of  Candide  that  he  was  a  young  metaphysician,

extremely  ignorant  of  the  things  of  this  world,  and  he  accorded  him  his

pardon with a clemency which will bring him praise in all the journals, and

throughout all ages.

  An able surgeon cured Candide in three weeks by means of emollients

taught by Dioscorides. He had already a little skin, and was able to march

when the King of the Bulgarians gave battle to the King of the Abares.[2]


  CHAPTER III

  HOW  CANDIDE  MADE  HIS  ESCAPE  FROM  THE  BULGARIANS,AND WHAT AFTERWARDS BECAME OF HIM.


  There was never anything so gallant, so spruce, so brilliant, and so well

disposed as the two armies. Trumpets, fifes, hautboys, drums, and cannon

made music such as Hell itself had never heard. The cannons first of all laid

flat about six thousand men on each side; the muskets swept away from this

best of worlds nine or ten thousand ruffians who infested its surface. The

bayonet was also a sufficient reason for the death of several thousands. The

whole might amount to thirty thousand souls. Candide, who trembled like a

philosopher, hid himself as well as he could during this heroic butchery.

  At length, while the two kings were causing Te Deum to be sung each in

his own camp, Candide resolved to go and reason elsewhere on effects and

causes.  He  passed  over  heaps  of  dead  and  dying,  and  first  reached  a

neighbouring village; it was in cinders, it was an Abare village which the

Bulgarians had burnt according to the laws of war. Here, old men covered

with  wounds,  beheld  their  wives,  hugging  their  children  to  their  bloody

breasts, massacred before their faces; there, their daughters, disembowelled

and breathing their last after having satisfied the natural wants of Bulgarian

heroes; while others, half burnt in the flames, begged to be despatched. The

earth was strewed with brains, arms, and legs.

  Candide fled quickly to another village; it belonged to the Bulgarians; and

the Abarian heroes had treated it in the same way. Candide, walking always

over palpitating limbs or across ruins, arrived at last beyond the seat of war,

with a few provisions in his knapsack, and Miss Cunegonde always in his

heart. His provisions failed him when he arrived in Holland; but having heard

that everybody was rich in that country, and that they were Christians, he did

not doubt but he should meet with the same treatment from them as he had

met with in the Baron's castle, before Miss Cunegonde's bright eyes were the

cause of his expulsion thence.

  He asked alms of several grave-looking people, who all answered him,

that if he continued to follow this trade they would confine him to the house

of correction, where he should be taught to get a living.

  The  next  he  addressed  was  a  man  who  had  been  haranguing  a  large

assembly for a whole hour on the subject of charity. But the orator, lookingaskew, said:

  "What are you doing here? Are you for the good cause?"

  "There can be no effect without a cause," modestly answered Candide;

"the  whole  is  necessarily  concatenated  and  arranged  for  the  best.  It  was

necessary  for  me  to  have  been  banished  from  the  presence  of  Miss

Cunegonde, to have afterwards run the gauntlet, and now it is necessary I

should beg my bread until I learn to earn it; all this cannot be otherwise."

  "My friend," said the orator to him, "do you believe the Pope to be Anti-

Christ?"

  "I have not heard it," answered Candide; "but whether he be, or whether

he be not, I want bread."

  "Thou dost not deserve to eat," said the other. "Begone, rogue; begone,

wretch; do not come near me again."

  The orator's wife, putting her head out of the window, and spying a man

that doubted whether the Pope was Anti-Christ, poured over him a full.... Oh,

heavens! to what excess does religious zeal carry the ladies.

  A man who had never been christened, a good Anabaptist, named James,

beheld the cruel and ignominious treatment shown to one of his brethren, an

unfeathered biped with a rational soul, he took him home, cleaned him, gave

him bread and beer, presented him with two florins, and even wished to teach

him the manufacture of Persian stuffs which they make in Holland. Candide,

almost prostrating himself before him, cried:

  "Master Pangloss has well said that all is for the best in this world, for I

am  infinitely  more  touched  by  your  extreme  generosity  than  with  the

inhumanity of that gentleman in the black coat and his lady."

  The next day, as he took a walk, he met a beggar all covered with scabs,

his eyes diseased, the end of his nose eaten away, his mouth distorted, his

teeth  black,  choking  in  his  throat,  tormented  with  a  violent  cough,  and

spitting out a tooth at each effort.


  CHAPTER IV

  HOW  CANDIDE  FOUND  HIS  OLD  MASTER  PANGLOSS,  ANDWHAT HAPPENED TO THEM.


  Candide, yet more moved with compassion than with horror, gave to this

shocking  beggar  the  two  florins  which  he  had  received  from  the  honest

Anabaptist James. The spectre looked at him very earnestly, dropped a few

tears, and fell upon his neck. Candide recoiled in disgust.

  "Alas!" said one wretch to the other, "do you no longer know your dear

Pangloss?"

  "What do I hear? You, my dear master! you in this terrible plight! What

misfortune  has  happened  to  you?  Why  are  you  no  longer  in  the  most

magnificent of castles? What has become of Miss Cunegonde, the pearl of

girls, and nature's masterpiece?"

  "I am so weak that I cannot stand," said Pangloss.

  Upon which Candide carried him to the Anabaptist's stable, and gave him

a crust of bread. As soon as Pangloss had refreshed himself a little:

  "Well," said Candide, "Cunegonde?"

  "She is dead," replied the other.

  Candide fainted at this word; his friend recalled his senses with a little bad

vinegar which he found by chance in the stable. Candide reopened his eyes.

  "Cunegonde is dead! Ah, best of worlds, where art thou? But of what

illness did she die? Was it not for grief, upon seeing her father kick me out of

his magnificent castle?"

  "No," said Pangloss, "she was ripped open by the Bulgarian soldiers, after

having been violated by many; they broke the Baron's head for attempting to

defend her; my lady, her mother, was cut in pieces; my poor pupil was served

just in the same manner as his sister; and as for the castle, they have not left

one stone upon another, not a barn, nor a sheep, nor a duck, nor a tree; but we

have had our revenge, for the Abares have done the very same thing to a

neighbouring barony, which belonged to a Bulgarian lord."

  At this discourse Candide fainted again; but coming to himself, and having

said all that it became him to say, inquired into the cause and effect, as well

as  into  the  sufficient  reason  that  had  reduced  Pangloss  to  so  miserable  aplight.

  "Alas!"  said  the  other,  "it  was  love;  love,  the  comfort  of  the  human

species, the preserver of the universe, the soul of all sensible beings, love,

tender love."

  "Alas!" said Candide, "I know this love, that sovereign of hearts, that soul

of our souls; yet it never cost me more than a kiss and twenty kicks on the

backside.  How  could  this  beautiful  cause  produce  in  you  an  effect  so

abominable?"

  Pangloss  made  answer  in  these  terms:  "Oh,  my  dear  Candide,  you

remember Paquette, that pretty wench who waited on our noble Baroness; in

her arms I tasted the delights of paradise, which produced in me those hell

torments with which you see me devoured; she was infected with them, she is

perhaps dead of them. This present Paquette received of a learned Grey Friar,

who had traced it to its source; he had had it of an old countess, who had

received it from a cavalry captain, who owed it to a marchioness, who took it

from a page, who had received it from a Jesuit, who when a novice had it in a

direct line from one of the companions of Christopher Columbus.[3] For my

part I shall give it to nobody, I am dying."

  "Oh,  Pangloss!"  cried  Candide,  "what  a  strange  genealogy!  Is  not  the

Devil the original stock of it?"

  "Not  at  all,"  replied  this  great  man,  "it  was  a  thing  unavoidable,  a

necessary ingredient in the best of worlds; for if Columbus had not in an

island of America caught this disease, which contaminates the source of life,

frequently even hinders generation, and which is evidently opposed to the

great end of nature, we should have neither chocolate nor cochineal. We are

also  to  observe  that  upon  our  continent,  this  distemper  is  like  religious

controversy,  confined  to  a  particular  spot.  The  Turks,  the  Indians,  the

Persians, the Chinese, the Siamese, the Japanese, know nothing of it; but

there is a sufficient reason for believing that they will know it in their turn in

a few centuries. In the meantime, it has made marvellous progress among us,

especially  in  those  great  armies  composed  of  honest  well-disciplined

hirelings, who decide the destiny of states; for we may safely affirm that

when an army of thirty thousand men fights another of an equal number,

there are about twenty thousand of them p-x-d on each side."  "Well, this is wonderful!" said Candide, "but you must get cured."

  "Alas! how can I?" said Pangloss, "I have not a farthing, my friend, and all

over the globe there is no letting of blood or taking a glister, without paying,

or somebody paying for you."

  These last words determined Candide; he went and flung himself at the

feet of the charitable Anabaptist James, and gave him so touching a picture of

the state to which his friend was reduced, that the good man did not scruple

to take Dr. Pangloss into his house, and had him cured at his expense. In the

cure  Pangloss  lost  only  an  eye  and  an  ear.  He  wrote  well,  and  knew

arithmetic perfectly. The Anabaptist James made him his bookkeeper. At the

end of two months, being obliged to go to Lisbon about some mercantile

affairs, he took the two philosophers with him in his ship. Pangloss explained

to him how everything was so constituted that it could not be better. James

was not of this opinion.

  "It is more likely," said he, "mankind have a little corrupted nature, for

they were not born wolves, and they have become wolves; God has given

them neither cannon of four-and-twenty pounders, nor bayonets; and yet they

have made cannon and bayonets to destroy one another. Into this account I

might throw not only bankrupts, but Justice which seizes on the effects of

bankrupts to cheat the creditors."

  "All  this  was  indispensable,"  replied  the  one-eyed  doctor,  "for  private

misfortunes  make  the  general  good,  so  that  the  more  private  misfortunes

there are the greater is the general good."

  While  he  reasoned,  the  sky  darkened,  the  winds  blew  from  the  four

quarters, and the ship was assailed by a most terrible tempest within sight of

the port of Lisbon.


  CHAPTER V

  TEMPEST, SHIPWRECK, EARTHQUAKE, AND WHAT BECAME OF

DOCTOR PANGLOSS, CANDIDE, AND JAMES THE ANABAPTIST.


  Half  dead  of  that  inconceivable  anguish  which  the  rolling  of  a  ship

produces, one-half of the passengers were not even sensible of the danger.The other half shrieked and prayed. The sheets were rent, the masts broken,

the vessel gaped. Work who would, no one heard, no one commanded. The

Anabaptist being upon deck bore a hand; when a brutish sailor struck him

roughly and laid him sprawling; but with the violence of the blow he himself

tumbled head foremost overboard, and stuck upon a piece of the broken mast.

Honest James ran to his assistance, hauled him up, and from the effort he

made was precipitated into the sea in sight of the sailor, who left him to

perish,  without  deigning  to  look  at  him.  Candide  drew  near  and  saw  his

benefactor, who rose above the water one moment and was then swallowed

up for ever. He was just going to jump after him, but was prevented by the

philosopher Pangloss, who demonstrated to him that the Bay of Lisbon had

been  made  on  purpose  for  the  Anabaptist  to  be  drowned.  While  he  was

proving  this  à  priori,  the  ship  foundered;  all  perished  except  Pangloss,

Candide, and that brutal sailor who had drowned the good Anabaptist. The

villain swam safely to the shore, while Pangloss and Candide were borne

thither upon a plank.

  As soon as they recovered themselves a little they walked toward Lisbon.

They had some money left, with which they hoped to save themselves from

starving, after they had escaped drowning. Scarcely had they reached the city,

lamenting  the  death  of  their  benefactor,  when  they  felt  the  earth  tremble

under their feet. The sea swelled and foamed in the harbour, and beat to

pieces the vessels riding at anchor. Whirlwinds of fire and ashes covered the

streets and public places; houses fell, roofs were flung upon the pavements,

and the pavements were scattered. Thirty thousand inhabitants of all ages and

sexes were crushed under the ruins.[4] The sailor, whistling and swearing,

said there was booty to be gained here.

  "What can be the sufficient reason of this phenomenon?" said Pangloss.

  "This is the Last Day!" cried Candide.

  The sailor ran among the ruins, facing death to find money; finding it, he

took it, got drunk, and having slept himself sober, purchased the favours of

the first good-natured wench whom he met on the ruins of the destroyed

houses, and in the midst of the dying and the dead. Pangloss pulled him by

the sleeve.

  "My  friend,"  said  he,  "this  is  not  right.  You  sin  against  the  universalreason; you choose your time badly."

  "S'blood and fury!" answered the other; "I am a sailor and born at Batavia.

Four times have I trampled upon the crucifix in four voyages to Japan[5]; a

fig for thy universal reason."

  Some falling stones had wounded Candide. He lay stretched in the street

covered with rubbish.

  "Alas!" said he to Pangloss, "get me a little wine and oil; I am dying."

  "This concussion of the earth is no new thing," answered Pangloss. "The

city of Lima, in America, experienced the same convulsions last year; the

same  cause,  the  same  effects;  there  is  certainly  a  train  of  sulphur  under

ground from Lima to Lisbon."

  "Nothing more probable," said Candide; "but for the love of God a little

oil and wine."

  "How, probable?" replied the philosopher. "I maintain that the point is

capable of being demonstrated."

  Candide  fainted  away,  and  Pangloss  fetched  him  some  water  from  a

neighbouring fountain. The following day they rummaged among the ruins

and  found  provisions,  with  which  they  repaired  their  exhausted  strength.

After  this  they  joined  with  others  in  relieving  those  inhabitants  who  had

escaped death. Some, whom they had succoured, gave them as good a dinner

as they could in such disastrous circumstances; true, the repast was mournful,

and the company moistened their bread with tears; but Pangloss consoled

them, assuring them that things could not be otherwise.

  "For," said he, "all that is is for the best. If there is a volcano at Lisbon it

cannot be elsewhere. It is impossible that things should be other than they

are; for everything is right."

  A little man dressed in black, Familiar of the Inquisition, who sat by him,

politely took up his word and said:

  "Apparently, then, sir, you do not believe in original sin; for if all is for the

best there has then been neither Fall nor punishment."

  "I humbly ask your Excellency's pardon," answered Pangloss, still more

politely; "for the Fall and curse of man necessarily entered into the system ofthe best of worlds."

  "Sir," said the Familiar, "you do not then believe in liberty?"

  "Your Excellency will excuse me," said Pangloss; "liberty is consistent

with absolute necessity, for it was necessary we should be free; for, in short,

the determinate will"

  Pangloss was in the middle of his sentence, when the Familiar beckoned to

his footman, who gave him a glass of wine from Porto or Opporto.


  CHAPTER VI

  HOW THE PORTUGUESE MADE A BEAUTIFUL AUTO-DA-FÉ, TO

PREVENT  ANY  FURTHER  EARTHQUAKES;  AND  HOW  CANDIDE

WAS PUBLICLY WHIPPED.


  After the earthquake had destroyed three-fourths of Lisbon, the sages of

that country could think of no means more effectual to prevent utter ruin than

to give the people a beautiful auto-da-fé[6]; for it had been decided by the

University of Coimbra, that the burning of a few people alive by a slow fire,

and  with  great  ceremony,  is  an  infallible  secret  to  hinder  the  earth  from

quaking.

  In  consequence  hereof,  they  had  seized  on  a  Biscayner,  convicted  of

having  married  his  godmother,  and  on  two  Portuguese,  for  rejecting  the

bacon which larded a chicken they were eating[7]; after dinner, they came

and secured Dr. Pangloss, and his disciple Candide, the one for speaking his

mind, the other for having listened with an air of approbation. They were

conducted  to  separate  apartments,  extremely  cold,  as  they  were  never

incommoded by the sun. Eight days after they were dressed in san-benitos[8]

and  their  heads  ornamented  with  paper  mitres.  The  mitre  and  san-benito

belonging to Candide were painted with reversed flames and with devils that

had neither tails nor claws; but Pangloss's devils had claws and tails and the

flames were upright. They marched in procession thus habited and heard a

very pathetic sermon, followed by fine church music. Candide was whipped

in cadence while they were singing; the Biscayner, and the two men who had

refused to eat bacon, were burnt; and Pangloss was hanged, though that wasnot the custom. The same day the earth sustained a most violent concussion.

  Candide, terrified, amazed, desperate, all bloody, all palpitating, said to

himself:

  "If this is the best of possible worlds, what then are the others? Well, if I

had been only whipped I could put up with it, for I experienced that among

the Bulgarians; but oh, my dear Pangloss! thou greatest of philosophers, that I

should  have  seen  you  hanged,  without  knowing  for  what!  Oh,  my  dear

Anabaptist, thou best of men, that thou should'st have been drowned in the

very harbour! Oh, Miss Cunegonde, thou pearl of girls! that thou should'st

have had thy belly ripped open!"

  Thus he was musing, scarce able to stand, preached at, whipped, absolved,

and blessed, when an old woman accosted him saying:

  "My son, take courage and follow me."


  CHAPTER VII

  HOW THE OLD WOMAN TOOK CARE OF CANDIDE, AND HOW

HE FOUND THE OBJECT HE LOVED.


  Candide did not take courage, but followed the old woman to a decayed

house, where she gave him a pot of pomatum to anoint his sores, showed him

a  very  neat  little  bed,  with  a  suit  of  clothes  hanging  up,  and  left  him

something to eat and drink.

  "Eat, drink, sleep," said she, "and may our lady of Atocha,[9] the great St.

Anthony of Padua, and the great St. James of Compostella, receive you under

their protection. I shall be back to-morrow."

  Candide, amazed at all he had suffered and still more with the charity of

the old woman, wished to kiss her hand.

  "It is not my hand you must kiss," said the old woman; "I shall be back to-

morrow. Anoint yourself with the pomatum, eat and sleep."

  Candide,  notwithstanding  so  many  disasters,  ate  and  slept.  The  next

morning the old woman brought him his breakfast, looked at his back, and

rubbed it herself with another ointment: in like manner she brought him hisdinner; and at night she returned with his supper. The day following she went

through the very same ceremonies.

  "Who  are  you?"  said  Candide;  "who  has  inspired  you  with  so  much

goodness? What return can I make you?"

  The  good  woman  made  no  answer;  she  returned  in  the  evening,  but

brought no supper.

  "Come with me," she said, "and say nothing."

  She took him by the arm, and walked with him about a quarter of a mile

into the country; they arrived at a lonely house, surrounded with gardens and

canals. The old woman knocked at a little door, it opened, she led Candide up

a private staircase into a small apartment richly furnished. She left him on a

brocaded sofa, shut the door and went away. Candide thought himself in a

dream; indeed, that he had been dreaming unluckily all his life, and that the

present moment was the only agreeable part of it all.

  The old woman returned very soon, supporting with difficulty a trembling

woman of a majestic figure, brilliant with jewels, and covered with a veil.

  "Take off that veil," said the old woman to Candide.

  The young man approaches, he raises the veil with a timid hand. Oh! what

a moment! what surprise! he believes he beholds Miss Cunegonde? he really

sees her! it is herself! His strength fails him, he cannot utter a word, but drops

at  her  feet.  Cunegonde  falls  upon  the  sofa.  The  old  woman  supplies  a

smelling bottle; they come to themselves and recover their speech. As they

began  with  broken  accents,  with  questions  and  answers  interchangeably

interrupted with sighs, with tears, and cries. The old woman desired they

would make less noise and then she left them to themselves.

  "What, is it you?" said Candide, "you live? I find you again in Portugal?

then you have not been ravished? then they did not rip open your belly as

Doctor Pangloss informed me?"

  "Yes, they did," said the beautiful Cunegonde; "but those two accidents

are not always mortal."

  "But were your father and mother killed?"

  "It is but too true," answered Cunegonde, in tears.  "And your brother?"

  "My brother also was killed."

  "And why are you in Portugal? and how did you know of my being here?

and by what strange adventure did you contrive to bring me to this house?"

  "I will tell you all that," replied the lady, "but first of all let me know your

history,  since  the  innocent  kiss  you  gave  me  and  the  kicks  which  you

received."

  Candide respectfully obeyed her, and though he was still in a surprise,

though his voice was feeble and trembling, though his back still pained him,

yet he gave her a most ingenuous account of everything that had befallen him

since the moment of their separation. Cunegonde lifted up her eyes to heaven;

shed tears upon hearing of the death of the good Anabaptist and of Pangloss;

after which she spoke as follows to Candide, who did not lose a word and

devoured her with his eyes.


  CHAPTER VIII

  THE HISTORY OF CUNEGONDE.


  "I was in bed and fast asleep when it pleased God to send the Bulgarians

to  our  delightful  castle  of  Thunder-ten-Tronckh;  they  slew  my  father  and

brother,  and  cut  my  mother  in  pieces.  A  tall  Bulgarian,  six  feet  high,

perceiving that I had fainted away at this sight, began to ravish me; this made

me recover; I regained my senses, I cried, I struggled, I bit, I scratched, I

wanted to tear out the tall Bulgarian's eyes-not knowing that what happened

at my father's house was the usual practice of war. The brute gave me a cut in

the left side with his hanger, and the mark is still upon me."

  "Ah! I hope I shall see it," said honest Candide.

  "You shall," said Cunegonde, "but let us continue."

  "Do so," replied Candide.

  Thus she resumed the thread of her story:

  "A Bulgarian captain came in, saw me all bleeding, and the soldier not in

the least disconcerted. The captain flew into a passion at the disrespectfulbehaviour of the brute, and slew him on my body. He ordered my wounds to

be dressed, and took me to his quarters as a prisoner of war. I washed the few

shirts that he had, I did his cooking; he thought me very pretty-he avowed it;

on the other hand, I must own he had a good shape, and a soft and white skin;

but he had little or no mind or philosophy, and you might see plainly that he

had never been instructed by Doctor Pangloss. In three months time, having

lost all his money, and being grown tired of my company, he sold me to a

Jew, named Don Issachar, who traded to Holland and Portugal, and had a

strong passion for women. This Jew was much attached to my person, but

could not triumph over it; I resisted him better than the Bulgarian soldier. A

modest woman may be ravished once, but her virtue is strengthened by it. In

order  to  render  me  more  tractable,  he  brought  me  to  this  country  house.

Hitherto I had imagined that nothing could equal the beauty of Thunder-ten-

Tronckh Castle; but I found I was mistaken.

  "The Grand Inquisitor, seeing me one day at Mass, stared long at me, and

sent to tell me that he wished to speak on private matters. I was conducted to

his palace, where I acquainted him with the history of my family, and he

represented to me how much it was beneath my rank to belong to an Israelite.

A proposal was then made to Don Issachar that he should resign me to my

lord. Don Issachar, being the court banker, and a man of credit, would hear

nothing of it. The Inquisitor threatened him with an auto-da-fé. At last my

Jew, intimidated, concluded a bargain, by which the house and myself should

belong  to  both  in  common;  the  Jew  should  have  for  himself  Monday,

Wednesday,  and  Saturday,  and  the  Inquisitor  should  have  the  rest  of  the

week. It is now six months since this agreement was made. Quarrels have not

been wanting, for they could not decide whether the night from Saturday to

Sunday belonged to the old law or to the new. For my part, I have so far held

out against both, and I verily believe that this is the reason why I am still

beloved.

  "At length, to avert the scourge of earthquakes, and to intimidate Don

Issachar, my Lord Inquisitor was pleased to celebrate an auto-da-fé. He did

me the honour to invite me to the ceremony. I had a very good seat, and the

ladies were served with refreshments between Mass and the execution. I was

in truth seized with horror at the burning of those two Jews, and of the honest

Biscayner who had married his godmother; but what was my surprise, myfright,  my  trouble,  when  I  saw  in  a  san-benito  and  mitre  a  figure  which

resembled that of Pangloss! I rubbed my eyes, I looked at him attentively, I

saw him hung; I fainted. Scarcely had I recovered my senses than I saw you

stripped, stark naked, and this was the height of my horror, consternation,

grief, and despair. I tell you, truthfully, that your skin is yet whiter and of a

more  perfect  colour  than  that  of  my  Bulgarian  captain.  This  spectacle

redoubled all the feelings which overwhelmed and devoured me. I screamed

out, and would have said, 'Stop, barbarians!' but my voice failed me, and my

cries would have been useless after you had been severely whipped. How is it

possible, said I, that the beloved Candide and the wise Pangloss should both

be at Lisbon, the one to receive a hundred lashes, and the other to be hanged

by  the  Grand  Inquisitor,  of  whom  I  am  the  well-beloved?  Pangloss  most

cruelly deceived me when he said that everything in the world is for the best.

  "Agitated, lost, sometimes beside myself, and sometimes ready to die of

weakness, my mind was filled with the massacre of my father, mother, and

brother, with the insolence of the ugly Bulgarian soldier, with the stab that he

gave me, with my servitude under the Bulgarian captain, with my hideous

Don Issachar, with my abominable Inquisitor, with the execution of Doctor

Pangloss, with the grand Miserere to which they whipped you, and especially

with the kiss I gave you behind the screen the day that I had last seen you. I

praised God for bringing you back to me after so many trials, and I charged

my old woman to take care of you, and to conduct you hither as soon as

possible. She has executed her commission perfectly well; I have tasted the

inexpressible pleasure of seeing you again, of hearing you, of speaking with

you. But you must be hungry, for myself, I am famished; let us have supper."

  They both sat down to table, and, when supper was over, they placed

themselves  once  more  on  the  sofa;  where  they  were  when  Signor  Don

Issachar arrived. It was the Jewish Sabbath, and Issachar had come to enjoy

his rights, and to explain his tender love.


  CHAPTER IX

  WHAT  BECAME  OF  CUNEGONDE,  CANDIDE,  THE  GRAND

INQUISITOR, AND THE JEW.  This Issachar was the most choleric Hebrew that had ever been seen in

Israel since the Captivity in Babylon.

  "What!" said he, "thou bitch of a Galilean, was not the Inquisitor enough

for thee? Must this rascal also share with me?"

  In saying this he drew a long poniard which he always carried about him;

and not imagining that his adversary had any arms he threw himself upon

Candide: but our honest Westphalian had received a handsome sword from

the old woman along with the suit of clothes. He drew his rapier, despite his

gentleness, and laid the Israelite stone dead upon the cushions at Cunegonde's

feet.

  "Holy Virgin!" cried she, "what will become of us? A man killed in my

apartment! If the officers of justice come, we are lost!"

  "Had not Pangloss been hanged," said Candide, "he would give us good

counsel in this emergency, for he was a profound philosopher. Failing him let

us consult the old woman."

  She was very prudent and commenced to give her opinion when suddenly

another little door opened. It was an hour after midnight, it was the beginning

of Sunday. This day belonged to my lord the Inquisitor. He entered, and saw

the whipped Candide, sword in hand, a dead man upon the floor, Cunegonde

aghast, and the old woman giving counsel.

  At this moment, the following is what passed in the soul of Candide, and

how he reasoned:

  If  this  holy  man  call  in  assistance,  he  will  surely  have  me  burnt;  and

Cunegonde will perhaps be served in the same manner; he was the cause of

my being cruelly whipped; he is my rival; and, as I have now begun to kill, I

will kill away, for there is no time to hesitate. This reasoning was clear and

instantaneous; so that without giving time to the Inquisitor to recover from

his surprise, he pierced him through and through, and cast him beside the

Jew.

  "Yet  again!"  said  Cunegonde,  "now  there  is  no  mercy  for  us,  we  are

excommunicated,  our  last  hour  has  come.  How  could  you  do  it?  you,

naturally so gentle, to slay a Jew and a prelate in two minutes!"

  "My  beautiful  young  lady,"  responded  Candide,  "when  one  is  a  lover,jealous and whipped by the Inquisition, one stops at nothing."

  The old woman then put in her word, saying:

  "There are three Andalusian horses in the stable with bridles and saddles,

let the brave Candide get them ready; madame has money, jewels; let us

therefore mount quickly on horseback, though I can sit only on one buttock;

let us set out for Cadiz, it is the finest weather in the world, and there is great

pleasure in travelling in the cool of the night."

  Immediately Candide saddled the three horses, and Cunegonde, the old

woman and he, travelled thirty miles at a stretch. While they were journeying,

the Holy Brotherhood entered the house; my lord the Inquisitor was interred

in a handsome church, and Issachar's body was thrown upon a dunghill.

  Candide, Cunegonde, and the old woman, had now reached the little town

of Avacena in the midst of the mountains of the Sierra Morena, and were

speaking as follows in a public inn.


  CHAPTER X

  IN  WHAT  DISTRESS  CANDIDE,  CUNEGONDE,  AND  THE  OLD

WOMAN ARRIVED AT CADIZ; AND OF THEIR EMBARKATION.


  "Who was it that robbed me of my money and jewels?" said Cunegonde,

all  bathed  in  tears.  "How  shall  we  live?  What  shall  we  do?  Where  find

Inquisitors or Jews who will give me more?"

  "Alas!" said the old woman, "I have a shrewd suspicion of a reverend

Grey Friar, who stayed last night in the same inn with us at Badajos. God

preserve me from judging rashly, but he came into our room twice, and he set

out upon his journey long before us."

  "Alas!" said Candide, "dear Pangloss has often demonstrated to me that

the goods of this world are common to all men, and that each has an equal

right to them. But according to these principles the Grey Friar ought to have

left us enough to carry us through our journey. Have you nothing at all left,

my dear Cunegonde?"

  "Not a farthing," said she.  "What then must we do?" said Candide.

  "Sell one of the horses," replied the old woman. "I will ride behind Miss

Cunegonde, though I can hold myself only on one buttock, and we shall reach

Cadiz."

  In the same inn there was a Benedictine prior who bought the horse for a

cheap price. Candide, Cunegonde, and the old woman, having passed through

Lucena, Chillas, and Lebrixa, arrived at length at Cadiz. A fleet was there

getting ready, and troops assembling to bring to reason the reverend Jesuit

Fathers of Paraguay, accused of having made one of the native tribes in the

neighborhood  of  San  Sacrament  revolt  against  the  Kings  of  Spain  and

Portugal.  Candide  having  been  in  the  Bulgarian  service,  performed  the

military exercise before the general of this little army with so graceful an

address, with so intrepid an air, and with such agility and expedition, that he

was given the command of a company of foot. Now, he was a captain! He set

sail  with  Miss  Cunegonde,  the  old  woman,  two  valets,  and  the  two

Andalusian horses, which had belonged to the grand Inquisitor of Portugal.

  During their voyage they reasoned a good deal on the philosophy of poor

Pangloss.

  "We are going into another world," said Candide; "and surely it must be

there that all is for the best. For I must confess there is reason to complain a

little  of  what  passeth  in  our  world  in  regard  to  both  natural  and  moral

philosophy."

  "I love you with all my heart," said Cunegonde; "but my soul is still full of

fright at that which I have seen and experienced."

  "All will be well," replied Candide; "the sea of this new world is already

better  than  our  European  sea;  it  is  calmer,  the  winds  more  regular.  It  is

certainly the New World which is the best of all possible worlds."

  "God grant it," said Cunegonde; "but I have been so horribly unhappy

there that my heart is almost closed to hope."

  "You complain," said the old woman; "alas! you have not known such

misfortunes as mine."

  Cunegonde  almost  broke  out  laughing,  finding  the  good  woman  very

amusing, for pretending to have been as unfortunate as she.  "Alas!" said Cunegonde, "my good mother, unless you have been ravished

by two Bulgarians, have received two deep wounds in your belly, have had

two castles demolished, have had two mothers cut to pieces before your eyes,

and two of your lovers whipped at an auto-da-fé, I do not conceive how you

could be more unfortunate than I. Add that I was born a baroness of seventy-

two quarterings-and have been a cook!"

  "Miss," replied the old woman, "you do not know my birth; and were I to

show you my backside, you would not talk in that manner, but would suspend

your judgment."

  This speech having raised extreme curiosity in the minds of Cunegonde

and Candide, the old woman spoke to them as follows.


  CHAPTER XI

  HISTORY OF THE OLD WOMAN.


  "I had not always bleared eyes and red eyelids; neither did my nose always

touch my chin; nor was I always a servant. I am the daughter of Pope Urban

X,[10]  and  of  the  Princess  of  Palestrina.  Until  the  age  of  fourteen  I  was

brought up in a palace, to which all the castles of your German barons would

scarcely have served for stables; and one of my robes was worth more than

all the magnificence of Westphalia. As I grew up I improved in beauty, wit,

and every graceful accomplishment, in the midst of pleasures, hopes, and

respectful homage. Already I inspired love. My throat was formed, and such

a throat! white, firm, and shaped like that of the Venus of Medici; and what

eyes! what eyelids! what black eyebrows! such flames darted from my dark

pupils that they eclipsed the scintillation of the stars-as I was told by the

poets  in  our  part  of  the  world.  My  waiting  women,  when  dressing  and

undressing me, used to fall into an ecstasy, whether they viewed me before or

behind; how glad would the gentlemen have been to perform that office for

them!

  "I was affianced to the most excellent Prince of Massa Carara. Such a

prince! as handsome as myself, sweet-tempered, agreeable, brilliantly witty,

and  sparkling  with  love.  I  loved  him  as  one  loves  for  the  first  time-withidolatry, with transport. The nuptials were prepared. There was surprising

pomp and magnificence; there were fêtes, carousals, continual opera bouffe;

and all Italy composed sonnets in my praise, though not one of them was

passable. I was just upon the point of reaching the summit of bliss, when an

old marchioness who had been mistress to the Prince, my husband, invited

him to drink chocolate with her. He died in less than two hours of most

terrible convulsions. But this is only a bagatelle. My mother, in despair, and

scarcely less afflicted than myself, determined to absent herself for some time

from so fatal a place. She had a very fine estate in the neighbourhood of

Gaeta. We embarked on board a galley of the country which was gilded like

the great altar of St. Peter's at Rome. A Sallee corsair swooped down and

boarded us. Our men defended themselves like the Pope's soldiers; they flung

themselves  upon  their  knees,  and  threw  down  their  arms,  begging  of  the

corsair an absolution in articulo mortis.

  "Instantly they were stripped as bare as monkeys; my mother, our maids of

honour, and myself were all served in the same manner. It is amazing with

what expedition those gentry undress people. But what surprised me most

was,  that  they  thrust  their  fingers  into  the  part  of  our  bodies  which  the

generality of women suffer no other instrument but-pipes to enter. It appeared

to me a very strange kind of ceremony; but thus one judges of things when

one has not seen the world. I afterwards learnt that it was to try whether we

had  concealed  any  diamonds.  This  is  the  practice  established  from  time

immemorial, among civilised nations that scour the seas. I was informed that

the very religious Knights of Malta never fail to make this search when they

take any Turkish prisoners of either sex. It is a law of nations from which

they never deviate.

  "I need not tell you how great a hardship it was for a young princess and

her  mother  to  be  made  slaves  and  carried  to  Morocco.  You  may  easily

imagine all we had to suffer on board the pirate vessel. My mother was still

very handsome; our maids of honour, and even our waiting women, had more

charms than are to be found in all Africa. As for myself, I was ravishing, was

exquisite,  grace  itself,  and  I  was  a  virgin!  I  did  not  remain  so  long;  this

flower, which had been reserved for the handsome Prince of Massa Carara,

was plucked by the corsair captain. He was an abominable negro, and yet

believed that he did me a great deal of honour. Certainly the Princess ofPalestrina and myself must have been very strong to go through all that we

experienced until our arrival at Morocco. But let us pass on; these are such

common things as not to be worth mentioning.

  "Morocco swam in blood when we arrived. Fifty sons of the Emperor

Muley-Ismael[11] had each their adherents; this produced fifty civil wars, of

blacks  against  blacks,  and  blacks  against  tawnies,  and  tawnies  against

tawnies, and mulattoes against mulattoes. In short it was a continual carnage

throughout the empire.

  "No sooner were we landed, than the blacks of a contrary faction to that of

my captain attempted to rob him of his booty. Next to jewels and gold we

were the most valuable things he had. I was witness to such a battle as you

have never seen in your European climates. The northern nations have not

that heat in their blood, nor that raging lust for women, so common in Africa.

It seems that you Europeans have only milk in your veins; but it is vitriol, it is

fire  which  runs  in  those  of  the  inhabitants  of  Mount  Atlas  and  the

neighbouring countries. They fought with the fury of the lions, tigers, and

serpents of the country, to see who should have us. A Moor seized my mother

by the right arm, while my captain's lieutenant held her by the left; a Moorish

soldier had hold of her by one leg, and one of our corsairs held her by the

other. Thus almost all our women were drawn in quarters by four men. My

captain  concealed  me  behind  him;  and  with  his  drawn  scimitar  cut  and

slashed  every  one  that  opposed  his  fury.  At  length  I  saw  all  our  Italian

women, and my mother herself, torn, mangled, massacred, by the monsters

who disputed over them. The slaves, my companions, those who had taken

them, soldiers, sailors, blacks, whites, mulattoes, and at last my captain, all

were killed, and I remained dying on a heap of dead. Such scenes as this were

transacted  through  an  extent  of  three  hundred  leagues-and  yet  they  never

missed the five prayers a day ordained by Mahomet.

  "With  difficulty  I  disengaged  myself  from  such  a  heap  of  slaughtered

bodies, and crawled to a large orange tree on the bank of a neighbouring

rivulet,  where  I  fell,  oppressed  with  fright,  fatigue,  horror,  despair,  and

hunger. Immediately after, my senses, overpowered, gave themselves up to

sleep,  which  was  yet  more  swooning  than  repose.  I  was  in  this  state  of

weakness  and  insensibility,  between  life  and  death,  when  I  felt  myself

pressed by something that moved upon my body. I opened my eyes, and sawa white man, of good countenance, who sighed, and who said between his

teeth: 'O che sciagura d'essere senza coglioni!'"[12]


  CHAPTER XII

  THE ADVENTURES OF THE OLD WOMAN CONTINUED.


  "Astonished  and  delighted  to  hear  my  native  language,  and  no  less

surprised at what this man said, I made answer that there were much greater

misfortunes than that of which he complained. I told him in a few words of

the horrors which I had endured, and fainted a second time. He carried me to

a  neighbouring  house,  put  me  to  bed,  gave  me  food,  waited  upon  me,

consoled me, flattered me; he told me that he had never seen any one so

beautiful as I, and that he never so much regretted the loss of what it was

impossible to recover.

  "'I was born at Naples,' said he, 'there they geld two or three thousand

children every year; some die of the operation, others acquire a voice more

beautiful than that of women, and others are raised to offices of state.[13]

This operation was performed on me with great success and I was chapel

musician to madam, the Princess of Palestrina.'

  "'To my mother!' cried I.

  "'Your mother!' cried he, weeping. 'What! can you be that young princess

whom I brought up until the age of six years, and who promised so early to

be as beautiful as you?'

  "'It is I, indeed; but my mother lies four hundred yards hence, torn in

quarters, under a heap of dead bodies.'

  "I told him all my adventures, and he made me acquainted with his; telling

me that he had been sent to the Emperor of Morocco by a Christian power, to

conclude a treaty with that prince, in consequence of which he was to be

furnished with military stores and ships to help to demolish the commerce of

other Christian Governments.

  "'My mission is done,' said this honest eunuch; 'I go to embark for Ceuta,

and will take you to Italy. Ma che sciagura d'essere senza coglioni!'  "I thanked him with tears of commiseration; and instead of taking me to

Italy he conducted me to Algiers, where he sold me to the Dey. Scarcely was

I sold, than the plague which had made the tour of Africa, Asia, and Europe,

broke out with great malignancy in Algiers. You have seen earthquakes; but

pray, miss, have you ever had the plague?"

  "Never," answered Cunegonde.

  "If you had," said the old woman, "you would acknowledge that it is far

more terrible than an earthquake. It is common in Africa, and I caught it.

Imagine to yourself the distressed situation of the daughter of a Pope, only

fifteen years old, who, in less than three months, had felt the miseries of

poverty and slavery, had been ravished almost every day, had beheld her

mother drawn in quarters, had experienced famine and war, and was dying of

the plague in Algiers. I did not die, however, but my eunuch, and the Dey,

and almost the whole seraglio of Algiers perished.

  "As soon as the first fury of this terrible pestilence was over, a sale was

made of the Dey's slaves; I was purchased by a merchant, and carried to

Tunis; this man sold me to another merchant, who sold me again to another at

Tripoli; from Tripoli I was sold to Alexandria, from Alexandria to Smyrna,

and from Smyrna to Constantinople. At length I became the property of an

Aga of the Janissaries, who was soon ordered away to the defence of Azof,

then besieged by the Russians.

  "The Aga, who was a very gallant man, took his whole seraglio with him,

and lodged us in a small fort on the Palus Méotides, guarded by two black

eunuchs and twenty soldiers. The Turks killed prodigious numbers of the

Russians, but the latter had their revenge. Azof was destroyed by fire, the

inhabitants  put  to  the  sword,  neither  sex  nor  age  was  spared;  until  there

remained only our little fort, and the enemy wanted to starve us out. The

twenty Janissaries had sworn they would never surrender. The extremities of

famine to which they were reduced, obliged them to eat our two eunuchs, for

fear of violating their oath. And at the end of a few days they resolved also to

devour the women.

  "We  had  a  very  pious  and  humane  Iman,  who  preached  an  excellent

sermon, exhorting them not to kill us all at once.

  "'Only cut off a buttock of each of those ladies,' said he, 'and you'll fareextremely  well;  if  you  must  go  to  it  again,  there  will  be  the  same

entertainment a few days hence; heaven will accept of so charitable an action,

and send you relief.'

  "He had great eloquence; he persuaded them; we underwent this terrible

operation. The Iman applied the same balsam to us, as he does to children

after circumcision; and we all nearly died.

  "Scarcely  had  the  Janissaries  finished  the  repast  with  which  we  had

furnished  them,  than  the  Russians  came  in  flat-bottomed  boats;  not  a

Janissary escaped. The Russians paid no attention to the condition we were

in. There are French surgeons in all parts of the world; one of them who was

very clever took us under his care-he cured us; and as long as I live I shall

remember that as soon as my wounds were healed he made proposals to me.

He bid us all be of good cheer, telling us that the like had happened in many

sieges, and that it was according to the laws of war.

  "As soon as my companions could walk, they were obliged to set out for

Moscow. I fell to the share of a Boyard who made me his gardener, and gave

me twenty lashes a day. But this nobleman having in two years' time been

broke  upon  the  wheel  along  with  thirty  more  Boyards  for  some  broils  at

court, I profited by that event; I fled. I traversed all Russia; I was a long time

an inn-holder's servant at Riga, the same at Rostock, at Vismar, at Leipzig, at

Cassel, at Utrecht, at Leyden, at the Hague, at Rotterdam. I waxed old in

misery  and  disgrace,  having  only  one-half  of  my  posteriors,  and  always

remembering I was a Pope's daughter. A hundred times I was upon the point

of killing myself; but still I loved life. This ridiculous foible is perhaps one of

our most fatal characteristics; for is there anything more absurd than to wish

to carry continually a burden which one can always throw down? to detest

existence and yet to cling to one's existence? in brief, to caress the serpent

which devours us, till he has eaten our very heart?

  "In the different countries which it has been my lot to traverse, and the

numerous  inns  where  I  have  been  servant,  I  have  taken  notice  of  a  vast

number  of  people  who  held  their  own  existence  in  abhorrence,  and  yet  I

never knew of more than eight who voluntarily put an end to their misery;

three negroes, four Englishmen, and a German professor named Robek.[14] I

ended by being servant to the Jew, Don Issachar, who placed me near yourpresence, my fair lady. I am determined to share your fate, and have been

much more affected with your misfortunes than with my own. I would never

even have spoken to you of my misfortunes, had you not piqued me a little,

and if it were not customary to tell stories on board a ship in order to pass

away the time. In short, Miss Cunegonde, I have had experience, I know the

world;  therefore  I  advise  you  to  divert  yourself,  and  prevail  upon  each

passenger to tell his story; and if there be one of them all, that has not cursed

his  life  many  a  time,  that  has  not  frequently  looked  upon  himself  as  the

unhappiest of mortals, I give you leave to throw me headforemost into the

sea."


  CHAPTER XIII

  HOW  CANDIDE  WAS  FORCED  AWAY  FROM  HIS  FAIR

CUNEGONDE AND THE OLD WOMAN.


  The beautiful Cunegonde having heard the old woman's history, paid her

all the civilities due to a person of her rank and merit. She likewise accepted

her proposal, and engaged all the passengers, one after the other, to relate

their adventures; and then both she and Candide allowed that the old woman

was in the right.

  "It  is  a  great  pity,"  said  Candide,  "that  the  sage  Pangloss  was  hanged

contrary to custom at an auto-da-fé; he would tell us most amazing things in

regard to the physical and moral evils that overspread earth and sea, and I

should be able, with due respect, to make a few objections."

  While each passenger was recounting his story, the ship made her way.

They  landed  at  Buenos  Ayres.  Cunegonde,  Captain  Candide,  and  the  old

woman,  waited  on  the  Governor,  Don  Fernando  d'Ibaraa,  y  Figueora,  y

Mascarenes,  y  Lampourdos,  y  Souza.  This  nobleman  had  a  stateliness

becoming a person who bore so many names. He spoke to men with so noble

a  disdain,  carried  his  nose  so  loftily,  raised  his  voice  so  unmercifully,

assumed so imperious an air, and stalked with such intolerable pride, that

those who saluted him were strongly inclined to give him a good drubbing.

Cunegonde appeared to him the most beautiful he had ever met. The first

thing he did was to ask whether she was not the captain's wife. The manner inwhich he asked the question alarmed Candide; he durst not say she was his

wife, because indeed she was not; neither durst he say she was his sister,

because it was not so; and although this obliging lie had been formerly much

in favour among the ancients, and although it could be useful to the moderns,

his soul was too pure to betray the truth.

  "Miss Cunegonde," said he, "is to do me the honour to marry me, and we

beseech your excellency to deign to sanction our marriage."

  Don  Fernando  d'Ibaraa,  y  Figueora,  y  Mascarenes,  y  Lampourdos,  y

Souza, turning up his moustachios, smiled mockingly, and ordered Captain

Candide to go and review his company. Candide obeyed, and the Governor

remained alone with Miss Cunegonde. He declared his passion, protesting he

would marry her the next day in the face of the church, or otherwise, just as

should  be  agreeable  to  herself.  Cunegonde  asked  a  quarter  of  an  hour  to

consider of it, to consult the old woman, and to take her resolution.

  The old woman spoke thus to Cunegonde:

  "Miss, you have seventy-two quarterings, and not a farthing; it is now in

your power to be wife to the greatest lord in South America, who has very

beautiful moustachios. Is it for you to pique yourself upon inviolable fidelity?

You have been ravished by Bulgarians; a Jew and an Inquisitor have enjoyed

your favours. Misfortune gives sufficient excuse. I own, that if I were in your

place, I should have no scruple in marrying the Governor and in making the

fortune of Captain Candide."

  While  the  old  woman  spoke  with  all  the  prudence  which  age  and

experience gave, a small ship entered the port on board of which were an

Alcalde and his alguazils, and this was what had happened.

  As the old woman had shrewdly guessed, it was a Grey Friar who stole

Cunegonde's  money  and  jewels  in  the  town  of  Badajos,  when  she  and

Candide were escaping. The Friar wanted to sell some of the diamonds to a

jeweller;  the  jeweller  knew  them  to  be  the  Grand  Inquisitor's.  The  Friar

before  he  was  hanged  confessed  he  had  stolen  them.  He  described  the

persons, and the route they had taken. The flight of Cunegonde and Candide

was already known. They were traced to Cadiz. A vessel was immediately

sent in pursuit of them. The vessel was already in the port of Buenos Ayres.

The report spread that the Alcalde was going to land, and that he was inpursuit of the murderers of my lord the Grand Inquisitor. The prudent old

woman saw at once what was to be done.

  "You cannot run away," said she to Cunegonde, "and you have nothing to

fear, for it was not you that killed my lord; besides the Governor who loves

you will not suffer you to be ill-treated; therefore stay."

  She then ran immediately to Candide.

  "Fly," said she, "or in an hour you will be burnt."

  There was not a moment to lose; but how could he part from Cunegonde,

and where could he flee for shelter?


  CHAPTER XIV

  HOW  CANDIDE  AND  CACAMBO  WERE  RECEIVED  BY  THE

JESUITS OF PARAGUAY.


  Candide had brought such a valet with him from Cadiz, as one often meets

with on the coasts of Spain and in the American colonies. He was a quarter

Spaniard, born of a mongrel in Tucuman; he had been singing-boy, sacristan,

sailor, monk, pedlar, soldier, and lackey. His name was Cacambo, and he

loved  his  master,  because  his  master  was  a  very  good  man.  He  quickly

saddled the two Andalusian horses.

  "Come, master, let us follow the old woman's advice; let us start, and run

without looking behind us."

  Candide shed tears.

  "Oh!  my  dear  Cunegonde!  must  I  leave  you  just  at  a  time  when  the

Governor was going to sanction our nuptials? Cunegonde, brought to such a

distance what will become of you?"

  "She will do as well as she can," said Cacambo; "the women are never at a

loss, God provides for them, let us run."

  "Whither art thou carrying me? Where shall we go? What shall we do

without Cunegonde?" said Candide.

  "By St. James of Compostella," said Cacambo, "you were going to fightagainst the Jesuits; let us go to fight for them; I know the road well, I'll

conduct you to their kingdom, where they will be charmed to have a captain

that understands the Bulgarian exercise. You'll make a prodigious fortune; if

we cannot find our account in one world we shall in another. It is a great

pleasure to see and do new things."

  "You have before been in Paraguay, then?" said Candide.

  "Ay,  sure,"  answered  Cacambo,  "I  was  servant  in  the  College  of  the

Assumption, and am acquainted with the government of the good Fathers as

well as I am with the streets of Cadiz. It is an admirable government. The

kingdom is upwards of three hundred leagues in diameter, and divided into

thirty provinces; there the Fathers possess all, and the people nothing; it is a

masterpiece of reason and justice. For my part I see nothing so divine as the

Fathers who here make war upon the kings of Spain and Portugal, and in

Europe confess those kings; who here kill Spaniards, and in Madrid send

them to heaven; this delights me, let us push forward. You are going to be the

happiest of mortals. What pleasure will it be to those Fathers to hear that a

captain who knows the Bulgarian exercise has come to them!"

  As  soon  as  they  reached  the  first  barrier,  Cacambo  told  the  advanced

guard that a captain wanted to speak with my lord the Commandant. Notice

was given to the main guard, and immediately a Paraguayan officer ran and

laid  himself  at  the  feet  of  the  Commandant,  to  impart  this  news  to  him.

Candide  and  Cacambo  were  disarmed,  and  their  two  Andalusian  horses

seized. The strangers were introduced between two files of musketeers; the

Commandant was at the further end, with the three-cornered cap on his head,

his gown tucked up, a sword by his side, and a spontoon[15] in his hand. He

beckoned, and straightway the new-comers were encompassed by four-and-

twenty soldiers. A sergeant told them they must wait, that the Commandant

could not speak to them, and that the reverend Father Provincial does not

suffer any Spaniard to open his mouth but in his presence, or to stay above

three hours in the province.

  "And where is the reverend Father Provincial?" said Cacambo.

  "He is upon the parade just after celebrating mass," answered the sergeant,

"and you cannot kiss his spurs till three hours hence."

  "However," said Cacambo, "the captain is not a Spaniard, but a German,he  is  ready  to  perish  with  hunger  as  well  as  myself;  cannot  we  have

something for breakfast, while we wait for his reverence?"

  The sergeant went immediately to acquaint the Commandant with what he

had heard.

  "God be praised!" said the reverend Commandant, "since he is a German, I

may speak to him; take him to my arbour."

  Candide was at once conducted to a beautiful summer-house, ornamented

with a very pretty colonnade of green and gold marble, and with trellises,

enclosing  parraquets,  humming-birds,  fly-birds,  guinea-hens,  and  all  other

rare birds. An excellent breakfast was provided in vessels of gold; and while

the Paraguayans were eating maize out of wooden dishes, in the open fields

and exposed to the heat of the sun, the reverend Father Commandant retired

to his arbour.

  He was a very handsome young man, with a full face, white skin but high

in colour; he had an arched eyebrow, a lively eye, red ears, vermilion lips, a

bold air, but such a boldness as neither belonged to a Spaniard nor a Jesuit.

They  returned  their  arms  to  Candide  and  Cacambo,  and  also  the  two

Andalusian  horses;  to  whom  Cacambo  gave  some  oats  to  eat  just  by  the

arbour, having an eye upon them all the while for fear of a surprise.

  Candide  first  kissed  the  hem  of  the  Commandant's  robe,  then  they  sat

down to table.

  "You are, then, a German?" said the Jesuit to him in that language.

  "Yes, reverend Father," answered Candide.

  As  they  pronounced  these  words  they  looked  at  each  other  with  great

amazement, and with such an emotion as they could not conceal.

  "And from what part of Germany do you come?" said the Jesuit.

  "I am from the dirty province of Westphalia," answered Candide; "I was

born in the Castle of Thunder-ten-Tronckh."

  "Oh! Heavens! is it possible?" cried the Commandant.

  "What a miracle!" cried Candide.

  "Is it really you?" said the Commandant.  "It is not possible!" said Candide.

  They drew back; they embraced; they shed rivulets of tears.

  "What, is it you, reverend Father? You, the brother of the fair Cunegonde!

You, that was slain by the Bulgarians! You, the Baron's son! You, a Jesuit in

Paraguay! I must confess this is a strange world that we live in. Oh, Pangloss!

Pangloss! how glad you would be if you had not been hanged!"

  The Commandant sent away the negro slaves and the Paraguayans, who

served them with liquors in goblets of rock-crystal. He thanked God and St.

Ignatius a thousand times; he clasped Candide in his arms; and their faces

were all bathed with tears.

  "You  will  be  more  surprised,  more  affected,  and  transported,"  said

Candide, "when I tell you that Cunegonde, your sister, whom you believe to

have been ripped open, is in perfect health."

  "Where?"

  "In your neighbourhood, with the Governor of Buenos Ayres; and I was

going to fight against you."

  Every word which they uttered in this long conversation but added wonder

to wonder. Their souls fluttered on their tongues, listened in their ears, and

sparkled in their eyes. As they were Germans, they sat a good while at table,

waiting for the reverend Father Provincial, and the Commandant spoke to his

dear Candide as follows.


  CHAPTER XV

  HOW  CANDIDE  KILLED  THE  BROTHER  OF  HIS  DEAR

CUNEGONDE.


  "I shall have ever present to my memory the dreadful day, on which I saw

my father and mother killed, and my sister ravished. When the Bulgarians

retired, my dear sister could not be found; but my mother, my father, and

myself, with two maid-servants and three little boys all of whom had been

slain,  were  put  in  a  hearse,  to  be  conveyed  for  interment  to  a  chapel

belonging  to  the  Jesuits,  within  two  leagues  of  our  family  seat.  A  Jesuitsprinkled us with some holy water; it was horribly salt; a few drops of it fell

into my eyes; the father perceived that my eyelids stirred a little; he put his

hand upon my heart and felt it beat. I received assistance, and at the end of

three weeks I recovered. You know, my dear Candide, I was very pretty; but I

grew  much  prettier,  and  the  reverend  Father  Didrie,[16]  Superior  of  that

House, conceived the tenderest friendship for me; he gave me the habit of the

order, some years after I was sent to Rome. The Father-General needed new

levies of young German-Jesuits. The sovereigns of Paraguay admit as few

Spanish Jesuits as possible; they prefer those of other nations as being more

subordinate  to  their  commands.  I  was  judged  fit  by  the  reverend  Father-

General to go and work in this vineyard. We set out-a Pole, a Tyrolese, and

myself.  Upon  my  arrival  I  was  honoured  with  a  sub-deaconship  and  a

lieutenancy. I am to-day colonel and priest. We shall give a warm reception

to  the  King  of  Spain's  troops;  I  will  answer  for  it  that  they  shall  be

excommunicated and well beaten. Providence sends you here to assist us. But

is it, indeed, true that my dear sister Cunegonde is in the neighbourhood, with

the Governor of Buenos Ayres?"

  Candide assured him on oath that nothing was more true, and their tears

began afresh.

  The Baron could not refrain from embracing Candide; he called him his

brother, his saviour.

  "Ah! perhaps," said he, "we shall together, my dear Candide, enter the

town as conquerors, and recover my sister Cunegonde."

  "That is all I want," said Candide, "for I intended to marry her, and I still

hope to do so."

  "You  insolent!"  replied  the  Baron,  "would  you  have  the  impudence  to

marry my sister who has seventy-two quarterings! I find thou hast the most

consummate effrontery to dare to mention so presumptuous a design!"

  Candide, petrified at this speech, made answer:

  "Reverend  Father,  all  the  quarterings  in  the  world  signify  nothing;  I

rescued your sister from the arms of a Jew and of an Inquisitor; she has great

obligations to me, she wishes to marry me; Master Pangloss always told me

that all men are equal, and certainly I will marry her."  "We shall see that, thou scoundrel!" said the Jesuit Baron de Thunder-ten-

Tronckh, and that instant struck him across the face with the flat of his sword.

Candide in an instant drew his rapier, and plunged it up to the hilt in the

Jesuit's belly; but in pulling it out reeking hot, he burst into tears.

  "Good God!" said he, "I have killed my old master, my friend, my brother-

in-law! I am the best-natured creature in the world, and yet I have already

killed three men, and of these three two were priests."

  Cacambo, who stood sentry by the door of the arbour, ran to him.

  "We have nothing more for it than to sell our lives as dearly as we can,"

said his master to him, "without doubt some one will soon enter the arbour,

and we must die sword in hand."

  Cacambo, who had been in a great many scrapes in his lifetime, did not

lose his head; he took the Baron's Jesuit habit, put it on Candide, gave him

the square cap, and made him mount on horseback. All this was done in the

twinkling of an eye.

  "Let us gallop fast, master, everybody will take you for a Jesuit, going to

give directions to your men, and we shall have passed the frontiers before

they will be able to overtake us."

  He flew as he spoke these words, crying out aloud in Spanish:

  "Make way, make way, for the reverend Father Colonel."


  CHAPTER XVI

  ADVENTURES OF THE TWO TRAVELLERS, WITH TWO GIRLS,

TWO MONKEYS, AND THE SAVAGES CALLED OREILLONS.


  Candide and his valet had got beyond the barrier, before it was known in

the camp that the German Jesuit was dead. The wary Cacambo had taken care

to fill his wallet with bread, chocolate, bacon, fruit, and a few bottles of wine.

With  their  Andalusian  horses  they  penetrated  into  an  unknown  country,

where they perceived no beaten track. At length they came to a beautiful

meadow intersected with purling rills. Here our two adventurers fed their

horses. Cacambo proposed to his master to take some food, and he set him anexample.

  "How can you ask me to eat ham," said Candide, "after killing the Baron's

son, and being doomed never more to see the beautiful Cunegonde? What

will it avail me to spin out my wretched days and drag them far from her in

remorse and despair? And what will the Journal of Trevoux[17] say?"

  While he was thus lamenting his fate, he went on eating. The sun went

down. The two wanderers heard some little cries which seemed to be uttered

by women. They did not know whether they were cries of pain or joy; but

they started up precipitately with that inquietude and alarm which every little

thing inspires in an unknown country. The noise was made by two naked

girls, who tripped along the mead, while two monkeys were pursuing them

and biting their buttocks. Candide was moved with pity; he had learned to

fire a gun in the Bulgarian service, and he was so clever at it, that he could hit

a filbert in a hedge without touching a leaf of the tree. He took up his double-

barrelled Spanish fusil, let it off, and killed the two monkeys.

  "God  be  praised!  My  dear  Cacambo,  I  have  rescued  those  two  poor

creatures from a most perilous situation. If I have committed a sin in killing

an Inquisitor and a Jesuit, I have made ample amends by saving the lives of

these girls. Perhaps they are young ladies of family; and this adventure may

procure us great advantages in this country."

  He was continuing, but stopped short when he saw the two girls tenderly

embracing the monkeys, bathing their bodies in tears, and rending the air

with the most dismal lamentations.

  "Little  did  I  expect  to  see  such  good-nature,"  said  he  at  length  to

Cacambo; who made answer:

  "Master, you have done a fine thing now; you have slain the sweethearts

of those two young ladies."

  "The sweethearts! Is it possible? You are jesting, Cacambo, I can never

believe it!"

  "Dear master," replied Cacambo; "you are surprised at everything. Why

should you think it so strange that in some countries there are monkeys which

insinuate themselves into the good graces of the ladies; they are a fourth part

human, as I am a fourth part Spaniard."  "Alas!" replied Candide, "I remember to have heard Master Pangloss say,

that  formerly  such  accidents  used  to  happen;  that  these  mixtures  were

productive of Centaurs, Fauns, and Satyrs; and that many of the ancients had

seen such monsters, but I looked upon the whole as fabulous."

  "You ought now to be convinced," said Cacambo, "that it is the truth, and

you see what use is made of those creatures, by persons that have not had a

proper education; all I fear is that those ladies will play us some ugly trick."

  These  sound  reflections  induced  Candide  to  leave  the  meadow  and  to

plunge into a wood. He supped there with Cacambo; and after cursing the

Portuguese inquisitor, the Governor of Buenos Ayres, and the Baron, they

fell  asleep  on  moss.  On  awaking  they  felt  that  they  could  not  move;  for

during the night the Oreillons, who inhabited that country, and to whom the

ladies had denounced them, had bound them with cords made of the bark of

trees. They were encompassed by fifty naked Oreillons, armed with bows and

arrows, with clubs and flint hatchets. Some were making a large cauldron

boil, others were preparing spits, and all cried:

  "A Jesuit! a Jesuit! we shall be revenged, we shall have excellent cheer, let

us eat the Jesuit, let us eat him up!"

  "I told you, my dear master," cried Cacambo sadly, "that those two girls

would play us some ugly trick."

  Candide seeing the cauldron and the spits, cried:

  "We are certainly going to be either roasted or boiled. Ah! what would

Master Pangloss say, were he to see how pure nature is formed? Everything

is right, may be, but I declare it is very hard to have lost Miss Cunegonde and

to be put upon a spit by Oreillons."

  Cacambo never lost his head.

  "Do not despair," said he to the disconsolate Candide, "I understand a little

of the jargon of these people, I will speak to them."

  "Be sure," said Candide, "to represent to them how frightfully inhuman it

is to cook men, and how very un-Christian."

  "Gentlemen," said Cacambo, "you reckon you are to-day going to feast

upon a Jesuit. It is all very well, nothing is more unjust than thus to treat yourenemies. Indeed, the law of nature teaches us to kill our neighbour, and such

is the practice all over the world. If we do not accustom ourselves to eating

them, it is because we have better fare. But you have not the same resources

as we; certainly it is much better to devour your enemies than to resign to the

crows and rooks the fruits of your victory. But, gentlemen, surely you would

not choose to eat your friends. You believe that you are going to spit a Jesuit,

and he is your defender. It is the enemy of your enemies that you are going to

roast. As for myself, I was born in your country; this gentleman is my master,

and, far from being a Jesuit, he has just killed one, whose spoils he wears;

and thence comes your mistake. To convince you of the truth of what I say,

take  his  habit  and  carry  it  to  the  first  barrier  of  the  Jesuit  kingdom,  and

inform yourselves whether my master did not kill a Jesuit officer. It will not

take you long, and you can always eat us if you find that I have lied to you.

But I have told you the truth. You are too well acquainted with the principles

of public law, humanity, and justice not to pardon us."

  The Oreillons found this speech very reasonable. They deputed two of

their  principal  people  with  all  expedition  to  inquire  into  the  truth  of  the

matter; these executed their commission like men of sense, and soon returned

with good news. The Oreillons untied their prisoners, showed them all sorts

of civilities, offered them girls, gave them refreshment, and reconducted them

to the confines of their territories, proclaiming with great joy:

  "He is no Jesuit! He is no Jesuit!"

  Candide could not help being surprised at the cause of his deliverance.

  "What people!" said he; "what men! what manners! If I had not been so

lucky as to run Miss Cunegonde's brother through the body, I should have

been devoured without redemption. But, after all, pure nature is good, since

these people, instead of feasting upon my flesh, have shown me a thousand

civilities, when then I was not a Jesuit."


  CHAPTER XVII

  ARRIVAL OF CANDIDE AND HIS VALET AT EL DORADO, AND

WHAT THEY SAW THERE.  "You see," said Cacambo to Candide, as soon as they had reached the

frontiers of the Oreillons, "that this hemisphere is not better than the others,

take my word for it; let us go back to Europe by the shortest way."

  "How  go  back?"  said  Candide,  "and  where  shall  we  go?  to  my  own

country? The Bulgarians and the Abares are slaying all; to Portugal? there I

shall be burnt; and if we abide here we are every moment in danger of being

spitted. But how can I resolve to quit a part of the world where my dear

Cunegonde resides?"

  "Let  us  turn  towards  Cayenne,"  said  Cacambo,  "there  we  shall  find

Frenchmen, who wander all over the world; they may assist us; God will

perhaps have pity on us."

  It was not easy to get to Cayenne; they knew vaguely in which direction to

go, but rivers, precipices, robbers, savages, obstructed them all the way. Their

horses died of fatigue. Their provisions were consumed; they fed a whole

month  upon  wild  fruits,  and  found  themselves  at  last  near  a  little  river

bordered with cocoa trees, which sustained their lives and their hopes.

  Cacambo,  who  was  as  good  a  counsellor  as  the  old  woman,  said  to

Candide:

  "We are able to hold out no longer; we have walked enough. I see an

empty canoe near the river-side; let us fill it with cocoanuts, throw ourselves

into it, and go with the current; a river always leads to some inhabited spot. If

we do not find pleasant things we shall at least find new things."

  "With  all  my  heart,"  said  Candide,  "let  us  recommend  ourselves  to

Providence."

  They rowed a few leagues, between banks, in some places flowery, in

others  barren;  in  some  parts  smooth,  in  others  rugged.  The  stream  ever

widened,  and  at  length  lost  itself  under  an  arch  of  frightful  rocks  which

reached to the sky. The two travellers had the courage to commit themselves

to the current. The river, suddenly contracting at this place, whirled them

along with a dreadful noise and rapidity. At the end of four-and-twenty hours

they saw daylight again, but their canoe was dashed to pieces against the

rocks. For a league they had to creep from rock to rock, until at length they

discovered  an  extensive  plain,  bounded  by  inaccessible  mountains.  Thecountry was cultivated as much for pleasure as for necessity. On all sides the

useful was also the beautiful. The roads were covered, or rather adorned, with

carriages of a glittering form and substance, in which were men and women

of surprising beauty, drawn by large red sheep which surpassed in fleetness

the finest coursers of Andalusia, Tetuan, and Mequinez.[18]

  "Here,  however,  is  a  country,"  said  Candide,  "which  is  better  than

Westphalia."

  He  stepped  out  with  Cacambo  towards  the  first  village  which  he  saw.

Some children dressed in tattered brocades played at quoits on the outskirts.

Our travellers from the other world amused themselves by looking on. The

quoits were large round pieces, yellow, red, and green, which cast a singular

lustre! The travellers picked a few of them off the ground; this was of gold,

that of emeralds, the other of rubies-the least of them would have been the

greatest ornament on the Mogul's throne.

  "Without doubt," said Cacambo, "these children must be the king's sons

that are playing at quoits!"

  The  village  schoolmaster  appeared  at  this  moment  and  called  them  to

school.

  "There," said Candide, "is the preceptor of the royal family."

  The little truants immediately quitted their game, leaving the quoits on the

ground with all their other playthings. Candide gathered them up, ran to the

master, and presented them to him in a most humble manner, giving him to

understand by signs that their royal highnesses had forgotten their gold and

jewels. The schoolmaster, smiling, flung them upon the ground; then, looking

at Candide with a good deal of surprise, went about his business.

  The travellers, however, took care to gather up the gold, the rubies, and

the emeralds.

  "Where are we?" cried Candide. "The king's children in this country must

be  well  brought  up,  since  they  are  taught  to  despise  gold  and  precious

stones."

  Cacambo was as much surprised as Candide. At length they drew near the

first house in the village. It was built like an European palace. A crowd of

people pressed about the door, and there were still more in the house. Theyheard most agreeable music, and were aware of a delicious odour of cooking.

Cacambo went up to the door and heard they were talking Peruvian; it was

his mother tongue, for it is well known that Cacambo was born in Tucuman,

in a village where no other language was spoken.

  "I will be your interpreter here," said he to Candide; "let us go in, it is a

public-house."

  Immediately two waiters and two girls, dressed in cloth of gold, and their

hair tied up with ribbons, invited them to sit down to table with the landlord.

They served four dishes of soup, each garnished with two young parrots; a

boiled  condor[19]  which  weighed  two  hundred  pounds;  two  roasted

monkeys, of excellent flavour; three hundred humming-birds in one dish, and

six  hundred  fly-birds  in  another;  exquisite  ragouts;  delicious  pastries;  the

whole served up in dishes of a kind of rock-crystal. The waiters and girls

poured out several liqueurs drawn from the sugar-cane.

  Most of the company were chapmen and waggoners, all extremely polite;

they asked Cacambo a few questions with the greatest circumspection, and

answered his in the most obliging manner.

  As soon as dinner was over, Cacambo believed as well as Candide that

they might well pay their reckoning by laying down two of those large gold

pieces which they had picked up. The landlord and landlady shouted with

laughter and held their sides. When the fit was over:

  "Gentlemen," said the landlord, "it is plain you are strangers, and such

guests we are not accustomed to see; pardon us therefore for laughing when

you offered us the pebbles from our highroads in payment of your reckoning.

You doubtless have not the money of the country; but it is not necessary to

have any money at all to dine in this house. All hostelries established for the

convenience of commerce are paid by the government. You have fared but

very indifferently because this is a poor village; but everywhere else, you will

be received as you deserve."

  Cacambo  explained  this  whole  discourse  with  great  astonishment  to

Candide, who was as greatly astonished to hear it.

  "What sort of a country then is this," said they to one another; "a country

unknown  to  all  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  where  nature  is  of  a  kind  sodifferent from ours? It is probably the country where all is well; for there

absolutely must be one such place. And, whatever Master Pangloss might

say, I often found that things went very ill in Westphalia."


  CHAPTER XVIII

  WHAT THEY SAW IN THE COUNTRY OF EL DORADO.


  Cacambo expressed his curiosity to the landlord, who made answer:

  "I am very ignorant, but not the worse on that account. However, we have

in this neighbourhood an old man retired from Court who is the most learned

and most communicative person in the kingdom."

  At  once  he  took  Cacambo  to  the  old  man.  Candide  acted  now  only  a

second  character,  and  accompanied  his  valet.  They  entered  a  very  plain

house, for the door was only of silver, and the ceilings were only of gold, but

wrought in so elegant a taste as to vie with the richest. The antechamber,

indeed, was only encrusted with rubies and emeralds, but the order in which

everything was arranged made amends for this great simplicity.

  The old man received the strangers on his sofa, which was stuffed with

humming-birds'  feathers,  and  ordered  his  servants  to  present  them  with

liqueurs in diamond goblets; after which he satisfied their curiosity in the

following terms:

  "I am now one hundred and seventy-two years old, and I learnt of my late

father, Master of the Horse to the King, the amazing revolutions of Peru, of

which he had been an eyewitness. The kingdom we now inhabit is the ancient

country of the Incas, who quitted it very imprudently to conquer another part

of the world, and were at length destroyed by the Spaniards.

  "More wise by far were the princes of their family, who remained in their

native country; and they ordained, with the consent of the whole nation, that

none of the inhabitants should ever be permitted to quit this little kingdom;

and this has preserved our innocence and happiness. The Spaniards have had

a  confused  notion  of  this  country,  and  have  called  it  El  Dorado;  and  an

Englishman, whose name was Sir Walter Raleigh, came very near it about a

hundred  years  ago;  but  being  surrounded  by  inaccessible  rocks  andprecipices,  we  have  hitherto  been  sheltered  from  the  rapaciousness  of

European nations, who have an inconceivable passion for the pebbles and dirt

of our land, for the sake of which they would murder us to the last man."

  The conversation was long: it turned chiefly on their form of government,

their  manners,  their  women,  their  public  entertainments,  and  the  arts.  At

length Candide, having always had a taste for metaphysics, made Cacambo

ask whether there was any religion in that country.

  The old man reddened a little.

  "How then," said he, "can you doubt it? Do you take us for ungrateful

wretches?"

  Cacambo humbly asked, "What was the religion in El Dorado?"

  The old man reddened again.

  "Can there be two religions?" said he. "We have, I believe, the religion of

all the world: we worship God night and morning."

  "Do  you  worship  but  one  God?"  said  Cacambo,  who  still  acted  as

interpreter in representing Candide's doubts.

  "Surely," said the old man, "there are not two, nor three, nor four. I must

confess  the  people  from  your  side  of  the  world  ask  very  extraordinary

questions."

  Candide was not yet tired of interrogating the good old man; he wanted to

know in what manner they prayed to God in El Dorado.

  "We do not pray to Him," said the worthy sage; "we have nothing to ask of

Him;  He  has  given  us  all  we  need,  and  we  return  Him  thanks  without

ceasing."

  Candide having a curiosity to see the priests asked where they were. The

good old man smiled.

  "My friend," said he, "we are all priests. The King and all the heads of

families sing solemn canticles of thanksgiving every morning, accompanied

by five or six thousand musicians."

  "What! have you no monks who teach, who dispute, who govern, who

cabal, and who burn people that are not of their opinion?"  "We must be mad, indeed, if that were the case," said the old man; "here

we are all of one opinion, and we know not what you mean by monks."

  During  this  whole  discourse  Candide  was  in  raptures,  and  he  said  to

himself:

  "This is vastly different from Westphalia and the Baron's castle. Had our

friend Pangloss seen El Dorado he would no longer have said that the castle

of Thunder-ten-Tronckh was the finest upon earth. It is evident that one must

travel."

  After this long conversation the old man ordered a coach and six sheep to

be got ready, and twelve of his domestics to conduct the travellers to Court.

  "Excuse  me,"  said  he,  "if  my  age  deprives  me  of  the  honour  of

accompanying  you.  The  King  will  receive  you  in  a  manner  that  cannot

displease you; and no doubt you will make an allowance for the customs of

the country, if some things should not be to your liking."

  Candide and Cacambo got into the coach, the six sheep flew, and in less

than four hours they reached the King's palace situated at the extremity of the

capital. The portal was two hundred and twenty feet high, and one hundred

wide; but words are wanting to express the materials of which it was built. It

is plain such materials must have prodigious superiority over those pebbles

and sand which we call gold and precious stones.

  Twenty  beautiful  damsels  of  the  King's  guard  received  Candide  and

Cacambo as they alighted from the coach, conducted them to the bath, and

dressed them in robes woven of the down of humming-birds; after which the

great crown officers, of both sexes, led them to the King's apartment, between

two files of musicians, a thousand on each side. When they drew near to the

audience chamber Cacambo asked one of the great officers in what way he

should  pay  his  obeisance  to  his  Majesty;  whether  they  should  throw

themselves upon their knees or on their stomachs; whether they should put

their hands upon their heads or behind their backs; whether they should lick

the dust off the floor; in a word, what was the ceremony?

  "The custom," said the great officer, "is to embrace the King, and to kiss

him on each cheek."

  Candide  and  Cacambo  threw  themselves  round  his  Majesty's  neck.  Hereceived them with all the goodness imaginable, and politely invited them to

supper.

  While waiting they were shown the city, and saw the public edifices raised

as  high  as  the  clouds,  the  market  places  ornamented  with  a  thousand

columns, the fountains of spring water, those of rose water, those of liqueurs

drawn  from  sugar-cane,  incessantly  flowing  into  the  great  squares,  which

were  paved  with  a  kind  of  precious  stone,  which  gave  off  a  delicious

fragrancy like that of cloves and cinnamon. Candide asked to see the court of

justice,  the  parliament.  They  told  him  they  had  none,  and  that  they  were

strangers to lawsuits. He asked if they had any prisons, and they answered no.

But what surprised him most and gave him the greatest pleasure was the

palace of sciences, where he saw a gallery two thousand feet long, and filled

with instruments employed in mathematics and physics.

  After  rambling  about  the  city  the  whole  afternoon,  and  seeing  but  a

thousandth  part  of  it,  they  were  reconducted  to  the  royal  palace,  where

Candide sat down to table with his Majesty, his valet Cacambo, and several

ladies. Never was there a better entertainment, and never was more wit shown

at  a  table  than  that  which  fell  from  his  Majesty.  Cacambo  explained  the

King's bon-mots to Candide, and notwithstanding they were translated they

still appeared to be bon-mots. Of all the things that surprised Candide this

was not the least.

  They spent a month in this hospitable place. Candide frequently said to

Cacambo:

  "I own, my friend, once more that the castle where I was born is nothing in

comparison with this; but, after all, Miss Cunegonde is not here, and you

have, without doubt, some mistress in Europe. If we abide here we shall only

be upon a footing with the rest, whereas, if we return to our old world, only

with twelve sheep laden with the pebbles of El Dorado, we shall be richer

than all the kings in Europe. We shall have no more Inquisitors to fear, and

we may easily recover Miss Cunegonde."

  This speech was agreeable to Cacambo; mankind are so fond of roving, of

making a figure in their own country, and of boasting of what they have seen

in their travels, that the two happy ones resolved to be no longer so, but to

ask his Majesty's leave to quit the country.  "You are foolish," said the King. "I am sensible that my kingdom is but a

small place, but when a person is comfortably settled in any part he should

abide there. I have not the right to detain strangers. It is a tyranny which

neither our manners nor our laws permit. All men are free. Go when you

wish, but the going will be very difficult. It is impossible to ascend that rapid

river  on  which  you  came  as  by  a  miracle,  and  which  runs  under  vaulted

rocks.  The  mountains  which  surround  my  kingdom  are  ten  thousand  feet

high, and as steep as walls; they are each over ten leagues in breadth, and

there is no other way to descend them than by precipices. However, since you

absolutely wish to depart, I shall give orders to my engineers to construct a

machine that will convey you very safely. When we have conducted you over

the mountains no one can accompany you further, for my subjects have made

a vow never to quit the kingdom, and they are too wise to break it. Ask me

besides anything that you please."

  "We  desire  nothing  of  your  Majesty,"  says  Candide,  "but  a  few  sheep

laden with provisions, pebbles, and the earth of this country."

  The King laughed.

  "I cannot conceive," said he, "what pleasure you Europeans find in our

yellow clay, but take as much as you like, and great good may it do you."

  At once he gave directions that his engineers should construct a machine

to hoist up these two extraordinary men out of the kingdom. Three thousand

good mathematicians went to work; it was ready in fifteen days, and did not

cost more than twenty million sterling in the specie of that country. They

placed  Candide  and  Cacambo  on  the  machine.  There  were  two  great  red

sheep saddled and bridled to ride upon as soon as they were beyond the

mountains, twenty pack-sheep laden with provisions, thirty with presents of

the curiosities of the country, and fifty with gold, diamonds, and precious

stones. The King embraced the two wanderers very tenderly.

  Their departure, with the ingenious manner in which they and their sheep

were  hoisted  over  the  mountains,  was  a  splendid  spectacle.  The

mathematicians took their leave after conveying them to a place of safety,

and Candide had no other desire, no other aim, than to present his sheep to

Miss Cunegonde.

  "Now," said he, "we are able to pay the Governor of Buenos Ayres if MissCunegonde  can  be  ransomed.  Let  us  journey  towards  Cayenne.  Let  us

embark,  and  we  will  afterwards  see  what  kingdom  we  shall  be  able  to

purchase."


  CHAPTER XIX

  WHAT HAPPENED TO THEM AT SURINAM AND HOW CANDIDE

GOT ACQUAINTED WITH MARTIN.


  Our travellers spent the first day very agreeably. They were delighted with

possessing  more  treasure  than  all  Asia,  Europe,  and  Africa  could  scrape

together. Candide, in his raptures, cut Cunegonde's name on the trees. The

second day two of their sheep plunged into a morass, where they and their

burdens were lost; two more died of fatigue a few days after; seven or eight

perished  with  hunger  in  a  desert;  and  others  subsequently  fell  down

precipices.  At  length,  after  travelling  a  hundred  days,  only  two  sheep

remained. Said Candide to Cacambo:

  "My friend, you see how perishable are the riches of this world; there is

nothing solid but virtue, and the happiness of seeing Cunegonde once more."

  "I  grant  all  you  say,"  said  Cacambo,  "but  we  have  still  two  sheep

remaining, with more treasure than the King of Spain will ever have; and I

see a town which I take to be Surinam, belonging to the Dutch. We are at the

end of all our troubles, and at the beginning of happiness."

  As they drew near the town, they saw a negro stretched upon the ground,

with only one moiety of his clothes, that is, of his blue linen drawers; the

poor man had lost his left leg and his right hand.

  "Good God!" said Candide in Dutch, "what art thou doing there, friend, in

that shocking condition?"

  "I  am  waiting  for  my  master,  Mynheer  Vanderdendur,  the  famous

merchant," answered the negro.

  "Was it Mynheer Vanderdendur," said Candide, "that treated thee thus?"

  "Yes, sir," said the negro, "it is the custom. They give us a pair of linen

drawers for our whole garment twice a year. When we work at the sugar-canes, and the mill snatches hold of a finger, they cut off the hand; and when

we attempt to run away, they cut off the leg; both cases have happened to me.

This is the price at which you eat sugar in Europe. Yet when my mother sold

me for ten patagons[20] on the coast of Guinea, she said to me: 'My dear

child,  bless  our  fetiches,  adore  them  for  ever;  they  will  make  thee  live

happily; thou hast the honour of being the slave of our lords, the whites,

which is making the fortune of thy father and mother.' Alas! I know not

whether I have made their fortunes; this I know, that they have not made

mine. Dogs, monkeys, and parrots are a thousand times less wretched than I.

The Dutch fetiches, who have converted me, declare every Sunday that we

are  all  of  us  children  of  Adam-blacks  as  well  as  whites.  I  am  not  a

genealogist, but if these preachers tell truth, we are all second cousins. Now,

you  must  agree,  that  it  is  impossible  to  treat  one's  relations  in  a  more

barbarous manner."

  "Oh,  Pangloss!"  cried  Candide,  "thou  hadst  not  guessed  at  this

abomination; it is the end. I must at last renounce thy optimism."

  "What is this optimism?" said Cacambo.

  "Alas!" said Candide, "it is the madness of maintaining that everything is

right when it is wrong."

  Looking at the negro, he shed tears, and weeping, he entered Surinam.

  The first thing they inquired after was whether there was a vessel in the

harbour which could be sent to Buenos Ayres. The person to whom they

applied  was  a  Spanish  sea-captain,  who  offered  to  agree  with  them  upon

reasonable  terms.  He  appointed  to  meet  them  at  a  public-house,  whither

Candide and the faithful Cacambo went with their two sheep, and awaited his

coming.

  Candide,  who  had  his  heart  upon  his  lips,  told  the  Spaniard  all  his

adventures, and avowed that he intended to elope with Miss Cunegonde.

  "Then I will take good care not to carry you to Buenos Ayres," said the

seaman. "I should be hanged, and so would you. The fair Cunegonde is my

lord's favourite mistress."

  This was a thunderclap for Candide: he wept for a long while. At last he

drew Cacambo aside.  "Here, my dear friend," said he to him, "this thou must do. We have, each

of us in his pocket, five or six millions in diamonds; you are more clever than

I;  you  must  go  and  bring  Miss  Cunegonde  from  Buenos  Ayres.  If  the

Governor makes any difficulty, give him a million; if he will not relinquish

her, give him two; as you have not killed an Inquisitor, they will have no

suspicion of you; I'll get another ship, and go and wait for you at Venice;

that's a free country, where there is no danger either from Bulgarians, Abares,

Jews, or Inquisitors."

  Cacambo applauded this wise resolution. He despaired at parting from so

good  a  master,  who  had  become  his  intimate  friend;  but  the  pleasure  of

serving him prevailed over the pain of leaving him. They embraced with

tears; Candide charged him not to forget the good old woman. Cacambo set

out that very same day. This Cacambo was a very honest fellow.

  Candide stayed some time longer in Surinam, waiting for another captain

to  carry  him  and  the  two  remaining  sheep  to  Italy.  After  he  had  hired

domestics, and purchased everything necessary for a long voyage, Mynheer

Vanderdendur, captain of a large vessel, came and offered his services.

  "How much will you charge," said he to this man, "to carry me straight to

Venice-me, my servants, my baggage, and these two sheep?"

  The skipper asked ten thousand piastres. Candide did not hesitate.

  "Oh! oh!" said the prudent Vanderdendur to himself, "this stranger gives

ten thousand piastres unhesitatingly! He must be very rich."

  Returning  a  little  while  after,  he  let  him  know  that  upon  second

consideration,  he  could  not  undertake  the  voyage  for  less  than  twenty

thousand piastres.

  "Well, you shall have them," said Candide.

  "Ay!" said the skipper to himself, "this man agrees to pay twenty thousand

piastres with as much ease as ten."

  He went back to him again, and declared that he could not carry him to

Venice for less than thirty thousand piastres.

  "Then you shall have thirty thousand," replied Candide.

  "Oh! oh!" said the Dutch skipper once more to himself, "thirty thousandpiastres are a trifle to this man; surely these sheep must be laden with an

immense treasure; let us say no more about it. First of all, let him pay down

the thirty thousand piastres; then we shall see."

  Candide sold two small diamonds, the least of which was worth more than

what the skipper asked for his freight. He paid him in advance. The two

sheep were put on board. Candide followed in a little boat to join the vessel

in the roads. The skipper seized his opportunity, set sail, and put out to sea,

the wind favouring him. Candide, dismayed and stupefied, soon lost sight of

the vessel.

  "Alas!" said he, "this is a trick worthy of the old world!"

  He put back, overwhelmed with sorrow, for indeed he had lost sufficient

to  make  the  fortune  of  twenty  monarchs.  He  waited  upon  the  Dutch

magistrate, and in his distress he knocked over loudly at the door. He entered

and told his adventure, raising his voice with unnecessary vehemence. The

magistrate began by fining him ten thousand piastres for making a noise; then

he  listened  patiently,  promised  to  examine  into  his  affair  at  the  skipper's

return, and ordered him to pay ten thousand piastres for the expense of the

hearing.

  This  drove  Candide  to  despair;  he  had,  indeed,  endured  misfortunes  a

thousand times worse; the coolness of the magistrate and of the skipper who

had robbed him, roused his choler and flung him into a deep melancholy. The

villainy  of  mankind  presented  itself  before  his  imagination  in  all  its

deformity, and his mind was filled with gloomy ideas. At length hearing that

a French vessel was ready to set sail for Bordeaux, as he had no sheep laden

with diamonds to take along with him he hired a cabin at the usual price. He

made it known in the town that he would pay the passage and board and give

two thousand piastres to any honest man who would make the voyage with

him, upon condition that this man was the most dissatisfied with his state, and

the most unfortunate in the whole province.

  Such  a  crowd  of  candidates  presented  themselves  that  a  fleet  of  ships

could  hardly  have  held  them.  Candide  being  desirous  of  selecting  from

among the best, marked out about one-twentieth of them who seemed to be

sociable men, and who all pretended to merit his preference. He assembled

them at his inn, and gave them a supper on condition that each took an oath torelate his history faithfully, promising to choose him who appeared to be

most justly discontented with his state, and to bestow some presents upon the

rest.

  They sat until four o'clock in the morning. Candide, in listening to all their

adventures, was reminded of what the old woman had said to him in their

voyage to Buenos Ayres, and of her wager that there was not a person on

board  the  ship  but  had  met  with  very  great  misfortunes.  He  dreamed  of

Pangloss at every adventure told to him.

  "This Pangloss," said he, "would be puzzled to demonstrate his system. I

wish that he were here. Certainly, if all things are good, it is in El Dorado and

not in the rest of the world."

  At length he made choice of a poor man of letters, who had worked ten

years for the booksellers of Amsterdam. He judged that there was not in the

whole world a trade which could disgust one more.

  This philosopher was an honest man; but he had been robbed by his wife,

beaten by his son, and abandoned by his daughter who got a Portuguese to

run away with her. He had just been deprived of a small employment, on

which he subsisted; and he was persecuted by the preachers of Surinam, who

took  him  for  a  Socinian.  We  must  allow  that  the  others  were  at  least  as

wretched as he; but Candide hoped that the philosopher would entertain him

during the voyage. All the other candidates complained that Candide had

done  them  great  injustice;  but  he  appeased  them  by  giving  one  hundred

piastres to each.


  CHAPTER XX

  WHAT HAPPENED AT SEA TO CANDIDE AND MARTIN.


  The  old  philosopher,  whose  name  was  Martin,  embarked  then  with

Candide for Bordeaux. They had both seen and suffered a great deal; and if

the vessel had sailed from Surinam to Japan, by the Cape of Good Hope, the

subject of moral and natural evil would have enabled them to entertain one

another during the whole voyage.

  Candide, however, had one great advantage over Martin, in that he alwayshoped to see Miss Cunegonde; whereas Martin had nothing at all to hope.

Besides, Candide was possessed of money and jewels, and though he had lost

one hundred large red sheep, laden with the greatest treasure upon earth;

though the knavery of the Dutch skipper still sat heavy upon his mind; yet

when he reflected upon what he had still left, and when he mentioned the

name of Cunegonde, especially towards the latter end of a repast, he inclined

to Pangloss's doctrine.

  "But you, Mr. Martin," said he to the philosopher, "what do you think of

all this? what are your ideas on moral and natural evil?"

  "Sir," answered Martin, "our priests accused me of being a Socinian, but

the real fact is I am a Manichean."[21]

  "You jest," said Candide; "there are no longer Manicheans in the world."

  "I  am  one,"  said  Martin.  "I  cannot  help  it;  I  know  not  how  to  think

otherwise."

  "Surely you must be possessed by the devil," said Candide.

  "He is so deeply concerned in the affairs of this world," answered Martin,

"that he may very well be in me, as well as in everybody else; but I own to

you that when I cast an eye on this globe, or rather on this little ball, I cannot

help thinking that God has abandoned it to some malignant being. I except,

always,  El  Dorado.  I  scarcely  ever  knew  a  city  that  did  not  desire  the

destruction  of  a  neighbouring  city,  nor  a  family  that  did  not  wish  to

exterminate some other family. Everywhere the weak execrate the powerful,

before whom they cringe; and the powerful beat them like sheep whose wool

and flesh they sell. A million regimented assassins, from one extremity of

Europe to the other, get their bread by disciplined depredation and murder,

for want of more honest employment. Even in those cities which seem to

enjoy peace, and where the arts flourish, the inhabitants are devoured by

more envy, care, and uneasiness than are experienced by a besieged town.

Secret griefs are more cruel than public calamities. In a word I have seen so

much, and experienced so much that I am a Manichean."

  "There are, however, some things good," said Candide.

  "That may be," said Martin; "but I know them not."

  In the middle of this dispute they heard the report of cannon; it redoubledevery instant. Each took out his glass. They saw two ships in close fight

about three miles off. The wind brought both so near to the French vessel that

our travellers had the pleasure of seeing the fight at their ease. At length one

let off a broadside, so low and so truly aimed, that the other sank to the

bottom. Candide and Martin could plainly perceive a hundred men on the

deck  of  the  sinking  vessel;  they  raised  their  hands  to  heaven  and  uttered

terrible outcries, and the next moment were swallowed up by the sea.

  "Well," said Martin, "this is how men treat one another."

  "It is true," said Candide; "there is something diabolical in this affair."

  While speaking, he saw he knew not what, of a shining red, swimming

close to the vessel. They put out the long-boat to see what it could be: it was

one of his sheep! Candide was more rejoiced at the recovery of this one sheep

than he had been grieved at the loss of the hundred laden with the large

diamonds of El Dorado.

  The French captain soon saw that the captain of the victorious vessel was

a Spaniard, and that the other was a Dutch pirate, and the very same one who

had robbed Candide. The immense plunder which this villain had amassed,

was buried with him in the sea, and out of the whole only one sheep was

saved.

  "You see," said Candide to Martin, "that crime is sometimes punished.

This rogue of a Dutch skipper has met with the fate he deserved."

  "Yes," said Martin; "but why should the passengers be doomed also to

destruction?  God  has  punished  the  knave,  and  the  devil  has  drowned  the

rest."

  The  French  and  Spanish  ships  continued  their  course,  and  Candide

continued  his  conversation  with  Martin.  They  disputed  fifteen  successive

days, and on the last of those fifteen days, they were as far advanced as on

the first. But, however, they chatted, they communicated ideas, they consoled

each other. Candide caressed his sheep.

  "Since I have found thee again," said he, "I may likewise chance to find

my Cunegonde."


  CHAPTER XXI  CANDIDE AND MARTIN, REASONING, DRAW NEAR THE COAST

OF FRANCE.


  At length they descried the coast of France.

  "Were you ever in France, Mr. Martin?" said Candide.

  "Yes," said Martin, "I have been in several provinces. In some one-half of

the people are fools, in others they are too cunning; in some they are weak

and simple, in others they affect to be witty; in all, the principal occupation is

love, the next is slander, and the third is talking nonsense."

  "But, Mr. Martin, have you seen Paris?"

  "Yes, I have. All these kinds are found there. It is a chaos-a confused

multitude, where everybody seeks pleasure and scarcely any one finds it, at

least as it appeared to me. I made a short stay there. On my arrival I was

robbed of all I had by pickpockets at the fair of St. Germain. I myself was

taken for a robber and was imprisoned for eight days, after which I served as

corrector of the press to gain the money necessary for my return to Holland

on  foot.  I  knew  the  whole  scribbling  rabble,  the  party  rabble,  the  fanatic

rabble. It is said that there are very polite people in that city, and I wish to

believe it."

  "For my part, I have no curiosity to see France," said Candide. "You may

easily  imagine  that  after  spending  a  month  at  El  Dorado  I  can  desire  to

behold nothing upon earth but Miss Cunegonde. I go to await her at Venice.

We  shall  pass  through  France  on  our  way  to  Italy.  Will  you  bear  me

company?"

  "With all my heart," said Martin. "It is said that Venice is fit only for its

own nobility, but that strangers meet with a very good reception if they have

a good deal of money. I have none of it; you have, therefore I will follow you

all over the world."

  "But do you believe," said Candide, "that the earth was originally a sea, as

we find it asserted in that large book belonging to the captain?"

  "I do not believe a word of it," said Martin, "any more than I do of the

many ravings which have been published lately."  "But for what end, then, has this world been formed?" said Candide.

  "To plague us to death," answered Martin.

  "Are you not greatly surprised," continued Candide, "at the love which

these  two  girls  of  the  Oreillons  had  for  those  monkeys,  of  which  I  have

already told you?"

  "Not at all," said Martin. "I do not see that that passion was strange. I have

seen so many extraordinary things that I have ceased to be surprised."

  "Do you believe," said Candide, "that men have always massacred each

other as they do to-day, that they have always been liars, cheats, traitors,

ingrates,  brigands,  idiots,  thieves,  scoundrels,  gluttons,  drunkards,  misers,

envious,  ambitious,  bloody-minded,  calumniators,  debauchees,  fanatics,

hypocrites, and fools?"

  "Do you believe," said Martin, "that hawks have always eaten pigeons

when they have found them?"

  "Yes, without doubt," said Candide.

  "Well, then," said Martin, "if hawks have always had the same character

why should you imagine that men may have changed theirs?"

  "Oh!" said Candide, "there is a vast deal of difference, for free will"

  And reasoning thus they arrived at Bordeaux.


  CHAPTER XXII

  WHAT HAPPENED IN FRANCE TO CANDIDE AND MARTIN.


  Candide stayed in Bordeaux no longer than was necessary for the selling

of a few of the pebbles of El Dorado, and for hiring a good chaise to hold two

passengers; for he could not travel without his Philosopher Martin. He was

only vexed at parting with his sheep, which he left to the Bordeaux Academy

of  Sciences,  who  set  as  a  subject  for  that  year's  prize,  "to  find  why  this

sheep's wool was red;" and the prize was awarded to a learned man of the

North, who demonstrated by A plus B minus C divided by Z, that the sheep

must be red, and die of the rot.  Meanwhile, all the travellers whom Candide met in the inns along his

route, said to him, "We go to Paris." This general eagerness at length gave

him, too, a desire to see this capital; and it was not so very great a détour

from the road to Venice.

  He entered Paris by the suburb of St. Marceau, and fancied that he was in

the dirtiest village of Westphalia.

  Scarcely was Candide arrived at his inn, than he found himself attacked by

a slight illness, caused by fatigue. As he had a very large diamond on his

finger, and the people of the inn had taken notice of a prodigiously heavy box

among his baggage, there were two physicians to attend him, though he had

never sent for them, and two devotees who warmed his broths.

  "I remember," Martin said, "also to have been sick at Paris in my first

voyage; I was very poor, thus I had neither friends, devotees, nor doctors, and

I recovered."

  However,  what  with  physic  and  bleeding,  Candide's  illness  became

serious. A parson of the neighborhood came with great meekness to ask for a

bill for the other world payable to the bearer. Candide would do nothing for

him; but the devotees assured him it was the new fashion. He answered that

he was not a man of fashion. Martin wished to throw the priest out of the

window. The priest swore that they would not bury Candide. Martin swore

that he would bury the priest if he continued to be troublesome. The quarrel

grew heated. Martin took him by the shoulders and roughly turned him out of

doors; which occasioned great scandal and a law-suit.

  Candide got well again, and during his convalescence he had very good

company to sup with him. They played high. Candide wondered why it was

that the ace never came to him; but Martin was not at all astonished.

  Among those who did him the honours of the town was a little Abbé of

Perigord,  one  of  those  busybodies  who  are  ever  alert,  officious,  forward,

fawning, and complaisant; who watch for strangers in their passage through

the  capital,  tell  them  the  scandalous  history  of  the  town,  and  offer  them

pleasure at all prices. He first took Candide and Martin to La Comédie, where

they played a new tragedy. Candide happened to be seated near some of the

fashionable wits. This did not prevent his shedding tears at the well-acted

scenes. One of these critics at his side said to him between the acts:  "Your tears are misplaced; that is a shocking actress; the actor who plays

with her is yet worse; and the play is still worse than the actors. The author

does not know a word of Arabic, yet the scene is in Arabia; moreover he is a

man that does not believe in innate ideas; and I will bring you, to-morrow,

twenty pamphlets written against him."[22]

  "How many dramas have you in France, sir?" said Candide to the Abbé.

  "Five or six thousand."

  "What a number!" said Candide. "How many good?"

  "Fifteen or sixteen," replied the other.

  "What a number!" said Martin.

  Candide was very pleased with an actress who played Queen Elizabeth in

a somewhat insipid tragedy[23] sometimes acted.

  "That actress," said he to Martin, "pleases me much; she has a likeness to

Miss Cunegonde; I should be very glad to wait upon her."

  The Perigordian Abbé offered to introduce him. Candide, brought up in

Germany,  asked  what  was  the  etiquette,  and  how  they  treated  queens  of

England in France.

  "It is necessary to make distinctions," said the Abbé. "In the provinces one

takes them to the inn; in Paris, one respects them when they are beautiful, and

throws them on the highway when they are dead."[24]

  "Queens on the highway!" said Candide.

  "Yes, truly," said Martin, "the Abbé is right. I was in Paris when Miss

Monime passed, as the saying is, from this life to the other. She was refused

what people call the honours of sepulture-that is to say, of rotting with all the

beggars of the neighbourhood in an ugly cemetery; she was interred all alone

by  her  company  at  the  corner  of  the  Rue  de  Bourgogne,  which  ought  to

trouble her much, for she thought nobly."

  "That was very uncivil," said Candide.

  "What  would  you  have?"  said  Martin;  "these  people  are  made  thus.

Imagine all contradictions, all possible incompatibilities-you will find them in

the government, in the law-courts, in the churches, in the public shows of thisdroll nation."

  "Is it true that they always laugh in Paris?" said Candide.

  "Yes,"  said  the  Abbé,  "but  it  means  nothing,  for  they  complain  of

everything with great fits of laughter; they even do the most detestable things

while laughing."

  "Who," said Candide, "is that great pig who spoke so ill of the piece at

which I wept, and of the actors who gave me so much pleasure?"

  "He is a bad character," answered the Abbé, "who gains his livelihood by

saying evil of all plays and of all books. He hates whatever succeeds, as the

eunuchs hate those who enjoy; he is one of the serpents of literature who

nourish themselves on dirt and spite; he is a folliculaire."

  "What is a folliculaire?" said Candide.

  "It is," said the Abbé, "a pamphleteer-a Fréron."[25]

  Thus  Candide,  Martin,  and  the  Perigordian  conversed  on  the  staircase,

while watching every one go out after the performance.

  "Although I am eager to see Cunegonde again," said Candide, "I should

like to sup with Miss Clairon, for she appears to me admirable."

  The Abbé was not the man to approach Miss Clairon, who saw only good

company.

  "She is engaged for this evening," he said, "but I shall have the honour to

take you to the house of a lady of quality, and there you will know Paris as if

you had lived in it for years."

  Candide, who was naturally curious, let himself be taken to this lady's

house, at the end of the Faubourg St. Honoré. The company was occupied in

playing faro; a dozen melancholy punters held each in his hand a little pack

of cards; a bad record of his misfortunes. Profound silence reigned; pallor

was on the faces of the punters, anxiety on that of the banker, and the hostess,

sitting near the unpitying banker, noticed with lynx-eyes all the doubled and

other increased stakes, as each player dog's-eared his cards; she made them

turn down the edges again with severe, but polite attention; she showed no

vexation for fear of losing her customers. The lady insisted upon being called

the Marchioness of Parolignac. Her daughter, aged fifteen, was among thepunters, and notified with a covert glance the cheatings of the poor people

who tried to repair the cruelties of fate. The Perigordian Abbé, Candide and

Martin entered; no one rose, no one saluted them, no one looked at them; all

were profoundly occupied with their cards.

  "The Baroness of Thunder-ten-Tronckh was more polite," said Candide.

  However,  the  Abbé  whispered  to  the  Marchioness,  who  half  rose,

honoured Candide with a gracious smile, and Martin with a condescending

nod; she gave a seat and a pack of cards to Candide, who lost fifty thousand

francs in two deals, after which they supped very gaily, and every one was

astonished that Candide was not moved by his loss; the servants said among

themselves, in the language of servants:-

  "Some English lord is here this evening."

  The supper passed at first like most Parisian suppers, in silence, followed

by a noise of words which could not be distinguished, then with pleasantries

of  which  most  were  insipid,  with  false  news,  with  bad  reasoning,  a  little

politics, and much evil speaking; they also discussed new books.

  "Have  you  seen,"  said  the  Perigordian  Abbé,  "the  romance  of  Sieur

Gauchat, doctor of divinity?"[26]

  "Yes," answered one of the guests, "but I have not been able to finish it.

We  have  a  crowd  of  silly  writings,  but  all  together  do  not  approach  the

impertinence of 'Gauchat, Doctor of Divinity.' I am so satiated with the great

number of detestable books with which we are inundated that I am reduced to

punting at faro."

  "And the Mélanges of Archdeacon Trublet,[27] what do you say of that?"

said the Abbé.

  "Ah!" said the Marchioness of Parolignac, "the wearisome mortal! How

curiously  he  repeats  to  you  all  that  the  world  knows!  How  heavily  he

discusses that which is not worth the trouble of lightly remarking upon! How,

without wit, he appropriates the wit of others! How he spoils what he steals!

How he disgusts me! But he will disgust me no longer-it is enough to have

read a few of the Archdeacon's pages."

  There was at table a wise man of taste, who supported the Marchioness.

They spoke afterwards of tragedies; the lady asked why there were tragedieswhich were sometimes played and which could not be read. The man of taste

explained very well how a piece could have some interest, and have almost

no merit; he proved in few words that it was not enough to introduce one or

two of those situations which one finds in all romances, and which always

seduce the spectator, but that it was necessary to be new without being odd,

often sublime and always natural, to know the human heart and to make it

speak; to be a great poet without allowing any person in the piece to appear to

be a poet; to know language perfectly-to speak it with purity, with continuous

harmony and without rhythm ever taking anything from sense.

  "Whoever," added he, "does not observe all these rules can produce one or

two tragedies, applauded at a theatre, but he will never be counted in the

ranks of good writers. There are very few good tragedies; some are idylls in

dialogue, well written and well rhymed, others political reasonings which lull

to sleep, or amplifications which repel; others demoniac dreams in barbarous

style, interrupted in sequence, with long apostrophes to the gods, because

they do not know how to speak to men, with false maxims, with bombastic

commonplaces!"

  Candide listened with attention to this discourse, and conceived a great

idea of the speaker, and as the Marchioness had taken care to place him

beside her, he leaned towards her and took the liberty of asking who was the

man who had spoken so well.

  "He is a scholar," said the lady, "who does not play, whom the Abbé

sometimes brings to supper; he is perfectly at home among tragedies and

books, and he has written a tragedy which was hissed, and a book of which

nothing has ever been seen outside his bookseller's shop excepting the copy

which he dedicated to me."

  "The great man!" said Candide. "He is another Pangloss!"

  Then, turning towards him, he said:

  "Sir, you think doubtless that all is for the best in the moral and physical

world, and that nothing could be otherwise than it is?"

  "I, sir!" answered the scholar, "I know nothing of all that; I find that all

goes awry with me; that no one knows either what is his rank, nor what is his

condition, what he does nor what he ought to do; and that except supper,which is always gay, and where there appears to be enough concord, all the

rest of the time is passed in impertinent quarrels; Jansenist against Molinist,

Parliament  against  the  Church,  men  of  letters  against  men  of  letters,

courtesans against courtesans, financiers against the people, wives against

husbands, relatives against relatives-it is eternal war."

  "I have seen the worst," Candide replied. "But a wise man, who since has

had the misfortune to be hanged, taught me that all is marvellously well;

these are but the shadows on a beautiful picture."

  "Your hanged man mocked the world," said Martin. "The shadows are

horrible blots."

  "They are men who make the blots," said Candide, "and they cannot be

dispensed with."

  "It is not their fault then," said Martin.

  Most of the punters, who understood nothing of this language, drank, and

Martin reasoned with the scholar, and Candide related some of his adventures

to his hostess.

  After supper the Marchioness took Candide into her boudoir, and made

him sit upon a sofa.

  "Ah, well!" said she to him, "you love desperately Miss Cunegonde of

Thunder-ten-Tronckh?"

  "Yes, madame," answered Candide.

  The Marchioness replied to him with a tender smile:

  "You answer me like a young man from Westphalia. A Frenchman would

have  said,  'It  is  true  that  I  have  loved  Miss  Cunegonde,  but  seeing  you,

madame, I think I no longer love her.'"

  "Alas! madame," said Candide, "I will answer you as you wish."

  "Your passion for her," said the Marchioness, "commenced by picking up

her handkerchief. I wish that you would pick up my garter."

  "With all my heart," said Candide. And he picked it up.

  "But I wish that you would put it on," said the lady.

  And Candide put it on.  "You see," said she, "you are a foreigner. I sometimes make my Parisian

lovers  languish  for  fifteen  days,  but  I  give  myself  to  you  the  first  night

because  one  must  do  the  honours  of  one's  country  to  a  young  man  from

Westphalia."

  The lady having perceived two enormous diamonds upon the hands of the

young  foreigner  praised  them  with  such  good  faith  that  from  Candide's

fingers they passed to her own.

  Candide, returning with the Perigordian Abbé, felt some remorse in having

been unfaithful to Miss Cunegonde. The Abbé sympathised in his trouble; he

had had but a light part of the fifty thousand francs lost at play and of the

value of the two brilliants, half given, half extorted. His design was to profit

as much as he could by the advantages which the acquaintance of Candide

could procure for him. He spoke much of Cunegonde, and Candide told him

that he should ask forgiveness of that beautiful one for his infidelity when he

should see her in Venice.

  The  Abbé  redoubled  his  politeness  and  attentions,  and  took  a  tender

interest in all that Candide said, in all that he did, in all that he wished to do.

  "And so, sir, you have a rendezvous at Venice?"

  "Yes, monsieur Abbé," answered Candide. "It is absolutely necessary that

I go to meet Miss Cunegonde."

  And then the pleasure of talking of that which he loved induced him to

relate,  according  to  his  custom,  part  of  his  adventures  with  the  fair

Westphalian.

  "I believe," said the Abbé, "that Miss Cunegonde has a great deal of wit,

and that she writes charming letters?"

  "I have never received any from her," said Candide, "for being expelled

from the castle on her account I had not an opportunity for writing to her.

Soon after that I heard she was dead; then I found her alive; then I lost her

again; and last of all, I sent an express to her two thousand five hundred

leagues from here, and I wait for an answer."

  The Abbé listened attentively, and seemed to be in a brown study. He soon

took  his  leave  of  the  two  foreigners  after  a  most  tender  embrace.  Thefollowing day Candide received, on awaking, a letter couched in these terms:

  "My very dear love, for eight days I have been ill in this town. I learn that

you are here. I would fly to your arms if I could but move. I was informed of

your passage at Bordeaux, where I left faithful Cacambo and the old woman,

who are to follow me very soon. The Governor of Buenos Ayres has taken

all, but there remains to me your heart. Come! your presence will either give

me life or kill me with pleasure."

  This  charming,  this  unhoped-for  letter  transported  Candide  with  an

inexpressible joy, and the illness of his dear Cunegonde overwhelmed him

with grief. Divided between those two passions, he took his gold and his

diamonds and hurried away, with Martin, to the hotel where Miss Cunegonde

was lodged. He entered her room trembling, his heart palpitating, his voice

sobbing; he wished to open the curtains of the bed, and asked for a light.

  "Take care what you do," said the servant-maid; "the light hurts her," and

immediately she drew the curtain again.

  "My  dear  Cunegonde,"  said  Candide,  weeping,  "how  are  you?  If  you

cannot see me, at least speak to me."

  "She cannot speak," said the maid.

  The lady then put a plump hand out from the bed, and Candide bathed it

with his tears and afterwards filled it with diamonds, leaving a bag of gold

upon the easy chair.

  In the midst of these transports in came an officer, followed by the Abbé

and a file of soldiers.

  "There," said he, "are the two suspected foreigners," and at the same time

he ordered them to be seized and carried to prison.

  "Travellers are not treated thus in El Dorado," said Candide.

  "I am more a Manichean now than ever," said Martin.

  "But pray, sir, where are you going to carry us?" said Candide.

  "To a dungeon," answered the officer.

  Martin, having recovered himself a little, judged that the lady who acted

the part of Cunegonde was a cheat, that the Perigordian Abbé was a knavewho had imposed upon the honest simplicity of Candide, and that the officer

was another knave whom they might easily silence.

  Candide,  advised  by  Martin  and  impatient  to  see  the  real  Cunegonde,

rather than expose himself before a court of justice, proposed to the officer to

give him three small diamonds, each worth about three thousand pistoles.

  "Ah, sir," said the man with the ivory baton, "had you committed all the

imaginable crimes you would be to me the most honest man in the world.

Three diamonds! Each worth three thousand pistoles! Sir, instead of carrying

you to jail I would lose my life to serve you. There are orders for arresting all

foreigners, but leave it to me. I have a brother at Dieppe in Normandy! I'll

conduct you thither, and if you have a diamond to give him he'll take as much

care of you as I would."

  "And why," said Candide, "should all foreigners be arrested?"

  "It is," the Perigordian Abbé then made answer, "because a poor beggar of

the country of Atrébatie[28] heard some foolish things said. This induced him

to commit a parricide, not such as that of 1610 in the month of May,[29] but

such as that of 1594 in the month of December,[30] and such as others which

have been committed in other years and other months by other poor devils

who had heard nonsense spoken."

  The officer then explained what the Abbé meant.

  "Ah, the monsters!" cried Candide. "What horrors among a people who

dance and sing! Is there no way of getting quickly out of this country where

monkeys provoke tigers? I have seen no bears in my country, but men I have

beheld nowhere except in El Dorado. In the name of God, sir, conduct me to

Venice, where I am to await Miss Cunegonde."

  "I can conduct you no further than lower Normandy," said the officer.

  Immediately he ordered his irons to be struck off, acknowledged himself

mistaken, sent away his men, set out with Candide and Martin for Dieppe,

and left them in the care of his brother.

  There was then a small Dutch ship in the harbour. The Norman, who by

the virtue of three more diamonds had become the most subservient of men,

put Candide and his attendants on board a vessel that was just ready to set sail

for Portsmouth in England.  This was not the way to Venice, but Candide thought he had made his way

out  of  hell,  and  reckoned  that  he  would  soon  have  an  opportunity  for

resuming his journey.


  CHAPTER XXIII

  CANDIDE  AND  MARTIN  TOUCHED  UPON  THE  COAST  OF

ENGLAND, AND WHAT THEY SAW THERE.


  "Ah, Pangloss! Pangloss! Ah, Martin! Martin! Ah, my dear Cunegonde,

what sort of a world is this?" said Candide on board the Dutch ship.

  "Something very foolish and abominable," said Martin.

  "You know England? Are they as foolish there as in France?"

  "It is another kind of folly," said Martin. "You know that these two nations

are at war for a few acres of snow in Canada,[31] and that they spend over

this beautiful war much more than Canada is worth. To tell you exactly,

whether there are more people fit to send to a madhouse in one country than

the other, is what my imperfect intelligence will not permit. I only know in

general that the people we are going to see are very atrabilious."

  Talking thus they arrived at Portsmouth. The coast was lined with crowds

of  people,  whose  eyes  were  fixed  on  a  fine  man  kneeling,  with  his  eyes

bandaged, on board one of the men of war in the harbour. Four soldiers stood

opposite to this man; each of them fired three balls at his head, with all the

calmness  in  the  world;  and  the  whole  assembly  went  away  very  well

satisfied.

  "What is all this?" said Candide; "and what demon is it that exercises his

empire in this country?"

  He then asked who was that fine man who had been killed with so much

ceremony. They answered, he was an Admiral.[32]

  "And why kill this Admiral?"

  "It is because he did not kill a sufficient number of men himself. He gave

battle  to  a  French  Admiral;  and  it  has  been  proved  that  he  was  not  near

enough to him."  "But," replied Candide, "the French Admiral was as far from the English

Admiral."

  "There is no doubt of it; but in this country it is found good, from time to

time, to kill one Admiral to encourage the others."

  Candide was so shocked and bewildered by what he saw and heard, that he

would not set foot on shore, and he made a bargain with the Dutch skipper

(were he even to rob him like the Surinam captain) to conduct him without

delay to Venice.

  The skipper was ready in two days. They coasted France; they passed in

sight of Lisbon, and Candide trembled. They passed through the Straits, and

entered the Mediterranean. At last they landed at Venice.

  "God be praised!" said Candide, embracing Martin. "It is here that I shall

see again my beautiful Cunegonde. I trust Cacambo as myself. All is well, all

will be well, all goes as well as possible."


  CHAPTER XXIV

  OF PAQUETTE AND FRIAR GIROFLÉE.


  Upon their arrival at Venice, Candide went to search for Cacambo at every

inn and coffee-house, and among all the ladies of pleasure, but to no purpose.

He sent every day to inquire on all the ships that came in. But there was no

news of Cacambo.

  "What!" said he to Martin, "I have had time to voyage from Surinam to

Bordeaux, to go from Bordeaux to Paris, from Paris to Dieppe, from Dieppe

to  Portsmouth,  to  coast  along  Portugal  and  Spain,  to  cross  the  whole

Mediterranean, to spend some months, and yet the beautiful Cunegonde has

not  arrived!  Instead  of  her  I  have  only  met  a  Parisian  wench  and  a

Perigordian Abbé. Cunegonde is dead without doubt, and there is nothing for

me but to die. Alas! how much better it would have been for me to have

remained  in  the  paradise  of  El  Dorado  than  to  come  back  to  this  cursed

Europe! You are in the right, my dear Martin: all is misery and illusion."

  He fell into a deep melancholy, and neither went to see the opera, nor anyof  the  other  diversions  of  the  Carnival;  nay,  he  was  proof  against  the

temptations of all the ladies.

  "You are in truth very simple," said Martin to him, "if you imagine that a

mongrel valet, who has five or six millions in his pocket, will go to the other

end of the world to seek your mistress and bring her to you to Venice. If he

find her, he will keep her to himself; if he do not find her he will get another.

I advise you to forget your valet Cacambo and your mistress Cunegonde."

  Martin was not consoling. Candide's melancholy increased; and Martin

continued to prove to him that there was very little virtue or happiness upon

earth, except perhaps in El Dorado, where nobody could gain admittance.

  While  they  were  disputing  on  this  important  subject  and  waiting  for

Cunegonde, Candide saw a young Theatin friar in St. Mark's Piazza, holding

a girl on his arm. The Theatin looked fresh coloured, plump, and vigorous;

his eyes were sparkling, his air assured, his look lofty, and his step bold. The

girl was very pretty, and sang; she looked amorously at her Theatin, and from

time to time pinched his fat cheeks.

  "At least you will allow me," said Candide to Martin, "that these two are

happy. Hitherto I have met with none but unfortunate people in the whole

habitable globe, except in El Dorado; but as to this pair, I would venture to

lay a wager that they are very happy."

  "I lay you they are not," said Martin.

  "We need only ask them to dine with us," said Candide, "and you will see

whether I am mistaken."

  Immediately  he  accosted  them,  presented  his  compliments,  and  invited

them to his inn to eat some macaroni, with Lombard partridges, and caviare,

and  to  drink  some  Montepulciano,  Lachrymæ  Christi,  Cyprus  and  Samos

wine. The girl blushed, the Theatin accepted the invitation and she followed

him, casting her eyes on Candide with confusion and surprise, and dropping a

few tears. No sooner had she set foot in Candide's apartment than she cried

out:

  "Ah! Mr. Candide does not know Paquette again."

  Candide  had  not  viewed  her  as  yet  with  attention,  his  thoughts  being

entirely taken up with Cunegonde; but recollecting her as she spoke.  "Alas!" said he, "my poor child, it is you who reduced Doctor Pangloss to

the beautiful condition in which I saw him?"

  "Alas! it was I, sir, indeed," answered Paquette. "I see that you have heard

all. I have been informed of the frightful disasters that befell the family of my

lady Baroness, and the fair Cunegonde. I swear to you that my fate has been

scarcely less sad. I was very innocent when you knew me. A Grey Friar, who

was my confessor, easily seduced me. The consequences were terrible. I was

obliged to quit the castle some time after the Baron had sent you away with

kicks on the backside. If a famous surgeon had not taken compassion on me,

I should have died. For some time I was this surgeon's mistress, merely out of

gratitude.  His  wife,  who  was  mad  with  jealousy,  beat  me  every  day

unmercifully; she was a fury. The surgeon was one of the ugliest of men, and

I the most wretched of women, to be continually beaten for a man I did not

love. You know, sir, what a dangerous thing it is for an ill-natured woman to

be married to a doctor. Incensed at the behaviour of his wife, he one day gave

her so effectual a remedy to cure her of a slight cold, that she died two hours

after,  in  most  horrid  convulsions.  The  wife's  relations  prosecuted  the

husband; he took flight, and I was thrown into jail. My innocence would not

have saved me if I had not been good-looking. The judge set me free, on

condition that he succeeded the surgeon. I was soon supplanted by a rival,

turned out of doors quite destitute, and obliged to continue this abominable

trade, which appears so pleasant to you men, while to us women it is the

utmost abyss of misery. I have come to exercise the profession at Venice. Ah!

sir, if you could only imagine what it is to be obliged to caress indifferently

an old merchant, a lawyer, a monk, a gondolier, an abbé, to be exposed to

abuse and insults; to be often reduced to borrowing a petticoat, only to go and

have it raised by a disagreeable man; to be robbed by one of what one has

earned from another; to be subject to the extortions of the officers of justice;

and to have in prospect only a frightful old age, a hospital, and a dung-hill;

you  would  conclude  that  I  am  one  of  the  most  unhappy  creatures  in  the

world."[33]

  Paquette  thus  opened  her  heart  to  honest  Candide,  in  the  presence  of

Martin, who said to his friend:

  "You see that already I have won half the wager."  Friar Giroflée stayed in the dining-room, and drank a glass or two of wine

while he was waiting for dinner.

  "But," said Candide to Paquette, "you looked so gay and content when I

met you; you sang and you behaved so lovingly to the Theatin, that you

seemed to me as happy as you pretend to be now the reverse."

  "Ah! sir," answered Paquette, "this is one of the miseries of the trade.

Yesterday I was robbed and beaten by an officer; yet to-day I must put on

good humour to please a friar."

  Candide wanted no more convincing; he owned that Martin was in the

right. They sat down to table with Paquette and the Theatin; the repast was

entertaining; and towards the end they conversed with all confidence.

  "Father," said Candide to the Friar, "you appear to me to enjoy a state that

all  the  world  might  envy;  the  flower  of  health  shines  in  your  face,  your

expression makes plain your happiness; you have a very pretty girl for your

recreation, and you seem well satisfied with your state as a Theatin."

  "My faith, sir," said Friar Giroflée, "I wish that all the Theatins were at the

bottom of the sea. I have been tempted a hundred times to set fire to the

convent, and go and become a Turk. My parents forced me at the age of

fifteen to put on this detestable habit, to increase the fortune of a cursed elder

brother,  whom  God  confound.  Jealousy,  discord,  and  fury,  dwell  in  the

convent. It is true I have preached a few bad sermons that have brought me in

a little money, of which the prior stole half, while the rest serves to maintain

my girls; but when I return at night to the monastery, I am ready to dash my

head against the walls of the dormitory; and all my fellows are in the same

case."

  Martin turned towards Candide with his usual coolness.

  "Well," said he, "have I not won the whole wager?"

  Candide gave two thousand piastres to Paquette, and one thousand to Friar

Giroflée.

  "I'll answer for it," said he, "that with this they will be happy."

  "I do not believe it at all," said Martin; "you will, perhaps, with these

piastres only render them the more unhappy."  "Let that be as it may," said Candide, "but one thing consoles me. I see

that we often meet with those whom we expected never to see more; so that,

perhaps, as I have found my red sheep and Paquette, it may well be that I

shall also find Cunegonde."

  "I wish," said Martin, "she may one day make you very happy; but I doubt

it very much."

  "You are very hard of belief," said Candide.

  "I have lived," said Martin.

  "You  see  those  gondoliers,"  said  Candide,  "are  they  not  perpetually

singing?"

  "You do not see them," said Martin, "at home with their wives and brats.

The Doge has his troubles, the gondoliers have theirs. It is true that, all things

considered, the life of a gondolier is preferable to that of a Doge; but I believe

the difference to be so trifling that it is not worth the trouble of examining."

  "People talk," said Candide, "of the Senator Pococurante, who lives in that

fine  palace  on  the  Brenta,  where  he  entertains  foreigners  in  the  politest

manner. They pretend that this man has never felt any uneasiness."

  "I should be glad to see such a rarity," said Martin.

  Candide immediately sent to ask the Lord Pococurante permission to wait

upon him the next day.


  CHAPTER XXV

  THE VISIT TO LORD POCOCURANTE, A NOBLE VENETIAN.


  Candide and Martin went in a gondola on the Brenta, and arrived at the

palace of the noble Signor Pococurante. The gardens, laid out with taste, were

adorned  with  fine  marble  statues.  The  palace  was  beautifully  built.  The

master of the house was a man of sixty, and very rich. He received the two

travellers  with  polite  indifference,  which  put  Candide  a  little  out  of

countenance, but was not at all disagreeable to Martin.

  First, two pretty girls, very neatly dressed, served them with chocolate,

which  was  frothed  exceedingly  well.  Candide  could  not  refrain  fromcommending their beauty, grace, and address.

  "They are good enough creatures," said the Senator. "I make them lie with

me  sometimes,  for  I  am  very  tired  of  the  ladies  of  the  town,  of  their

coquetries, of their jealousies, of their quarrels, of their humours, of their

pettinesses, of their prides, of their follies, and of the sonnets which one must

make, or have made, for them. But after all, these two girls begin to weary

me."

  After breakfast, Candide walking into a long gallery was surprised by the

beautiful pictures. He asked, by what master were the two first.

  "They are by Raphael," said the Senator. "I bought them at a great price,

out of vanity, some years ago. They are said to be the finest things in Italy,

but they do not please me at all. The colours are too dark, the figures are not

sufficiently rounded, nor in good relief; the draperies in no way resemble

stuffs. In a word, whatever may be said, I do not find there a true imitation of

nature. I only care for a picture when I think I see nature itself; and there are

none of this sort. I have a great many pictures, but I prize them very little."

  While  they  were  waiting  for  dinner  Pococurante  ordered  a  concert.

Candide found the music delicious.

  "This noise," said the Senator, "may amuse one for half an hour; but if it

were to last longer it would grow tiresome to everybody, though they durst

not own it. Music, to-day, is only the art of executing difficult things, and that

which is only difficult cannot please long. Perhaps I should be fonder of the

opera if they had not found the secret of making of it a monster which shocks

me. Let who will go to see bad tragedies set to music, where the scenes are

contrived for no other end than to introduce two or three songs ridiculously

out of place, to show off an actress's voice. Let who will, or who can, die

away with pleasure at the sight of an eunuch quavering the rôle of Cæsar, or

of Cato, and strutting awkwardly upon the stage. For my part I have long

since  renounced  those  paltry  entertainments  which  constitute  the  glory  of

modern Italy, and are purchased so dearly by sovereigns."

  Candide disputed the point a little, but with discretion. Martin was entirely

of the Senator's opinion.

  They sat down to table, and after an excellent dinner they went into thelibrary.  Candide,  seeing  a  Homer  magnificently  bound,  commended  the

virtuoso on his good taste.

  "There,"  said  he,  "is  a  book  that  was  once  the  delight  of  the  great

Pangloss, the best philosopher in Germany."

  "It is not mine," answered Pococurante coolly. "They used at one time to

make me believe that I took a pleasure in reading him. But that continual

repetition of battles, so extremely like one another; those gods that are always

active without doing anything decisive; that Helen who is the cause of the

war, and who yet scarcely appears in the piece; that Troy, so long besieged

without being taken; all these together caused me great weariness. I have

sometimes asked learned men whether they were not as weary as I of that

work. Those who were sincere have owned to me that the poem made them

fall asleep; yet it was necessary to have it in their library as a monument of

antiquity,  or  like  those  rusty  medals  which  are  no  longer  of  use  in

commerce."

  "But your Excellency does not think thus of Virgil?" said Candide.

  "I grant," said the Senator, "that the second, fourth, and sixth books of his

Æneid are excellent, but as for his pious Æneas, his strong Cloanthus, his

friend  Achates,  his  little  Ascanius,  his  silly  King  Latinus,  his  bourgeois

Amata,  his  insipid  Lavinia,  I  think  there  can  be  nothing  more  flat  and

disagreeable.  I  prefer  Tasso  a  good  deal,  or  even  the  soporific  tales  of

Ariosto."

  "May  I  presume  to  ask  you,  sir,"  said  Candide,  "whether  you  do  not

receive a great deal of pleasure from reading Horace?"

  "There are maxims in this writer," answered Pococurante, "from which a

man of the world may reap great benefit, and being written in energetic verse

they are more easily impressed upon the memory. But I care little for his

journey to Brundusium, and his account of a bad dinner, or of his low quarrel

between one Rupilius whose words he says were full of poisonous filth, and

another whose language was imbued with vinegar. I have read with much

distaste his indelicate verses against old women and witches; nor do I see any

merit in telling his friend Mæcenas that if he will but rank him in the choir of

lyric poets, his lofty head shall touch the stars. Fools admire everything in an

author of reputation. For my part, I read only to please myself. I like only thatwhich serves my purpose."

  Candide,  having  been  educated  never  to  judge  for  himself,  was  much

surprised at what he heard. Martin found there was a good deal of reason in

Pococurante's remarks.

  "Oh! here is Cicero," said Candide. "Here is the great man whom I fancy

you are never tired of reading."

  "I never read him," replied the Venetian. "What is it to me whether he

pleads  for  Rabirius  or  Cluentius?  I  try  causes  enough  myself;  his

philosophical works seem to me better, but when I found that he doubted of

everything, I concluded that I knew as much as he, and that I had no need of a

guide to learn ignorance."

  "Ha!  here  are  four-score  volumes  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences,"  cried

Martin. "Perhaps there is something valuable in this collection."

  "There might be," said Pococurante, "if only one of those rakers of rubbish

had shown how to make pins; but in all these volumes there is nothing but

chimerical systems, and not a single useful thing."

  "And what dramatic works I see here," said Candide, "in Italian, Spanish,

and French."

  "Yes," replied the Senator, "there are three thousand, and not three dozen

of  them  good  for  anything.  As  to  those  collections  of  sermons,  which

altogether are not worth a single page of Seneca, and those huge volumes of

theology, you may well imagine that neither I nor any one else ever opens

them."

  Martin saw some shelves filled with English books.

  "I have a notion," said he, "that a Republican must be greatly pleased with

most of these books, which are written with a spirit of freedom."

  "Yes," answered Pococurante, "it is noble to write as one thinks; this is the

privilege of humanity. In all our Italy we write only what we do not think;

those who inhabit the country of the Cæsars and the Antoninuses dare not

acquire a single idea without the permission of a Dominican friar. I should be

pleased with the liberty which inspires the English genius if passion and party

spirit did not corrupt all that is estimable in this precious liberty."  Candide, observing a Milton, asked whether he did not look upon this

author as a great man.

  "Who?" said Pococurante, "that barbarian, who writes a long commentary

in  ten  books  of  harsh  verse  on  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis;  that  coarse

imitator of the Greeks, who disfigures the Creation, and who, while Moses

represents the Eternal producing the world by a word, makes the Messiah

take a great pair of compasses from the armoury of heaven to circumscribe

His work? How can I have any esteem for a writer who has spoiled Tasso's

hell and the devil, who transforms Lucifer sometimes into a toad and other

times into a pigmy, who makes him repeat the same things a hundred times,

who makes him dispute on theology, who, by a serious imitation of Ariosto's

comic invention of firearms, represents the devils cannonading in heaven?

Neither  I  nor  any  man  in  Italy  could  take  pleasure  in  those  melancholy

extravagances; and the marriage of Sin and Death, and the snakes brought

forth by Sin, are enough to turn the stomach of any one with the least taste,

[and his long description of a pest-house is good only for a grave-digger].

This obscure, whimsical, and disagreeable poem was despised upon its first

publication, and I only treat it now as it was treated in its own country by

contemporaries. For the matter of that I say what I think, and I care very little

whether others think as I do."

  Candide was grieved at this speech, for he had a respect for Homer and

was fond of Milton.

  "Alas!"  said  he  softly  to  Martin,  "I  am  afraid  that  this  man  holds  our

German poets in very great contempt."

  "There would not be much harm in that," said Martin.

  "Oh! what a superior man," said Candide below his breath. "What a great

genius is this Pococurante! Nothing can please him."

  After their survey of the library they went down into the garden, where

Candide praised its several beauties.

  "I know of nothing in so bad a taste," said the master. "All you see here is

merely trifling. After to-morrow I will have it planted with a nobler design."

  "Well," said Candide to Martin when they had taken their leave, "you will

agree  that  this  is  the  happiest  of  mortals,  for  he  is  above  everything  hepossesses."

  "But do you not see," answered Martin, "that he is disgusted with all he

possesses? Plato observed a long while ago that those stomachs are not the

best that reject all sorts of food."

  "But is there not a pleasure," said Candide, "in criticising everything, in

pointing out faults where others see nothing but beauties?"

  "That is to say," replied Martin, "that there is some pleasure in having no

pleasure."

  "Well, well," said Candide, "I find that I shall be the only happy man

when I am blessed with the sight of my dear Cunegonde."

  "It is always well to hope," said Martin.

  However, the days and the weeks passed. Cacambo did not come, and

Candide was so overwhelmed with grief that he did not even reflect that

Paquette and Friar Giroflée did not return to thank him.


  CHAPTER XXVI

  OF A SUPPER WHICH CANDIDE AND MARTIN TOOK WITH SIX

STRANGERS, AND WHO THEY WERE.[34]


  One evening that Candide and Martin were going to sit down to supper

with some foreigners who lodged in the same inn, a man whose complexion

was as black as soot, came behind Candide, and taking him by the arm, said:

  "Get yourself ready to go along with us; do not fail."

  Upon this he turned round and saw-Cacambo! Nothing but the sight of

Cunegonde could have astonished and delighted him more. He was on the

point of going mad with joy. He embraced his dear friend.

  "Cunegonde is here, without doubt; where is she? Take me to her that I

may die of joy in her company."

  "Cunegonde is not here," said Cacambo, "she is at Constantinople."

  "Oh,  heavens!  at  Constantinople!  But  were  she  in  China  I  would  fly

thither; let us be off."  "We shall set out after supper," replied Cacambo. "I can tell you nothing

more; I am a slave, my master awaits me, I must serve him at table; speak not

a word, eat, and then get ready."

  Candide, distracted between joy and grief, delighted at seeing his faithful

agent again, astonished at finding him a slave, filled with the fresh hope of

recovering his mistress, his heart palpitating, his understanding confused, sat

down to table with Martin, who saw all these scenes quite unconcerned, and

with six strangers who had come to spend the Carnival at Venice.

  Cacambo waited at table upon one of the strangers; towards the end of the

entertainment he drew near his master, and whispered in his ear:

  "Sire, your Majesty may start when you please, the vessel is ready."

  On saying these words he went out. The company in great surprise looked

at one another without speaking a word, when another domestic approached

his master and said to him:

  "Sire, your Majesty's chaise is at Padua, and the boat is ready."

  The master gave a nod and the servant went away. The company all stared

at one another again, and their surprise redoubled. A third valet came up to a

third stranger, saying:

  "Sire, believe me, your Majesty ought not to stay here any longer. I am

going to get everything ready."

  And immediately he disappeared. Candide and Martin did not doubt that

this was a masquerade of the Carnival. Then a fourth domestic said to a

fourth master:

  "Your Majesty may depart when you please."

  Saying this he went away like the rest. The fifth valet said the same thing

to the fifth master. But the sixth valet spoke differently to the sixth stranger,

who sat near Candide. He said to him:

  "Faith, Sire, they will no longer give credit to your Majesty nor to me, and

we may perhaps both of us be put in jail this very night. Therefore I will take

care of myself. Adieu."

  The servants being all gone, the six strangers, with Candide and Martin,

remained in a profound silence. At length Candide broke it.  "Gentlemen," said he, "this is a very good joke indeed, but why should

you all be kings? For me I own that neither Martin nor I is a king."

  Cacambo's master then gravely answered in Italian:

  "I am not at all joking. My name is Achmet III. I was Grand Sultan many

years. I dethroned my brother; my nephew dethroned me, my viziers were

beheaded,  and  I  am  condemned  to  end  my  days  in  the  old  Seraglio.  My

nephew, the great Sultan Mahmoud, permits me to travel sometimes for my

health, and I am come to spend the Carnival at Venice."

  A young man who sat next to Achmet, spoke then as follows:

  "My  name  is  Ivan.  I  was  once  Emperor  of  all  the  Russias,  but  was

dethroned  in  my  cradle.  My  parents  were  confined  in  prison  and  I  was

educated  there;  yet  I  am  sometimes  allowed  to  travel  in  company  with

persons who act as guards; and I am come to spend the Carnival at Venice."

  The third said:

  "I am Charles Edward, King of England; my father has resigned all his

legal rights to me. I have fought in defence of them; and above eight hundred

of  my  adherents  have  been  hanged,  drawn,  and  quartered.  I  have  been

confined in prison; I am going to Rome, to pay a visit to the King, my father,

who was dethroned as well as myself and my grandfather, and I am come to

spend the Carnival at Venice."

  The fourth spoke thus in his turn:

  "I  am  the  King  of  Poland;  the  fortune  of  war  has  stripped  me  of  my

hereditary dominions; my father underwent the same vicissitudes; I resign

myself to Providence in the same manner as Sultan Achmet, the Emperor

Ivan, and King Charles Edward, whom God long preserve; and I am come to

the Carnival at Venice."

  The fifth said:

  "I am King of Poland also; I have been twice dethroned; but Providence

has given me another country, where I have done more good than all the

Sarmatian kings were ever capable of doing on the banks of the Vistula; I

resign myself likewise to Providence, and am come to pass the Carnival at

Venice."  It was now the sixth monarch's turn to speak:

  "Gentlemen," said he, "I am not so great a prince as any of you; however, I

am a king. I am Theodore, elected King of Corsica; I had the title of Majesty,

and now I am scarcely treated as a gentleman. I have coined money, and now

am not worth a farthing; I have had two secretaries of state, and now I have

scarce a valet; I have seen myself on a throne, and I have seen myself upon

straw in a common jail in London. I am afraid that I shall meet with the same

treatment here though, like your majesties, I am come to see the Carnival at

Venice."

  The other five kings listened to this speech with generous compassion.

Each of them gave twenty sequins to King Theodore to buy him clothes and

linen; and Candide made him a present of a diamond worth two thousand

sequins.

  "Who can this private person be," said the five kings to one another, "who

is able to give, and really has given, a hundred times as much as any of us?"

  Just as they rose from table, in came four Serene Highnesses, who had

also been stripped of their territories by the fortune of war, and were come to

spend  the  Carnival  at  Venice.  But  Candide  paid  no  regard  to  these

newcomers,  his  thoughts  were  entirely  employed  on  his  voyage  to

Constantinople, in search of his beloved Cunegonde.


  CHAPTER XXVII

  CANDIDE'S VOYAGE TO CONSTANTINOPLE.


  The  faithful  Cacambo  had  already  prevailed  upon  the  Turkish  skipper,

who was to conduct the Sultan Achmet to Constantinople, to receive Candide

and  Martin  on  his  ship.  They  both  embarked  after  having  made  their

obeisance to his miserable Highness.

  "You  see,"  said  Candide  to  Martin  on  the  way,  "we  supped  with  six

dethroned kings, and of those six there was one to whom I gave charity.

Perhaps there are many other princes yet more unfortunate. For my part, I

have only lost a hundred sheep; and now I am flying into Cunegonde's arms.

My dear Martin, yet once more Pangloss was right: all is for the best."  "I wish it," answered Martin.

  "But,"  said  Candide,  "it  was  a  very  strange  adventure  we  met  with  at

Venice. It has never before been seen or heard that six dethroned kings have

supped together at a public inn."

  "It is not more extraordinary," said Martin, "than most of the things that

have happened to us. It is a very common thing for kings to be dethroned;

and as for the honour we have had of supping in their company, it is a trifle

not worth our attention."

  No sooner had Candide got on board the vessel than he flew to his old

valet and friend Cacambo, and tenderly embraced him.

  "Well,"  said  he,  "what  news  of  Cunegonde?  Is  she  still  a  prodigy  of

beauty? Does she love me still? How is she? Thou hast doubtless bought her

a palace at Constantinople?"

  "My dear master," answered Cacambo, "Cunegonde washes dishes on the

banks of the Propontis, in the service of a prince, who has very few dishes to

wash; she is a slave in the family of an ancient sovereign named Ragotsky,

[35] to whom the Grand Turk allows three crowns a day in his exile. But

what is worse still is, that she has lost her beauty and has become horribly

ugly."

  "Well, handsome or ugly," replied Candide, "I am a man of honour, and it

is my duty to love her still. But how came she to be reduced to so abject a

state with the five or six millions that you took to her?"

  "Ah!"  said  Cacambo,  "was  I  not  to  give  two  millions  to  Senor  Don

Fernando  d'Ibaraa,  y  Figueora,  y  Mascarenes,  y  Lampourdos,  y  Souza,

Governor of Buenos Ayres, for permitting Miss Cunegonde to come away?

And did not a corsair bravely rob us of all the rest? Did not this corsair carry

us  to  Cape  Matapan,  to  Milo,  to  Nicaria,  to  Samos,  to  Petra,  to  the

Dardanelles, to Marmora, to Scutari? Cunegonde and the old woman serve

the prince I now mentioned to you, and I am slave to the dethroned Sultan."

  "What a series of shocking calamities!" cried Candide. "But after all, I

have some diamonds left; and I may easily pay Cunegonde's ransom. Yet it is

a pity that she is grown so ugly."

  Then, turning towards Martin: "Who do you think," said he, "is most to bepitied-the Sultan Achmet, the Emperor Ivan, King Charles Edward, or I?"

  "How should I know!" answered Martin. "I must see into your hearts to be

able to tell."

  "Ah!" said Candide, "if Pangloss were here, he could tell."

  "I know not," said Martin, "in what sort of scales your Pangloss would

weigh the misfortunes of mankind and set a just estimate on their sorrows.

All that I can presume to say is, that there are millions of people upon earth

who have a hundred times more to complain of than King Charles Edward,

the Emperor Ivan, or the Sultan Achmet."

  "That may well be," said Candide.

  In a few days they reached the Bosphorus, and Candide began by paying a

very  high  ransom  for  Cacambo.  Then  without  losing  time,  he  and  his

companions went on board a galley, in order to search on the banks of the

Propontis for his Cunegonde, however ugly she might have become.

  Among the crew there were two slaves who rowed very badly, and to

whose bare shoulders the Levantine captain would now and then apply blows

from a bull's pizzle. Candide, from a natural impulse, looked at these two

slaves more attentively than at the other oarsmen, and approached them with

pity. Their features though greatly disfigured, had a slight resemblance to

those of Pangloss and the unhappy Jesuit and Westphalian Baron, brother to

Miss Cunegonde. This moved and saddened him. He looked at them still

more attentively.

  "Indeed," said he to Cacambo, "if I had not seen Master Pangloss hanged,

and if I had not had the misfortune to kill the Baron, I should think it was

they that were rowing."

  At the names of the Baron and of Pangloss, the two galley-slaves uttered a

loud cry, held fast by the seat, and let drop their oars. The captain ran up to

them and redoubled his blows with the bull's pizzle.

  "Stop! stop! sir," cried Candide. "I will give you what money you please."

  "What! it is Candide!" said one of the slaves.

  "What! it is Candide!" said the other.

  "Do I dream?" cried Candide; "am I awake? or am I on board a galley? Isthis the Baron whom I killed? Is this Master Pangloss whom I saw hanged?"

  "It is we! it is we!" answered they.

  "Well! is this the great philosopher?" said Martin.

  "Ah! captain," said Candide, "what ransom will you take for Monsieur de

Thunder-ten-Tronckh, one of the first barons of the empire, and for Monsieur

Pangloss, the profoundest metaphysician in Germany?"

  "Dog of a Christian," answered the Levantine captain, "since these two

dogs of Christian slaves are barons and metaphysicians, which I doubt not are

high dignities in their country, you shall give me fifty thousand sequins."

  "You shall have them, sir. Carry me back at once to Constantinople, and

you  shall  receive  the  money  directly.  But  no;  carry  me  first  to  Miss

Cunegonde."

  Upon the first proposal made by Candide, however, the Levantine captain

had already tacked about, and made the crew ply their oars quicker than a

bird cleaves the air.

  Candide embraced the Baron and Pangloss a hundred times.

  "And how happened it, my dear Baron, that I did not kill you? And, my

dear Pangloss, how came you to life again after being hanged? And why are

you both in a Turkish galley?"

  "And it is true that my dear sister is in this country?" said the Baron.

  "Yes," answered Cacambo.

  "Then I behold, once more, my dear Candide," cried Pangloss.

  Candide  presented  Martin  and  Cacambo  to  them;  they  embraced  each

other, and all spoke at once. The galley flew; they were already in the port.

Instantly Candide sent for a Jew, to whom he sold for fifty thousand sequins a

diamond  worth  a  hundred  thousand,  though  the  fellow  swore  to  him  by

Abraham that he could give him no more. He immediately paid the ransom

for  the  Baron  and  Pangloss.  The  latter  threw  himself  at  the  feet  of  his

deliverer, and bathed them with his tears; the former thanked him with a nod,

and promised to return him the money on the first opportunity.

  "But is it indeed possible that my sister can be in Turkey?" said he.  "Nothing is more possible," said Cacambo, "since she scours the dishes in

the service of a Transylvanian prince."

  Candide sent directly for two Jews and sold them some more diamonds,

and then they all set out together in another galley to deliver Cunegonde from

slavery.


  CHAPTER XXVIII

  WHAT  HAPPENED  TO  CANDIDE,  CUNEGONDE,  PANGLOSS,

MARTIN, ETC.


  "I ask your pardon once more," said Candide to the Baron, "your pardon,

reverend father, for having run you through the body."

  "Say no more about it," answered the Baron. "I was a little too hasty, I

own, but since you wish to know by what fatality I came to be a galley-slave

I will inform you. After I had been cured by the surgeon of the college of the

wound you gave me, I was attacked and carried off by a party of Spanish

troops, who confined me in prison at Buenos Ayres at the very time my sister

was setting out thence. I asked leave to return to Rome to the General of my

Order. I was appointed chaplain to the French Ambassador at Constantinople.

I had not been eight days in this employment when one evening I met with a

young Ichoglan, who was a very handsome fellow. The weather was warm.

The young man wanted to bathe, and I took this opportunity of bathing also. I

did not know that it was a capital crime for a Christian to be found naked

with a young Mussulman. A cadi ordered me a hundred blows on the soles of

the feet, and condemned me to the galleys. I do not think there ever was a

greater act of injustice. But I should be glad to know how my sister came to

be  scullion  to  a  Transylvanian  prince  who  has  taken  shelter  among  the

Turks."

  "But you, my dear Pangloss," said Candide, "how can it be that I behold

you again?"

  "It is true," said Pangloss, "that you saw me hanged. I should have been

burnt, but you may remember it rained exceedingly hard when they were

going to roast me; the storm was so violent that they despaired of lighting thefire, so I was hanged because they could do no better. A surgeon purchased

my  body,  carried  me  home,  and  dissected  me.  He  began  with  making  a

crucial incision on me from the navel to the clavicula. One could not have

been worse hanged than I was. The executioner of the Holy Inquisition was a

sub-deacon, and knew how to burn people marvellously well, but he was not

accustomed to hanging. The cord was wet and did not slip properly, and

besides it was badly tied; in short, I still drew my breath, when the crucial

incision made me give such a frightful scream that my surgeon fell flat upon

his back, and imagining that he had been dissecting the devil he ran away,

dying with fear, and fell down the staircase in his flight. His wife, hearing the

noise, flew from the next room. She saw me stretched out upon the table with

my crucial incision. She was seized with yet greater fear than her husband,

fled, and tumbled over him. When they came to themselves a little, I heard

the wife say to her husband: 'My dear, how could you take it into your head

to dissect a heretic? Do you not know that these people always have the devil

in their bodies? I will go and fetch a priest this minute to exorcise him.' At

this proposal I shuddered, and mustering up what little courage I had still

remaining I cried out aloud, 'Have mercy on me!' At length the Portuguese

barber plucked up his spirits. He sewed up my wounds; his wife even nursed

me. I was upon my legs at the end of fifteen days. The barber found me a

place as lackey to a knight of Malta who was going to Venice, but finding

that my master had no money to pay me my wages I entered the service of a

Venetian merchant, and went with him to Constantinople. One day I took it

into my head to step into a mosque, where I saw an old Iman and a very

pretty  young  devotee  who  was  saying  her  paternosters.  Her  bosom  was

uncovered, and between her breasts she had a beautiful bouquet of tulips,

roses,  anemones,  ranunculus,  hyacinths,  and  auriculas.  She  dropped  her

bouquet; I picked it up, and presented it to her with a profound reverence. I

was so long in delivering it that the Iman began to get angry, and seeing that I

was a Christian he called out for help. They carried me before the cadi, who

ordered me a hundred lashes on the soles of the feet and sent me to the

galleys. I was chained to the very same galley and the same bench as the

young  Baron.  On  board  this  galley  there  were  four  young  men  from

Marseilles, five Neapolitan priests, and two monks from Corfu, who told us

similar  adventures  happened  daily.  The  Baron  maintained  that  he  had

suffered greater injustice than I, and I insisted that it was far more innocent totake up a bouquet and place it again on a woman's bosom than to be found

stark naked with an Ichoglan. We were continually disputing, and received

twenty lashes with a bull's pizzle when the concatenation of universal events

brought you to our galley, and you were good enough to ransom us."

  "Well,  my  dear  Pangloss,"  said  Candide  to  him,  "when  you  had  been

hanged, dissected, whipped, and were tugging at the oar, did you always

think that everything happens for the best?"

  "I  am  still  of  my  first  opinion,"  answered  Pangloss,  "for  I  am  a

philosopher and I cannot retract, especially as Leibnitz could never be wrong;

and besides, the pre-established harmony is the finest thing in the world, and

so is his plenum and materia subtilis."


  CHAPTER XXIX

  HOW  CANDIDE  FOUND  CUNEGONDE  AND  THE  OLD  WOMAN

AGAIN.


  While Candide, the Baron, Pangloss, Martin, and Cacambo were relating

their several adventures, were reasoning on the contingent or non-contingent

events of the universe, disputing on effects and causes, on moral and physical

evil, on liberty and necessity, and on the consolations a slave may feel even

on a Turkish galley, they arrived at the house of the Transylvanian prince on

the  banks  of  the  Propontis.  The  first  objects  which  met  their  sight  were

Cunegonde and the old woman hanging towels out to dry.

  The  Baron  paled  at  this  sight.  The  tender,  loving  Candide,  seeing  his

beautiful  Cunegonde  embrowned,  with  blood-shot  eyes,  withered  neck,

wrinkled  cheeks,  and  rough,  red  arms,  recoiled  three  paces,  seized  with

horror, and then advanced out of good manners. She embraced Candide and

her brother; they embraced the old woman, and Candide ransomed them both.

  There  was  a  small  farm  in  the  neighbourhood  which  the  old  woman

proposed to Candide to make a shift with till the company could be provided

for in a better manner. Cunegonde did not know she had grown ugly, for

nobody had told her of it; and she reminded Candide of his promise in so

positive a tone that the good man durst not refuse her. He therefore intimatedto the Baron that he intended marrying his sister.

  "I will not suffer," said the Baron, "such meanness on her part, and such

insolence on yours; I will never be reproached with this scandalous thing; my

sister's children would never be able to enter the church in Germany. No; my

sister shall only marry a baron of the empire."

  Cunegonde flung herself at his feet, and bathed them with her tears; still

he was inflexible.

  "Thou foolish fellow," said Candide; "I have delivered thee out of the

galleys, I have paid thy ransom, and thy sister's also; she was a scullion, and

is  very  ugly,  yet  I  am  so  condescending  as  to  marry  her;  and  dost  thou

pretend to oppose the match? I should kill thee again, were I only to consult

my anger."

  "Thou mayest kill me again," said the Baron, "but thou shalt not marry my

sister, at least whilst I am living."


  CHAPTER XXX

  THE CONCLUSION.


  At the bottom of his heart Candide had no wish to marry Cunegonde. But

the  extreme  impertinence  of  the  Baron  determined  him  to  conclude  the

match, and Cunegonde pressed him so strongly that he could not go from his

word. He consulted Pangloss, Martin, and the faithful Cacambo. Pangloss

drew up an excellent memorial, wherein he proved that the Baron had no

right over his sister, and that according to all the laws of the empire, she

might marry Candide with her left hand. Martin was for throwing the Baron

into the sea; Cacambo decided that it would be better to deliver him up again

to the captain of the galley, after which they thought to send him back to the

General Father of the Order at Rome by the first ship. This advice was well

received, the old woman approved it; they said not a word to his sister; the

thing was executed for a little money, and they had the double pleasure of

entrapping a Jesuit, and punishing the pride of a German baron.

  It is natural to imagine that after so many disasters Candide married, and

living  with  the  philosopher  Pangloss,  the  philosopher  Martin,  the  prudentCacambo, and the old woman, having besides brought so many diamonds

from the country of the ancient Incas, must have led a very happy life. But he

was so much imposed upon by the Jews that he had nothing left except his

small  farm;  his  wife  became  uglier  every  day,  more  peevish  and

unsupportable;  the  old  woman  was  infirm  and  even  more  fretful  than

Cunegonde. Cacambo, who worked in the garden, and took vegetables for

sale to Constantinople, was fatigued with hard work, and cursed his destiny.

Pangloss  was  in  despair  at  not  shining  in  some  German  university.  For

Martin, he was firmly persuaded that he would be as badly off elsewhere, and

therefore  bore  things  patiently.  Candide,  Martin,  and  Pangloss  sometimes

disputed about morals and metaphysics. They often saw passing under the

windows of their farm boats full of Effendis, Pashas, and Cadis, who were

going  into  banishment  to  Lemnos,  Mitylene,  or  Erzeroum.  And  they  saw

other Cadis, Pashas, and Effendis coming to supply the place of the exiles,

and afterwards exiled in their turn. They saw heads decently impaled for

presentation  to  the  Sublime  Porte.  Such  spectacles  as  these  increased  the

number of their dissertations; and when they did not dispute time hung so

heavily upon their hands, that one day the old woman ventured to say to

them:

  "I want to know which is worse, to be ravished a hundred times by negro

pirates, to have a buttock cut off, to run the gauntlet among the Bulgarians, to

be  whipped  and  hanged  at  an  auto-da-fé,  to  be  dissected,  to  row  in  the

galleys-in short, to go through all the miseries we have undergone, or to stay

here and have nothing to do?"

  "It is a great question," said Candide.

  This  discourse  gave  rise  to  new  reflections,  and  Martin  especially

concluded that man was born to live either in a state of distracting inquietude

or of lethargic disgust. Candide did not quite agree to that, but he affirmed

nothing. Pangloss owned that he had always suffered horribly, but as he had

once  asserted  that  everything  went  wonderfully  well,  he  asserted  it  still,

though he no longer believed it.

  What  helped  to  confirm  Martin  in  his  detestable  principles,  to  stagger

Candide more than ever, and to puzzle Pangloss, was that one day they saw

Paquette and Friar Giroflée land at the farm in extreme misery. They hadsoon  squandered  their  three  thousand  piastres,  parted,  were  reconciled,

quarrelled again, were thrown into gaol, had escaped, and Friar Giroflée had

at length become Turk. Paquette continued her trade wherever she went, but

made nothing of it.

  "I foresaw," said Martin to Candide, "that your presents would soon be

dissipated,  and  only  make  them  the  more  miserable.  You  have  rolled  in

millions of money, you and Cacambo; and yet you are not happier than Friar

Giroflée and Paquette."

  "Ha!"  said  Pangloss  to  Paquette,  "Providence  has  then  brought  you

amongst us again, my poor child! Do you know that you cost me the tip of

my nose, an eye, and an ear, as you may see? What a world is this!"

  And now this new adventure set them philosophising more than ever.

  In  the  neighbourhood  there  lived  a  very  famous  Dervish  who  was

esteemed the best philosopher in all Turkey, and they went to consult him.

Pangloss was the speaker.

  "Master," said he, "we come to beg you to tell why so strange an animal as

man was made."

  "With what meddlest thou?" said the Dervish; "is it thy business?"

  "But, reverend father," said Candide, "there is horrible evil in this world."

  "What  signifies  it,"  said  the  Dervish,  "whether  there  be  evil  or  good?

When his highness sends a ship to Egypt, does he trouble his head whether

the mice on board are at their ease or not?"

  "What, then, must we do?" said Pangloss.

  "Hold your tongue," answered the Dervish.

  "I was in hopes," said Pangloss, "that I should reason with you a little

about causes and effects, about the best of possible worlds, the origin of evil,

the nature of the soul, and the pre-established harmony."

  At these words, the Dervish shut the door in their faces.

  During this conversation, the news was spread that two Viziers and the

Mufti had been strangled at Constantinople, and that several of their friends

had  been  impaled.  This  catastrophe  made  a  great  noise  for  some  hours.Pangloss, Candide, and Martin, returning to the little farm, saw a good old

man taking the fresh air at his door under an orange bower. Pangloss, who

was as inquisitive as he was argumentative, asked the old man what was the

name of the strangled Mufti.

  "I do not know," answered the worthy man, "and I have not known the

name of any Mufti, nor of any Vizier. I am entirely ignorant of the event you

mention; I presume in general that they who meddle with the administration

of public affairs die sometimes miserably, and that they deserve it; but I never

trouble my head about what is transacting at Constantinople; I content myself

with sending there for sale the fruits of the garden which I cultivate."

  Having said these words, he invited the strangers into his house; his two

sons and two daughters presented them with several sorts of sherbet, which

they  made  themselves,  with  Kaimak  enriched  with  the  candied-peel  of

citrons, with oranges, lemons, pine-apples, pistachio-nuts, and Mocha coffee

unadulterated with the bad coffee of Batavia or the American islands. After

which the two daughters of the honest Mussulman perfumed the strangers'

beards.

  "You must have a vast and magnificent estate," said Candide to the Turk.

  "I  have  only  twenty  acres,"  replied  the  old  man;  "I  and  my  children

cultivate them; our labour preserves us from three great evils-weariness, vice,

and want."

  Candide, on his way home, made profound reflections on the old man's

conversation.

  "This honest Turk," said he to Pangloss and Martin, "seems to be in a

situation far preferable to that of the six kings with whom we had the honour

of supping."

  "Grandeur,"  said  Pangloss,  "is  extremely  dangerous  according  to  the

testimony  of  philosophers.  For,  in  short,  Eglon,  King  of  Moab,  was

assassinated by Ehud; Absalom was hung by his hair, and pierced with three

darts; King Nadab, the son of Jeroboam, was killed by Baasa; King Ela by

Zimri;  Ahaziah  by  Jehu;  Athaliah  by  Jehoiada;  the  Kings  Jehoiakim,

Jeconiah, and Zedekiah, were led into captivity. You know how perished

Crœsus,  Astyages,  Darius,  Dionysius  of  Syracuse,  Pyrrhus,  Perseus,Hannibal,  Jugurtha,  Ariovistus,  Cæsar,  Pompey,  Nero,  Otho,  Vitellius,

Domitian, Richard II. of England, Edward II., Henry VI., Richard III., Mary

Stuart, Charles I., the three Henrys of France, the Emperor Henry IV.! You

know"

  "I know also," said Candide, "that we must cultivate our garden."

  "You  are  right,"  said  Pangloss,  "for  when  man  was  first  placed  in  the

Garden of Eden, he was put there ut operaretur eum, that he might cultivate

it; which shows that man was not born to be idle."

  "Let us work," said Martin, "without disputing; it is the only way to render

life tolerable."

  The whole little society entered into this laudable design, according to

their  different  abilities.  Their  little  plot  of  land  produced  plentiful  crops.

Cunegonde was, indeed, very ugly, but she became an excellent pastry cook;

Paquette worked at embroidery; the old woman looked after the linen. They

were all, not excepting Friar Giroflée, of some service or other; for he made a

good joiner, and became a very honest man.

  Pangloss sometimes said to Candide:

  "There is a concatenation of events in this best of all possible worlds: for if

you  had  not  been  kicked  out  of  a  magnificent  castle  for  love  of  Miss

Cunegonde:  if  you  had  not  been  put  into  the  Inquisition:  if  you  had  not

walked over America: if you had not stabbed the Baron: if you had not lost

all your sheep from the fine country of El Dorado: you would not be here

eating preserved citrons and pistachio-nuts."

  "All  that  is  very  well,"  answered  Candide,  "but  let  us  cultivate  our

garden."


  FOOTNOTES:


  [1] P. 2. The name Pangloss is derived from two Greek words signifying

"all" and "language."

  [2] P. 8. The Abares were a tribe of Tartars settled on the shores of the

Danube, who later dwelt in part of Circassia.  [3]  P.  15.  Venereal  disease  was  said  to  have  been  first  brought  from

Hispaniola, in the West Indies, by some followers of Columbus who were

later employed in the siege of Naples. From this latter circumstance it was at

one time known as the Neapolitan disease.

  [4]  P.  19.  The  great  earthquake  of  Lisbon  happened  on  the  first  of

November, 1755.

  [5] P. 20. Such was the aversion of the Japanese to the Christian faith that

they compelled Europeans trading with their islands to trample on the cross,

renounce all marks of Christianity, and swear that it was not their religion.

See chap. xi. of the voyage to Laputa in Swift's Gulliver's Travels.

  [6]  P.  23.  This  auto-da-fé  actually  took  place,  some  months  after  the

earthquake, on June 20, 1756.

  [7] P. 23. The rejection of bacon convicting them, of course, of being

Jews, and therefore fitting victims for an auto-da-fé.

  [8] P. 24. The San-benito was a kind of loose over-garment painted with

flames,  figures  of  devils,  the  victim's  own  portrait,  etc.,  worn  by  persons

condemned  to  death  by  the  Inquisition  when  going  to  the  stake  on  the

occasion of an auto-da-fé. Those who expressed repentance for their errors

wore a garment of the same kind covered with flames directed downwards,

while that worn by Jews, sorcerers, and renegades bore a St. Andrew's cross

before and behind.

  [9] P. 26. "This Notre-Dame is of wood; every year she weeps on the day

of  her  fête,  and  the  people  weep  also.  One  day  the  preacher,  seeing  a

carpenter with dry eyes, asked him how it was that he did not dissolve in

tears when the Holy Virgin wept. 'Ah, my reverend father,' replied he, 'it is I

who refastened her in her niche yesterday. I drove three great nails through

her behind; it is then she would have wept if she had been able.'"-Voltaire,

Mélanges.

  [10] P. 42. The following posthumous note of Voltaire's was first added to

M. Beuchot's edition of his works issued in 1829; "See the extreme discretion

of the author; there has not been up to the present any Pope named Urban X.;

he feared to give a bastard to a known Pope. What circumspection! What

delicacy of conscience!" The last Pope Urban was the eighth, and he died in1644.

  [11] P. 45. Muley-Ismael was Emperor of Morocco from 1672 to 1727,

and was a notoriously cruel tyrant.

  [12] P. 47. "Oh, what a misfortune to be an eunuch!"

  [13] P. 48. Carlo Broschi, called Farinelli, an Italian singer, born at Naples

in 1705, without being exactly Minister, governed Spain under Ferdinand

VI.; he died in 1782. He has been made one of the chief persons in one of the

comic operas of MM. Auber and Scribe.

  [14] P. 53. Jean Robeck, a Swede, who was born in 1672, will be found

mentioned in Rousseau's Nouvelle Héloïse. He drowned himself in the Weser

at Bremen in 1729, and was the author of a Latin treatise on voluntary death,

first printed in 1735.

  [15] P. 60. A spontoon was a kind of half-pike, a military weapon carried

by officers of infantry and used as a medium for signalling orders to the

regiment.

  [16] P. 64. Later Voltaire substituted the name of the Father Croust for

that of Didrie. Of Croust he said in the Dictionnaire Philosophique that he

was "the most brutal of the Society."

  [17] P. 68. By the Journal of Trevoux Voltaire meant a critical periodical

printed by the Jesuits at Trevoux under the title of Mémoires pour servir à

l'Historie des Sciences et des Beaux-Arts. It existed from 1701 until 1767,

during which period its title underwent many changes.

  [18] P. 76. It has been suggested that Voltaire, in speaking of red sheep,

referred to the llama, a South American ruminant allied to the camel. These

animals are sometimes of a reddish colour, and were notable as pack-carriers

and for their fleetness.

  [19] P. 78. The first English translator curiously gives "a tourene of bouilli

that weighed two hundred pounds," as the equivalent of "un contour bouilli

qui pesait deux cent livres." The French editor of the 1869 reprint points out

that the South American vulture, or condor, is meant; the name of this bird, it

may be added, is taken from "cuntur," that given it by the aborigines.

  [20] P. 90. Spanish half-crowns.  [21]  P.  99.  Socinians;  followers  of  the  teaching  of  Lalius  and  Faustus

Socinus (16th century), which denied the doctrine of the Trinity, the deity of

Christ, the personality of the devil, the native and total depravity of man, the

vicarious  atonement  and  eternal  punishment.  The  Socinians  are  now

represented  by  the  Unitarians.  Manicheans;  followers  of  Manes  or

Manichæus  (3rd  century),  a  Persian  who  maintained  that  there  are  two

principles,  the  one  good  and  the  other  evil,  each  equally  powerful  in  the

government of the world.

  [22] P. 107. In the 1759 editions, in place of the long passage in brackets

from  here  to  page  215,  there  was  only  the  following:  "'Sir,'  said  the

Perigordian Abbé to him, 'have you noticed that young person who has so

roguish a face and so fine a figure? You may have her for ten thousand francs

a month, and fifty thousand crowns in diamonds.' 'I have only a day or two to

give her,' answered Candide, 'because I have a rendezvous at Venice.' In the

evening after supper the insinuating Perigordian redoubled his politeness and

attentions."

  [23] P. 108. The play referred to is supposed to be "Le Comte d'Essex," by

Thomas Corneille.

  [24]  P.  108.  In  France  actors  were  at  one  time  looked  upon  as

excommunicated  persons,  not  worthy  of  burial  in  holy  ground  or  with

Christian  rites.  In  1730  the  "honours  of  sepulture"  were  refused  to

Mademoiselle  Lecouvreur  (doubtless  the  Miss  Monime  of  this  passage).

Voltaire's miscellaneous works contain a paper on the matter.

  [25] P. 109. Élie-Catherine Fréron was a French critic (1719-1776) who

incurred the enmity of Voltaire. In 1752 Fréron, in Lettres sur quelques écrits

du temps, wrote pointedly of Voltaire as one who chose to be all things to all

men, and Voltaire retaliated by references such as these in Candide.

  [26] P. 111. Gabriel Gauchat (1709-1779), French ecclesiastical writer,

was author of a number of works on religious subjects.

  [27] P. 112. Nicholas Charles Joseph Trublet (1697-1770) was a French

writer whose criticism of Voltaire was revenged in passages such as this one

in Candide, and one in the Pauvre Diable beginning:  L'abbé Trublet avait alors le rage

  D'être à Paris un petit personage.

  [28] P. 120. Damiens, who attempted the life of Louis XV. in 1757, was

born at Arras, capital of Artois (Atrébatie).

  [29] P. 120. On May 14, 1610, Ravaillac assassinated Henry VI.

  [30] P. 120. On December 27, 1594, Jean Châtel attempted to assassinate

Henry IV.

  [31] P. 122. This same curiously inept criticism of the war which cost

France  her  American  provinces  occurs  in  Voltaire's  Memoirs,  wherein  he

says, "In 1756 England made a piratical war upon France for some acres of

snow." See also his Précis du Siècle de Louis XV.

  [32] P. 123. Admiral Byng was shot on March 14, 1757.

  [33] P. 129. Commenting upon this passage, M. Sarcey says admirably:

"All is there! In those ten lines Voltaire has gathered all the griefs and all the

terrors of these creatures; the picture is admirable for its truth and power! But

do you not feel the pity and sympathy of the painter? Here irony becomes

sad,  and  in  a  way  an  avenger.  Voltaire  cries  out  with  horror  against  the

society which throws some of its members into such an abyss. He has his

'Bartholomew' fever; we tremble with him through contagion."

  [34] P. 142. The following particulars of the six monarchs may prove not

uninteresting. Achmet III. (b. 1673, d. 1739) was dethroned in 1730. Ivan VI.

(b.  1740,  d.  1762)  was  dethroned  in  1741.  Charles  Edward  Stuart,  the

Pretender (b. 1720, d. 1788). Auguste III. (b. 1696, d. 1763). Stanislaus (b.

1682,  d.  1766).  Theodore  (b.  1690,  d.  1755).  It  will  be  observed  that,

although quite impossible for the six kings ever to have met, five of them

might have been made to do so without any anachronism.

  [35] P. 149. François Leopold Ragotsky (1676-1735).From Love to Friendship

 

  Voltaire

  From Love to Friendship

  Published in 1901

Translated by William F. Fleming 


  IF YOU would have me love once more,

  The blissful age of love restore;

  From wine's free joys, and lovers' cares,

  Relentless time, who no man spares,

  Urges me quickly to retire,

  And no more to such bliss aspire.

  From such austerity exact,

  Let's, if we can, some good extract;

  Whose way of thinking with this age

  Suits not, can ne'er be deemed a sage.

  Let sprightly youth its follies gay,

  Its follies amiable display;

  Life to two moments is confined,

  Let one to wisdom be consigned.

  You sweet delusions of my mind,

  Still to my ruling passion kind,

  Which always brought a sure relief

  To life's accurst companion, grief.

  Will you forever from me fly,

  And must I joyless, friendless die?  No mortal e'er resigns his breath

  I see, without a double death;

  Who loves, and is beloved no more,

  His hapless fate may well deplore;

  Life's loss may easily be borne,

  Of love bereft man is forlorn.

  'Twas thus those pleasures I lamented,

  Which I so oft in youth repented;

  My soul replete with soft desire,

  Vainly regretted youthful fire.

  But friendship then, celestial maid,

  From heaven descended to my aid;

  Less lively than the amorous flame,

  Although her tenderness the same.

  The charms of friendship I admired,

  My soul was with new beauty fired;

  I then made one in friendship's train,

  But destitute of love, complain.In Camp Before Philippsburg, July 3, 1734  

 

  Voltaire

  In Camp Before Philippsburg, July 3, 1734

  Published in 1901 

Translated by William F. Fleming


  WITHOUT a bed we now sleep sound

  And take our meals upon the ground;

  And though the blazing atmosphere

  Must dreadful to the eye appear,

  The air though roaring cannons rend

  While warriors with fierce rage contend,

  The thoughtless French drink, laugh, and sing,

  And with their mirth the heavens ring;

  The walls of Philippsburg shall burn,

  And all her towers to ashes turn

  By fifty thousand Alexanders,

  Who all deserve to be commanders,

  Though they receive the paltry pay

  Of only four poor sous a day.

  Lavish of life, with high delight

  I see them rushing to the fight;

  They all appear both gay and jolly,

  Quite covered o'er with fame and folly.

  The Phantom, which we Glory name,

  Spurs them to the pursuit of fame;  With threat'ning eye, and front all o'er

  Bedusted, marching still before,

  She holds a trumpet in her hand

  To sound to arms, and cheer the band,

  And loudly sings, with voice sonorous,

  Catches, which they repeat in chorus.

  Oh! people brilliant, gay, and vain,

  Who drag with patience glory's chain,

  'Tis great, an honorable grave

  To seek, Eugene and death to brave.

  But what will be your mighty prize?

  What from your prowess will arise?

  Regret your blood, in vain you spilt it;

  At Paris cuckolded, or jilted.Letters on England

 

  Voltaire

  Letters on England

  Published in 1778


  TABLE

  INTRODUCTION

  LETTER I.

  ON THE QUAKERS

  LETTER II.

  ON THE QUAKERS

  LETTER III.

  ON THE QUAKERS

  LETTER IV.

  ON THE QUAKERS

  LETTER V.

  ON THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND

  LETTER VI.

  ON THE PRESBYTERIANS

  LETTER VII.

  ON THE SOCINIANS, OR ARIANS, OR ANTITRINITARIANS

  LETTER VIII.

  ON THE PARLIAMENT

  LETTER IX.

  ON THE GOVERNMENT

  LETTER X.  ON TRADE

  LETTER XI.

  ON INOCULATION

  LETTER XII.

  ON THE LORD BACON

  LETTER XIII.

  ON MR. LOCKE

  LETTER XIV.

  ON DESCARTES AND SIR ISAAC NEWTON

  LETTER XV.

  ON ATTRACTION

  LETTER XVI.

  ON SIR ISAAC NEWTON’S OPTICS

  LETTER XVII.

  ON  INFINITES  IN  GEOMETRY,  AND  SIR  ISAAC  NEWTON’S

CHRONOLOGY

  LETTER XVIII.

  ON TRAGEDY

  LETTER XIX.

  ON COMEDY

  LETTER XX.

  ON  SUCH  OF  THE  NOBILITY  AS  CULTIVATE  THE  BELLES

LETTRES

  LETTER XXI.

  ON THE EARL OF ROCHESTER AND MR. WALLER

  LETTER XXII.

  ON MR. POPE AND SOME OTHER FAMOUS POETS  LETTER XXIII.

  ON  THE  REGARD  THAT  OUGHT  TO  BE  SHOWN  TO  MEN  OF

LETTERS

  LETTER XXIV.

  ON THE ROYAL SOCIETY AND OTHER ACADEMIES


  INTRODUCTION


  François  Marie  Arouet,  who  called  himself  Voltaire,  was  the  son  of

François Arouet of Poitou, who lived in Paris, had given up his office of

notary two years before the birth of this his third son, and obtained some

years afterwards a treasurer’s office in the Chambre des Comptes. Voltaire

was born in the year 1694. He lived until within ten or eleven years of the

outbreak  of  the  Great  French  Revolution,  and  was  a  chief  leader  in  the

movement of thought that preceded the Revolution. Though he lived to his

eighty-fourth year, Voltaire was born with a weak body. His brother Armand,

eight years his senior, became a Jansenist. Voltaire when ten years old was

placed with the Jesuits in the Collège Louis-le-Grand. There he was taught

during seven years, and his genius was encouraged in its bent for literature;

skill in speaking and in writing being especially fostered in the system of

education which the Jesuits had planned to produce capable men who by

voice and pen could give a reason for the faith they held. Verses written for

an invalid soldier at the age of eleven won for young Voltaire the friendship

of Ninon l’Enclos, who encouraged him to go on writing verses. She died

soon afterwards, and remembered him with a legacy of two thousand livres

for  purchase  of  books. He  wrote  in  his  lively  school-days  a  tragedy  that

afterwards he burnt. At the age of seventeen he left the Collège Louis-le-

Grand, where he said afterwards that he had been taught nothing but Latin

and the Stupidities. He was then sent to the law schools, and saw life in Paris

as a gay young poet who, with all his brilliant liveliness, had an aptitude for

looking on the tragic side of things, and one of whose first poems was an

“Ode on the Misfortunes of Life.” His mother died when he was twenty.

Voltaire’s father thought him a fool for his versifying, and attached him as

secretary to the Marquis of Châteauneuf; when he went as ambassador to theHague. In December, 1713, he was dismissed for his irregularities. In Paris

his unsteadiness and his addiction to literature caused his father to rejoice in

getting  him  housed  in  a  country  château  with  M.  de  Caumartin. M.  de

Caumartin’s father talked with such enthusiasm of Henri IV. and Sully that

Voltaire planned the writing of what became his Henriade, and his “History

of the Age of Louis XIV.,” who died on the 1st of September, 1715.

  Under the regency that followed, Voltaire got into trouble again and again

through the sharpness of his pen, and at last, accused of verse that satirised

the Regent, he was locked up-on the 17th of May, 1717-in the Bastille. There

he wrote the first two books of his Henriade, and finished a play on Œdipus,

which he had begun at the age of eighteen. He did not obtain full liberty until

the 12th of April, 1718, and it was at this time-with a clearly formed design

to associate the name he took with work of high attempt in literature-that

François Marie Arouet, aged twenty-four, first called himself Voltaire.

  Voltaire’s  Œdipe  was  played  with  success  in  November,  1718. A few

months later he was again banished from Paris, and finished the Henriade in

his retirement, as well as another play, Artémise, that was acted in February,

1720. Other  plays  followed. In  December,  1721,  Voltaire  visited  Lord

Bolingbroke, who was then an exile from England, at the Château of La

Source. There was now constant literary activity. From July to October, 1722,

Voltaire visited Holland with Madame de Rupelmonde. After a serious attack

of small-pox in November, 1723, Voltaire was active as a poet about the

Court. He was then in receipt of a pension of two thousand livres from the

king, and had inherited more than twice as much by the death of his father in

January, 1722. But in December, 1725, a quarrel, fastened upon him by the

Chevalier de Rohan, who had him waylaid and beaten, caused him to send a

challenge. For this he was arrested and lodged once more, in April, 1726, in

the Bastille. There he was detained a month; and his first act when he was

released was to ask for a passport to England.

  Voltaire left France, reached London in August, 1726, went as guest to the

house of a rich merchant at Wandsworth, and remained three years in this

country, from the age of thirty-two to the age of thirty-five. He was here

when George I. died, and George II. became king. He published here his

Henriade. He wrote here his “History of Charles XII.” He read “Gulliver’s

Travels” as a new book, and might have been present at the first night of TheBeggar’s Opera. He was here whet Sir Isaac Newton died.


  In 1731 he published at Rouen the Lettres sur les Anglais, which appeared

in England in 1733 in the volume from which they are here reprinted.


  H.M.


  LETTER I.

  ON THE QUAKERS


  I was of opinion that the doctrine and history of so extraordinary a people

were worthy the attention of the curious. To acquaint myself with them I

made  a  visit  to  one  of  the  most  eminent  Quakers  in  England,  who,  after

having traded thirty years, had the wisdom to prescribe limits to his fortune

and to his desires, and was settled in a little solitude not far from London.

Being come into it, I perceived a small but regularly built house, vastly neat,

but without the least pomp of furniture. The Quaker who owned it was a hale,

ruddy-complexioned old man, who had never been afflicted with sickness

because he had always been insensible to passions, and a perfect stranger to

intemperance. I never in my life saw a more noble or a more engaging aspect

than his. He was dressed like those of his persuasion, in a plain coat without

pleats  in  the  sides,  or  buttons  on  the  pockets  and  sleeves;  and  had  on  a

beaver, the brims of which were horizontal like those of our clergy. He did

not uncover himself when I appeared, and advanced towards me without once

stooping his body; but there appeared more politeness in the open, humane

air of his countenance, than in the custom of drawing one leg behind the

other, and taking that from the head which is made to cover it. “Friend,” says

he to me, “I perceive thou art a stranger, but if I can do anything for thee,

only tell me.” “Sir,” said I to him, bending forwards and advancing, as is

usual with us, one leg towards him, “I flatter myself that my just curiosity

will  not  give  you  the  least  offence,  and  that  you’ll  do  me  the  honour  to

inform me of the particulars of your religion.” “The people of thy country,”

replied the Quaker, “are too full of their bows and compliments, but I never

yet met with one of them who had so much curiosity as thyself. Come in, andlet us first dine together.” I still continued to make some very unseasonable

ceremonies, it not being easy to disengage one’s self at once from habits we

have been long used to; and after taking part in a frugal meal, which began

and ended with a prayer to God, I began to question my courteous host. I

opened  with  that  which  good  Catholics  have  more  than  once  made  to

Huguenots. “My dear sir,” said I, “were you ever baptised?” “I never was,”

replied the Quaker, “nor any of my brethren.” “Zounds!” say I to him, “you

are not Christians, then.” “Friend,” replies the old man in a soft tone of voice,

“swear not; we are Christians, and endeavour to be good Christians, but we

are not of opinion that the sprinkling water on a child’s head makes him a

Christian.” “Heavens!” say I, shocked at his impiety, “you have then forgot

that Christ was baptised by St. John.” “Friend,” replies the mild Quaker once

again, “swear not; Christ indeed was baptised by John, but He himself never

baptised anyone. We are the disciples of Christ, not of John.” I pitied very

much the sincerity of my worthy Quaker, and was absolutely for forcing him

to get himself christened. “Were that all,” replied he very gravely, “we would

submit cheerfully to baptism, purely in compliance with thy weakness, for we

don’t condemn any person who uses it; but then we think that those who

profess a religion of so holy, so spiritual a nature as that of Christ, ought to

abstain  to  the  utmost  of  their  power  from  the  Jewish  ceremonies.” “O

unaccountable!”  say  I:  “what!  baptism  a  Jewish  ceremony?” “Yes,  my

friend,” says he, “so truly Jewish, that a great many Jews use the baptism of

John to this day. Look into ancient authors, and thou wilt find that John only

revived this practice; and that it had been used by the Hebrews, long before

his time, in like manner as the Mahometans imitated the Ishmaelites in their

pilgrimages to Mecca. Jesus indeed submitted to the baptism of John, as He

had suffered Himself to be circumcised; but circumcision and the washing

with water ought to be abolished by the baptism of Christ, that baptism of the

Spirit, that ablution of the soul, which is the salvation of mankind. Thus the

forerunner said, ‘I indeed baptise you with water unto repentance; but He that

cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he

shall baptise you with the Holy Ghost and with fire.’ Likewise Paul, the great

apostle of the Gentiles, writes as follows to the Corinthians, ‘Christ sent me

not to baptise, but to preach the Gospel;’ and indeed Paul never baptised but

two  persons  with  water,  and  that  very  much  against  his  inclinations. He

circumcised  his  disciple  Timothy,  and  the  other  disciples  likewisecircumcised all who were willing to submit to that carnal ordinance. But art

thou circumcised?” added he. “I have not the honour to be so,” say I. “Well,

friend,”  continues  the  Quaker,  “thou  art  a  Christian  without  being

circumcised, and I am one without being baptised.” Thus did this pious man

make a wrong but very specious application of four or five texts of Scripture

which seemed to favour the tenets of his sect; but at the same time forgot

very sincerely an hundred texts which made directly against them. I had more

sense than to contest with him, since there is no possibility of convincing an

enthusiast. A man should never pretend to inform a lover of his mistress’s

faults, no more than one who is at law, of the badness of his cause; nor

attempt to win over a fanatic by strength of reasoning. Accordingly I waived

the subject.


  “Well,” said I to him, “what sort of a communion have you?” “We have

none like that thou hintest at among us,” replied he. “How! no communion?”

said I. “Only that spiritual one,” replied he, “of hearts.” He then began again

to throw out his texts of Scripture; and preached a most eloquent sermon

against  that  ordinance. He  harangued  in  a  tone  as  though  he  had  been

inspired, to prove that the sacraments were merely of human invention, and

that the word “sacrament” was not once mentioned in the Gospel. “Excuse,”

said he, “my ignorance, for I have not employed a hundredth part of the

arguments which might be brought to prove the truth of our religion, but

these thou thyself mayest peruse in the Exposition of our Faith written by

Robert Barclay. It is one of the best pieces that ever was penned by man; and

as our adversaries confess it to be of dangerous tendency, the arguments in it

must necessarily be very convincing.” I promised to peruse this piece, and

my Quaker imagined he had already made a convert of me. He afterwards

gave me an account in few words of some singularities which make this sect

the contempt of others. “Confess,” said he, “that it was very difficult for thee

to refrain from laughter, when I answered all thy civilities without uncovering

my head, and at the same time said ‘thee’ and ‘thou’ to thee. However, thou

appearest to me too well read not to know that in Christ’s time no nation was

so ridiculous as to put the plural number for the singular. Augustus Cæsar

himself was spoken to in such phrases as these: ‘I love thee,’ ‘I beseech thee,’

‘I thank thee;’ but he did not allow any person to call him ‘Domine,’ sir. Itwas not till many ages after that men would have the word ‘you,’ as though

they  were  double,  instead  of  ‘thou’  employed  in  speaking  to  them;  and

usurped the flattering titles of lordship, of eminence, and of holiness, which

mere worms bestow on other worms by assuring them that they are with a

most  profound  respect,  and  an  infamous  falsehood,  their  most  obedient

humble  servants. It  is  to  secure  ourselves  more  strongly  from  such  a

shameless traffic of lies and flattery, that we ‘thee’ and ‘thou’ a king with the

same freedom as we do a beggar, and salute no person; we owing nothing to

mankind but charity, and to the laws respect and obedience.


  “Our  apparel  is  also  somewhat  different  from  that  of  others,  and  this

purely, that it may be a perpetual warning to us not to imitate them. Others

wear  the  badges  and  marks  of  their  several  dignities,  and  we  those  of

Christian humility. We fly from all assemblies of pleasure, from diversions of

every kind, and from places where gaming is practised; and indeed our case

would be very deplorable, should we fill with such levities as those I have

mentioned  the  heart  which  ought  to  be  the  habitation  of  God. We never

swear, not even in a court of justice, being of opinion that the most holy name

of God ought not to be prostituted in the miserable contests betwixt man and

man. When we are obliged to appear before a magistrate upon other people’s

account (for law-suits are unknown among the Friends), we give evidence to

the truth by sealing it with our yea or nay; and the judges believe us on our

bare affirmation, whilst so many other Christians forswear themselves on the

holy Gospels. We never war or fight in any case; but it is not that we are

afraid, for so far from shuddering at the thoughts of death, we on the contrary

bless the moment which unites us with the Being of Beings; but the reason of

our not using the outward sword is, that we are neither wolves, tigers, nor

mastiffs, but men and Christians. Our God, who has commanded us to love

our enemies, and to suffer without repining, would certainly not permit us to

cross the seas, merely because murderers clothed in scarlet, and wearing caps

two foot high, enlist citizens by a noise made with two little sticks on an ass’s

skin extended. And when, after a victory is gained, the whole city of London

is illuminated; when the sky is in a blaze with fireworks, and a noise is heard

in the air, of thanksgivings, of bells, of organs, and of the cannon, we groan

in silence, and are deeply affected with sadness of spirit and brokenness ofheart, for the sad havoc which is the occasion of those public rejoicings.”


  LETTER II.

  ON THE QUAKERS


  Such was the substance of the conversation I had with this very singular

person; but I was greatly surprised to see him come the Sunday following and

take me with him to the Quakers’ meeting. There are several of these in

London, but that which he carried me to stands near the famous pillar called

The Monument. The brethren were already assembled at my entering it with

my guide. There might be about four hundred men and three hundred women

in the meeting. The women hid their faces behind their fans, and the men

were covered with their broad-brimmed hats. All were seated, and the silence

was universal. I passed through them, but did not perceive so much as one lift

up his eyes to look at me. This silence lasted a quarter of an hour, when at

last one of them rose up, took off his hat, and, after making a variety of wry

faces and groaning in a most lamentable manner, he, partly from his nose and

partly  from  his  mouth,  threw  out  a  strange,  confused  jumble  of  words

(borrowed, as he imagined, from the Gospel) which neither himself nor any

of  his  hearers  understood. When  this  distorter  had  ended  his  beautiful

soliloquy,  and  that  the  stupid,  but  greatly  edified,  congregation  were

separated, I asked my friend how it was possible for the judicious part of their

assembly to suffer such a babbling? “We are obliged,” says he, “to suffer it,

because no one knows when a man rises up to hold forth whether he will be

moved  by  the  Spirit  or  by  folly. In  this  doubt  and  uncertainty  we  listen

patiently to everyone; we even allow our women to hold forth. Two or three

of these are often inspired at one and the same time, and it is then that a most

charming noise is heard in the Lord’s house.” “You have, then, no priests?”

say I to him. “No, no, friend,” replies the Quaker, “to our great happiness.”

Then opening one of the Friends’ books, as he called it, he read the following

words  in  an  emphatic  tone:-“‘God  forbid  we  should  presume  to  ordain

anyone to receive the Holy Spirit on the Lord’s Day to the prejudice of the

rest of the brethren.’ Thanks to the Almighty, we are the only people upon

earth that have no priests. Wouldst thou deprive us of so happy a distinction?

Why should we abandon our babe to mercenary nurses, when we ourselveshave milk enough for it? These mercenary creatures would soon domineer in

our houses and destroy both the mother and the babe. God has said, ‘Freely

you have received, freely give.’ Shall we, after these words, cheapen, as it

were, the Gospel, sell the Holy Ghost, and make of an assembly of Christians

a mere shop of traders? We don’t pay a set of men clothed in black to assist

our poor, to bury our dead, or to preach to the brethren. These offices are all

of too tender a nature for us ever to entrust them to others.” “But how is it

possible  for  you,”  said  I,  with  some  warmth,  “to  know  whether  your

discourse is really inspired by the Almighty?” “Whosoever,” says he, “shall

implore Christ to enlighten him, and shall publish the Gospel truths he may

feel inwardly, such an one may be assured that he is inspired by the Lord.”

He then poured forth a numberless multitude of Scripture texts which proved,

as  he  imagined,  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  Christianity  without  an

immediate  revelation,  and  added  these  remarkable  words:  “When  thou

movest one of thy limbs, is it moved by thy own power? Certainly not; for

this  limb  is  often  sensible  to  involuntary  motions. Consequently  he  who

created thy body gives motion to this earthly tabernacle. And are the several

ideas of which thy soul receives the impression formed by thyself? Much less

are  they,  since  these  pour  in  upon  thy  mind  whether  thou  wilt  or  no;

consequently thou receivest thy ideas from Him who created thy soul. But as

He leaves thy affections at full liberty, He gives thy mind such ideas as thy

affections may deserve; if thou livest in God, thou actest, thou thinkest in

God. After this thou needest only but open thine eyes to that light which

enlightens all mankind, and it is then thou wilt perceive the truth, and make

others perceive it.” “Why, this,” said I, “is Malebranche’s doctrine to a tittle.”

“I am acquainted with thy Malebranche,” said he; “he had something of the

Friend  in  him,  but  was  not  enough  so.” These  are  the  most  considerable

particulars I learnt concerning the doctrine of the Quakers. In my next letter I

shall acquaint you with their history, which you will find more singular than

their opinions.


  LETTER III.

  ON THE QUAKERS


  You have already heard that the Quakers date from Christ, who, accordingto them, was the first Quaker. Religion, say these, was corrupted a little after

His death, and remained in that state of corruption about sixteen hundred

years. But there were always a few Quakers concealed in the world, who

carefully  preserved  the  sacred  fire,  which  was  extinguished  in  all  but

themselves, until at last this light spread itself in England in 1642.


  It was at the time when Great Britain was torn to pieces by the intestine

wars  which  three  or  four  sects  had  raised  in  the  name  of  God,  that  one

George Fox, born in Leicestershire, and son to a silk-weaver, took it into his

head to preach, and, as he pretended, with all the requisites of a true apostle-

that is, without being able either to read or write. He was about twenty-five

years of age, irreproachable in his life and conduct, and a holy madman. He

was equipped in leather from head to foot, and travelled from one village to

another,  exclaiming  against  war  and  the  clergy. Had  his  invectives  been

levelled against the soldiery only he would have been safe enough, but he

inveighed against ecclesiastics. Fox was seized at Derby, and being carried

before a justice of peace, he did not once offer to pull off his leathern hat,

upon which an officer gave him a great box of the ear, and cried to him,

“Don’t you know you are to appear uncovered before his worship?” Fox

presented his other cheek to the officer, and begged him to give him another

box for God’s sake. The justice would have had him sworn before he asked

him any questions. “Know, friend,” says Fox to him, “that I never swear.”

The justice, observing he “thee’d” and “thou’d” him, sent him to the House

of Correction, in Derby, with orders that he should be whipped there. Fox

praised the Lord all the way he went to the House of Correction, where the

justice’s order was executed with the utmost severity. The men who whipped

this enthusiast were greatly surprised to hear him beseech them to give him a

few more lashes for the good of his soul. There was no need of entreating

these people; the lashes were repeated, for which Fox thanked them very

cordially, and began to preach. At first the spectators fell a-laughing, but they

afterwards listened to him; and as enthusiasm is an epidemical distemper,

many  were  persuaded,  and  those  who  scourged  him  became  his  first

disciples. Being set at liberty, he ran up and down the country with a dozen

proselytes at his heels, still declaiming against the clergy, and was whipped

from time to time. Being one day set in the pillory, he harangued the crowd inso strong and moving a manner, that fifty of the auditors became his converts,

and  he  won  the  rest  so  much  in  his  favour  that,  his  head  being  freed

tumultuously from the hole where it was fastened, the populace went and

searched  for  the  Church  of  England  clergyman  who  had  been  chiefly

instrumental in bringing him to this punishment, and set him on the same

pillory where Fox had stood.


  Fox was bold enough to convert some of Oliver Cromwell’s soldiers, who

thereupon quitted the service and refused to take the oaths. Oliver, having as

great a contempt for a sect which would not allow its members to fight, as

Sixtus  Quintus  had  for  another  sect,  Dove  non  si  chiamava,  began  to

persecute  these  new  converts. The  prisons  were  crowded  with  them,  but

persecution  seldom  has  any  other  effect  than  to  increase  the  number  of

proselytes. These  came,  therefore,  from  their  confinement  more  strongly

confirmed in the principles they had imbibed, and followed by their gaolers,

whom they had brought over to their belief. But the circumstances which

contributed chiefly to the spreading of this sect were as follows:-Fox thought

himself inspired, and consequently was of opinion that he must speak in a

manner different from the rest of mankind. He thereupon began to writhe his

body, to screw up his face, to hold in his breath, and to exhale it in a forcible

manner, insomuch that the priestess of the Pythian god at Delphos could not

have acted her part to better advantage. Inspiration soon became so habitual

to him that he could scarce deliver himself in any other manner. This was the

first gift he communicated to his disciples. These aped very sincerely their

master’s  several  grimaces,  and  shook  in  every  limb  the  instant  the  fit  of

inspiration came upon them, whence they were called Quakers. The vulgar

attempted to mimic them; they trembled, they spake through the nose, they

quaked and fancied themselves inspired by the Holy Ghost. The only thing

now wanting was a few miracles, and accordingly they wrought some.


  Fox, this modern patriarch, spoke thus to a justice of peace before a large

assembly of people: “Friend, take care what thou dost; God will soon punish

thee for persecuting His saints.” This magistrate, being one who besotted

himself every day with bad beer and brandy, died of an apoplexy two days

after, the moment he had signed a mittimus for imprisoning some Quakers.The sudden death with which this justice was seized was not ascribed to his

intemperance,  but  was  universally  looked  upon  as  the  effect  of  the  holy

man’s predictions; so that this accident made more converts to Quakerism

than a thousand sermons and as many shaking fits could have done. Oliver,

finding them increase daily, was desirous of bringing them over to his party,

and for that purpose attempted to bribe them by money. However, they were

incorruptible, which made him one day declare that this religion was the only

one he had ever met with that had resisted the charms of gold.


  The Quakers were several times persecuted under Charles II.; not upon a

religious  account,  but  for  refusing  to  pay  the  tithes,  for  “theeing”  and

“thouing” the magistrates, and for refusing to take the oaths enacted by the

laws.


  At last Robert Barclay, a native of Scotland, presented to the King, in

1675, his “Apology for the Quakers,” a work as well drawn up as the subject

could possibly admit. The dedication to Charles II. is not filled with mean,

flattering encomiums, but abounds with bold touches in favour of truth and

with the wisest counsels. “Thou hast tasted,” says he to the King at the close

of his epistle dedicatory, “of prosperity and adversity; thou knowest what it is

to be banished thy native country; to be overruled as well as to rule and sit

upon the throne; and, being oppressed, thou hast reason to know how hateful

the  Oppressor  is  both  to  God  and  man. If,  after  all  these  warnings  and

advertisements, thou dost not turn unto the Lord with all thy heart, but forget

Him who remembered thee in thy distress, and give up thyself to follow lust

and vanity, surely great will be thy condemnation.


  “Against which snare, as well as the temptation of those that may or do

feed thee and prompt thee to evil, the most excellent and prevalent remedy

will  be,  to  apply  thyself  to  that  light  of  Christ  which  shineth  in  thy

conscience, which neither can nor will flatter thee nor suffer thee to be at ease

in thy sins, but doth and will deal plainly and faithfully with thee, as those

that are followers thereof have plainly done.-Thy faithful friend and subject,

Robert Barclay.”  A more surprising circumstance is, that this epistle, written by a private

man  of  no  figure,  was  so  happy  in  its  effects,  as  to  put  a  stop  to  the

persecution.


  LETTER IV.

  ON THE QUAKERS


  About this time arose the illustrious William Penn, who established the

power  of  the  Quakers  in  America,  and  would  have  made  them  appear

venerable  in  the  eyes  of  the  Europeans,  were  it  possible  for  mankind  to

respect virtue when revealed in a ridiculous light. He was the only son of

Vice-Admiral Penn, favourite of the Duke of York, afterwards King James II.


  William Penn, at twenty years of age, happening to meet with a Quaker in

Cork, whom he had known at Oxford, this man made a proselyte of him; and

William being a sprightly youth, and naturally eloquent, having a winning

aspect,  and  a  very  engaging  carriage,  he  soon  gained  over  some  of  his

intimates. He carried matters so far, that he formed by insensible degrees a

society of young Quakers, who met at his house; so that he was at the head of

a sect when a little above twenty.


  Being returned, after his leaving Cork, to the Vice-Admiral his father,

instead of falling upon his knees to ask his blessing, he went up to him with

his hat on, and said, “Friend, I am very glad to see thee in good health.” The

Vice-Admiral imagined his son to be crazy, but soon finding he was turned

Quaker, he employed all the methods that prudence could suggest to engage

him to behave and act like other people. The youth made no other answer to

his  father,  than  by  exhorting  him  to  turn  Quaker  also. At  last  his  father

confined himself to this single request, viz., “that he should wait upon the

King and the Duke of York with his hat under his arm, and should not ‘thee’

and ‘thou’ them.” William answered, “that he could not do these things, for

conscience’ sake,” which exasperated his father to such a degree, that he

turned him out of doors. Young Pen gave God thanks for permitting him to

suffer so early in His cause, after which he went into the city, where he heldforth, and made a great number of converts.


  The Church of England clergy found their congregations dwindle away

daily; and Penn being young, handsome, and of a graceful stature, the court

as well as the city ladies flocked very devoutly to his meeting. The patriarch,

George Fox, hearing of his great reputation, came to London (though the

journey was very long) purely to see and converse with him. Both resolved to

go upon missions into foreign countries, and accordingly they embarked for

Holland,  after  having  left  labourers  sufficient  to  take  care  of  the  London

vineyard.


  Their  labours  were  crowned  with  success  in  Amsterdam,  but  a

circumstance which reflected the greatest honour on them, and at the same

time put their humility to the greatest trial, was the reception they met with

from Elizabeth, the Princess Palatine, aunt to George I. of Great Britain, a

lady conspicuous for her genius and knowledge, and to whom Descartes had

dedicated his Philosophical Romance.


  She was then retired to the Hague, where she received these Friends, for

so the Quakers were at that time called in Holland. This princess had several

conferences with them in her palace, and she at last entertained so favourable

an  opinion  of  Quakerism,  that  they  confessed  she  was  not  far  from  the

kingdom of heaven. The Friends sowed likewise the good seed in Germany,

but reaped very little fruit; for the mode of “theeing” and “thouing” was not

approved of in a country where a man is perpetually obliged to employ the

titles of “highness” and “excellency.” William Penn returned soon to England

upon hearing of his father’s sickness, in order to see him before he died. The

Vice-Admiral was reconciled to his son, and though of a different persuasion,

embraced him tenderly. William made a fruitless exhortation to his father not

to receive the sacrament, but to die a Quaker, and the good old man entreated

his son William to wear buttons on his sleeves, and a crape hatband in his

beaver, but all to no purpose.


  William Penn inherited very large possessions, part of which consisted inCrown debts due to the Vice-Admiral for sums he had advanced for the sea

service. No moneys were at that time more insecure than those owing from

the king. Penn was obliged to go more than once, and “thee” and “thou” King

Charles and his Ministers, in order to recover the debt; and at last, instead of

specie,  the  Government  invested  him  with  the  right  and  sovereignty  of  a

province of America, to the south of Maryland. Thus was a Quaker raised to

sovereign  power. Penn  set  sail  for  his  new  dominions  with  two  ships

freighted  with  Quakers,  who  followed  his  fortune. The  country  was  then

called  Pennsylvania  from  William  Penn,  who  there  founded  Philadelphia,

now the most flourishing city in that country. The first step he took was to

enter  into  an  alliance  with  his  American  neighbours,  and  this  is  the  only

treaty between those people and the Christians that was not ratified by an

oath, and was never infringed. The new sovereign was at the same time the

legislator of Pennsylvania, and enacted very wise and prudent laws, none of

which have ever been changed since his time. The first is, to injure no person

upon a religious account, and to consider as brethren all those who believe in

one God.


  He had no sooner settled his government, but several American merchants

came and peopled this colony. The natives of the country, instead of flying

into  the  woods,  cultivated  by  insensible  degrees  a  friendship  with  the

peaceable Quakers. They loved these foreigners as much as they detested the

other Christians who had conquered and laid waste America. In a little time a

great number of these savages (falsely so called), charmed with the mild and

gentle disposition of their neighbours, came in crowds to William Penn, and

besought him to admit them into the number of his vassals. It was very rare

and uncommon for a sovereign to be “thee’d” and “thou’d” by the meanest of

his subjects, who never took their hats off when they came into his presence;

and as singular for a Government to be without one priest in it, and for a

people  to  be  without  arms,  either  offensive  or  defensive;  for  a  body  of

citizens to be absolutely undistinguished but by the public employments, and

for neighbours not to entertain the least jealousy one against the other.


  William Penn might glory in having brought down upon earth the so much

boasted  golden  age,  which  in  all  probability  never  existed  but  inPennsylvania. He returned to England to settle some affairs relating to his

new dominions. After the death of King Charles II., King James, who had

loved  the  father,  indulged  the  same  affection  to  the  son,  and  no  longer

considered him as an obscure sectary, but as a very great man. The king’s

politics on this occasion agreed with his inclinations. He was desirous of

pleasing the Quakers by annulling the laws made against Nonconformists, in

order to have an opportunity, by this universal toleration, of establishing the

Romish religion. All the sectarists in England saw the snare that was laid for

them, but did not give into it; they never failing to unite when the Romish

religion,  their  common  enemy,  is  to  be  opposed. But  Penn  did  not  think

himself bound in any manner to renounce his principles, merely to favour

Protestants to whom he was odious, in opposition to a king who loved him.

He  had  established  a  universal  toleration  with  regard  to  conscience  in

America, and would not have it thought that he intended to destroy it in

Europe, for which reason he adhered so inviolably to King James, that a

report prevailed universally of his being a Jesuit. This calumny affected him

very strongly, and he was obliged to justify himself in print. However, the

unfortunate King James II., in whom, as in most princes of the Stuart family,

grandeur and weakness were equally blended, and who, like them, as much

overdid some things as he was short in others, lost his kingdom in a manner

that is hardly to be accounted for.


  All the English sectarists accepted from William III, and his Parliament

the toleration and indulgence which they had refused when offered by King

James. It was then the Quakers began to enjoy, by virtue of the laws, the

several  privileges  they  possess  at  this  time. Penn  having  at  last  seen

Quakerism  firmly  established  in  his  native  country,  went  back  to

Pennsylvania. His own people and the Americans received him with tears of

joy, as though he had been a father who was returned to visit his children. All

the  laws  had  been  religiously  observed  in  his  absence,  a  circumstance  in

which no legislator had ever been happy but himself. After having resided

some years in Pennsylvania he left it, but with great reluctance, in order to

return to England, there to solicit some matters in favour of the commerce of

Pennsylvania. But he never saw it again, he dying in Ruscombe, in Berkshire,

in 1718.  I am not able to guess what fate Quakerism may have in America, but I

perceive it dwindles away daily in England. In all countries where liberty of

conscience is allowed, the established religion will at last swallow up all the

rest. Quakers are disqualified from being members of Parliament; nor can

they enjoy any post or preferment, because an oath must always be taken on

these occasions, and they never swear. They are therefore reduced to the

necessity of subsisting upon traffic. Their children, whom the industry of

their  parents  has  enriched,  are  desirous  of  enjoying  honours,  of  wearing

buttons and ruffles; and quite ashamed of being called Quakers they become

converts to the Church of England, merely to be in the fashion.


  LETTER V.

  ON THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND


  England is properly the country of sectarists. Multæ sunt mansiones in

domo patris mei (in my Father’s house are many mansions). An Englishman,

as one to whom liberty is natural, may go to heaven his own way.


  Nevertheless,  though  every  one  is  permitted  to  serve  God  in  whatever

mode or fashion he thinks proper, yet their true religion, that in which a man

makes  his  fortune,  is  the  sect  of  Episcopalians  or  Churchmen,  called  the

Church of England, or simply the Church, by way of eminence. No person

can possess an employment either in England or Ireland unless he be ranked

among the faithful, that is, professes himself a member of the Church of

England. This  reason  (which  carries  mathematical  evidence  with  it)  has

converted such numbers of Dissenters of all persuasions, that not a twentieth

part of the nation is out of the pale of the Established Church. The English

clergy  have  retained  a  great  number  of  the  Romish  ceremonies,  and

especially that of receiving, with a most scrupulous attention, their tithes.

They also have the pious ambition to aim at superiority.


  Moreover, they inspire very religiously their flock with a holy zeal against

Dissenters of all denominations. This zeal was pretty violent under the Toriesin  the  four  last  years  of  Queen  Anne;  but  was  productive  of  no  greater

mischief  than  the  breaking  the  windows  of  some  meeting-houses  and  the

demolishing of a few of them. For religious rage ceased in England with the

civil wars, and was no more under Queen Anne than the hollow noise of a sea

whose billows still heaved, though so long after the storm when the Whigs

and Tories laid waste their native country, in the same manner as the Guelphs

and Ghibelins formerly did theirs. It was absolutely necessary for both parties

to call in religion on this occasion; the Tories declared for Episcopacy, and

the Whigs, as some imagined, were for abolishing it; however, after these had

got the upper hand, they contented themselves with only abridging it.


  At the time when the Earl of Oxford and the Lord Bolingbroke used to

drink  healths  to  the  Tories,  the  Church  of  England  considered  those

noblemen  as  the  defenders  of  its  holy  privileges. The  lower  House  of

Convocation (a kind of House of Commons) composed wholly of the clergy,

was in some credit at that time; at least the members of it had the liberty to

meet, to dispute on ecclesiastical matters, to sentence impious books from

time to time to the flames, that is, books written against themselves. The

Ministry which is now composed of Whigs does not so much as allow those

gentlemen to assemble, so that they are at this time reduced (in the obscurity

of their respective parishes) to the melancholy occupation of praying for the

prosperity  of  the  Government  whose  tranquillity  they  would  willingly

disturb. With regard to the bishops, who are twenty-six in all, they still have

seats in the House of Lords in spite of the Whigs, because the ancient abuse

of considering them as barons subsists to this day. There is a clause, however,

in the oath which the Government requires from these gentlemen, that puts

their Christian patience to a very great trial, viz., that they shall be of the

Church of England as by law established. There are few bishops, deans, or

other dignitaries, but imagine they are so jure divino; it is consequently a

great  mortification  to  them  to  be  obliged  to  confess  that  they  owe  their

dignity to a pitiful law enacted by a set of profane laymen. A learned monk

(Father Courayer) wrote a book lately to prove the validity and succession of

English ordinations. This book was forbid in France, but do you believe that

the English Ministry were pleased with it? Far from it. Those wicked Whigs

don’t care a straw whether the episcopal succession among them hath beeninterrupted  or  not,  or  whether  Bishop  Parker  was  consecrated  (as  it  is

pretended) in a tavern or a church; for these Whigs are much better pleased

that the Bishops should derive their authority from the Parliament than from

the Apostles. The Lord Bolingbroke observed that this notion of divine right

would only make so many tyrants in lawn sleeves, but that the laws made so

many citizens.


  With regard to the morals of the English clergy, they are more regular than

those of France, and for this reason. All the clergy (a very few excepted) are

educated in the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge, far from the depravity

and corruption which reign in the capital. They are not called to dignities till

very late, at a time of life when men are sensible of no other passion but

avarice, that is, when their ambition craves a supply. Employments are here

bestowed both in the Church and the army, as a reward for long services; and

we never see youngsters made bishops or colonels immediately upon their

laying  aside  the  academical  gown;  and  besides  most  of  the  clergy  are

married. The stiff and awkward air contracted by them at the University, and

the little familiarity the men of this country have with the ladies, commonly

oblige  a  bishop  to  confine  himself  to,  and  rest  contented  with,  his  own.

Clergymen  sometimes  take  a  glass  at  the  tavern,  custom  giving  them  a

sanction on this occasion; and if they fuddle themselves it is in a very serious

manner, and without giving the least scandal.


  That fable-mixed kind of mortal (not to be defined), who is neither of the

clergy nor of the laity; in a word, the thing called Abbé in France; is a species

quite  unknown  in  England. All  the  clergy  here  are  very  much  upon  the

reserve, and most of them pedants. When these are told that in France young

fellows famous for their dissoluteness, and raised to the highest dignities of

the Church by female intrigues, address the fair publicly in an amorous way,

amuse themselves in writing tender love songs, entertain their friends very

splendidly every night at their own houses, and after the banquet is ended

withdraw to invoke the assistance of the Holy Ghost, and call themselves

boldly  the  successors  of  the  Apostles,  they  bless  God  for  their  being

Protestants. But these are shameless heretics, who deserve to be blown hence

through the flames to old Nick, as Rabelais says, and for this reason I do nottrouble myself about them.


  LETTER VI.

  ON THE PRESBYTERIANS


  The  Church  of  England  is  confined  almost  to  the  kingdom  whence  it

received  its  name,  and  to  Ireland,  for  Presbyterianism  is  the  established

religion  in  Scotland. This  Presbyterianism  is  directly  the  same  with

Calvinism, as it was established in France, and is now professed at Geneva.

As the priests of this sect receive but very inconsiderable stipends from their

churches, and consequently cannot emulate the splendid luxury of bishops,

they exclaim very naturally against honours which they can never attain to.

Figure to yourself the haughty Diogenes trampling under foot the pride of

Plato. The Scotch Presbyterians are not very unlike that proud though tattered

reasoner. Diogenes  did  not  use  Alexander  half  so  impertinently  as  these

treated  King  Charles  II.;  for  when  they  took  up  arms  in  his  cause  in

opposition to Oliver, who had deceived them, they forced that poor monarch

to undergo the hearing of three or four sermons every day, would not suffer

him to play, reduced him to a state of penitence and mortification, so that

Charles soon grew sick of these pedants, and accordingly eloped from them

with as much joy as a youth does from school.


  A Church of England minister appears as another Cato in presence of a

juvenile, sprightly French graduate, who bawls for a whole morning together

in the divinity schools, and hums a song in chorus with ladies in the evening;

but this Cato is a very spark when before a Scotch Presbyterian. The latter

affects a serious gait, puts on a sour look, wears a vastly broad-brimmed hat

and a long cloak over a very short coat, preaches through the nose, and gives

the name of the whore of Babylon to all churches where the ministers are so

fortunate as to enjoy an annual revenue of five or six thousand pounds, and

where the people are weak enough to suffer this, and to give them the titles of

my lord, your lordship, or your eminence.


  These gentlemen, who have also some churches in England, introducedthere  the  mode  of  grave  and  severe  exhortations. To  them  is  owing  the

sanctification of Sunday in the three kingdoms. People are there forbidden to

work or take any recreation on that day, in which the severity is twice as great

as that of the Romish Church. No operas, plays, or concerts are allowed in

London on Sundays, and even cards are so expressly forbidden that none but

persons of quality, and those we call the genteel, play on that day; the rest of

the nation go either to church, to the tavern, or to see their mistresses.


  Though the Episcopal and Presbyterian sects are the two prevailing ones

in Great Britain, yet all others are very welcome to come and settle in it, and

live very sociably together, though most of their preachers hate one another

almost as cordially as a Jansenist damns a Jesuit.


  Take a view of the Royal Exchange in London, a place more venerable

than many courts of justice, where the representatives of all nations meet for

the benefit of mankind. There the Jew, the Mahometan, and the Christian

transact together, as though they all professed the same religion, and give the

name of infidel to none but bankrupts. There the Presbyterian confides in the

Anabaptist, and the Churchman depends on the Quaker’s word.


  If one religion only were allowed in England, the Government would very

possibly become arbitrary; if there were but two, the people would cut one

another’s throats; but as there are such a multitude, they all live happy and in

peace.


  LETTER VII.

  ON THE SOCINIANS, OR ARIANS, OR ANTITRINITARIANS


  There  is  a  little  sect  here  composed  of  clergymen,  and  of  a  few  very

learned persons among the laity, who, though they do not call themselves

Arians or Socinians, do yet dissent entirely from St. Athanasius with regard

to their notions of the Trinity, and declare very frankly that the Father is

greater than the Son.  Do you remember what is related of a certain orthodox bishop, who, in

order to convince an emperor of the reality of consubstantiation, put his hand

under the chin of the monarch’s son, and took him by the nose in presence of

his sacred majesty? The emperor was going to order his attendants to throw

the  bishop  out  of  the  window,  when  the  good  old  man  gave  him  this

handsome and convincing reason: “Since your majesty,” says he, “is angry

when your son has not due respect shown him, what punishment do you think

will God the Father inflict on those who refuse His Son Jesus the titles due to

Him?” The persons I just now mentioned declare that the holy bishop took a

very wrong step, that his argument was inconclusive, and that the emperor

should have answered him thus: “Know that there are two ways by which

men may be wanting in respect to me-first, in not doing honour sufficient to

my son; and, secondly, in paying him the same honour as to me.”


  Be  this  as  it  will,  the  principles  of  Arius  begin  to  revive,  not  only  in

England,  but  in  Holland  and  Poland. The  celebrated  Sir  Isaac  Newton

honoured this opinion so far as to countenance it. This philosopher thought

that the Unitarians argued more mathematically than we do. But the most

sanguine stickler for Arianism is the illustrious Dr. Clark. This man is rigidly

virtuous, and of a mild disposition, is more fond of his tenets than desirous of

propagating them, and absorbed so entirely in problems and calculations that

he is a mere reasoning machine.


  It is he who wrote a book which is much esteemed and little understood,

on  the  existence  of  God,  and  another,  more  intelligible,  but  pretty  much

contemned, on the truth of the Christian religion.


  He never engaged in scholastic disputes, which our friend calls venerable

trifles. He  only  published  a  work  containing  all  the  testimonies  of  the

primitive ages for and against the Unitarians, and leaves to the reader the

counting of the voices and the liberty of forming a judgment. This book won

the doctor a great number of partisans, and lost him the See of Canterbury;

but, in my humble opinion, he was out in his calculation, and had better have

been Primate of all England than merely an Arian parson.  You  see  that  opinions  are  subject  to  revolutions  as  well  as  empires.

Arianism,  after  having  triumphed  during  three  centuries,  and  been  forgot

twelve, rises at last out of its own ashes; but it has chosen a very improper

season to make its appearance in, the present age being quite cloyed with

disputes  and  sects. The  members  of  this  sect  are,  besides,  too  few  to  be

indulged the liberty of holding public assemblies, which, however, they will,

doubtless, be permitted to do in case they spread considerably. But people are

now so very cold with respect to all things of this kind, that there is little

probability any new religion, or old one, that may be revived, will meet with

favour. Is it not whimsical enough that Luther, Calvin, and Zuinglius, all of

them wretched authors, should have founded sects which are now spread over

a great part of Europe, that Mahomet, though so ignorant, should have given

a  religion  to  Asia  and  Africa,  and  that  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  Dr.  Clark,  Mr.

Locke, Mr. Le Clerc, etc., the greatest philosophers, as well as the ablest

writers of their ages, should scarcely have been able to raise a little flock,

which even decreases daily.


  This it is to be born at a proper period of time. Were Cardinal de Retz to

return again into the world, neither his eloquence nor his intrigues would

draw together ten women in Paris.

  Were Oliver Cromwell, he who beheaded his sovereign, and seized upon

the kingly dignity, to rise from the dead, he would be a wealthy City trader,

and no more.


  LETTER VIII.

  ON THE PARLIAMENT


  The members of the English Parliament are fond of comparing themselves

to the old Romans.

  Not long since Mr. Shippen opened a speech in the House of Commons

with  these  words,  “The  majesty  of  the  people  of  England  would  be

wounded.” The singularity of the expression occasioned a loud laugh; but thisgentleman, so far from being disconcerted, repeated the same words with a

resolute tone of voice, and the laugh ceased. In my opinion, the majesty of

the people of England has nothing in common with that of the people of

Rome, much less is there any affinity between their Governments. There is in

London a senate, some of the members whereof are accused (doubtless very

unjustly) of selling their voices on certain occasions, as was done in Rome;

this is the only resemblance. Besides, the two nations appear to me quite

opposite in character, with regard both to good and evil. The Romans never

knew the dreadful folly of religious wars, an abomination reserved for devout

preachers of patience and humility. Marius and Sylla, Cæsar and Pompey,

Anthony and Augustus, did not draw their swords and set the world in a blaze

merely to determine whether the flamen should wear his shirt over his robe,

or his robe over his shirt, or whether the sacred chickens should eat and

drink, or eat only, in order to take the augury. The English have hanged one

another by law, and cut one another to pieces in pitched battles, for quarrels

of as trifling a nature. The sects of the Episcopalians and Presbyterians quite

distracted these very serious heads for a time. But I fancy they will hardly

ever be so silly again, they seeming to be grown wiser at their own expense;

and I do not perceive the least inclination in them to murder one another

merely about syllogisms, as some zealots among them once did.


  But here follows a more essential difference between Rome and England,

which gives the advantage entirely to the latter-viz., that the civil wars of

Rome ended in slavery, and those of the English in liberty. The English are

the only people upon earth who have been able to prescribe limits to the

power of kings by resisting them; and who, by a series of struggles, have at

last established that wise Government where the Prince is all-powerful to do

good, and, at the same time, is restrained from committing evil; where the

nobles are great without insolence, though there are no vassals; and where the

people share in the Government without confusion.


  The House of Lords and that of the Commons divide the legislative power

under the king, but the Romans had no such balance. The patricians and

plebeians  in  Rome  were  perpetually  at  variance,  and  there  was  no

intermediate  power  to  reconcile  them. The  Roman  senate,  who  were  sounjustly, so criminally proud as not to suffer the plebeians to share with them

in  anything,  could  find  no  other  artifice  to  keep  the  latter  out  of  the

administration than by employing them in foreign wars. They considered the

plebeians  as  a  wild  beast,  whom  it  behoved  them  to  let  loose  upon  their

neighbours,  for  fear  they  should  devour  their  masters. Thus  the  greatest

defect in the Government of the Romans raised them to be conquerors. By

being unhappy at home, they triumphed over and possessed themselves of the

world, till at last their divisions sunk them to slavery.


  The Government of England will never rise to so exalted a pitch of glory,

nor will its end be so fatal. The English are not fired with the splendid folly

of  making  conquests,  but  would  only  prevent  their  neighbours  from

conquering. They are not only jealous of their own liberty, but even of that of

other nations. The English were exasperated against Louis XIV. for no other

reason but because he was ambitious, and declared war against him merely

out of levity, not from any interested motives.


  The English have doubtless purchased their liberties at a very high price,

and waded through seas of blood to drown the idol of arbitrary power. Other

nations have been involved in as great calamities, and have shed as much

blood; but then the blood they spilt in defence of their liberties only enslaved

them the more.


  That which rises to a revolution in England is no more than a sedition in

other countries. A city in Spain, in Barbary, or in Turkey, takes up arms in

defence  of  its  privileges,  when  immediately  it  is  stormed  by  mercenary

troops, it is punished by executioners, and the rest of the nation kiss the

chains they are loaded with. The French are of opinion that the government

of this island is more tempestuous than the sea which surrounds it, which

indeed is true; but then it is never so but when the king raises the storm-when

he attempts to seize the ship of which he is only the chief pilot. The civil wars

of France lasted longer, were more cruel, and productive of greater evils than

those of England; but none of these civil wars had a wise and prudent liberty

for their object.  In the detestable reigns of Charles IX. and Henry III. the whole affair was

only whether the people should be slaves to the Guises. With regard to the

last war of Paris, it deserves only to be hooted at. Methinks I see a crowd of

schoolboys rising up in arms against their master, and afterwards whipped for

it. Cardinal de Retz, who was witty and brave (but to no purpose), rebellious

without a cause, factious without design, and head of a defenceless party,

caballed for caballing sake, and seemed to foment the civil war merely out of

diversion. The Parliament did not know what he intended, nor what he did

not intend. He  levied  troops  by  Act  of  Parliament,  and  the  next  moment

cashiered  them. He  threatened,  he  begged  pardon;  he  set  a  price  upon

Cardinal  Mazarin’s  head,  and  afterwards  congratulated  him  in  a  public

manner. Our civil wars under Charles VI. were bloody and cruel, those of the

League execrable, and that of the Frondeurs ridiculous.


  That  for  which  the  French  chiefly  reproach  the  English  nation  is  the

murder of King Charles I., whom his subjects treated exactly as he would

have treated them had his reign been prosperous. After all, consider on one

side Charles I., defeated in a pitched battle, imprisoned, tried, sentenced to

die in Westminster Hall, and then beheaded. And on the other, the Emperor

Henry VII., poisoned by his chaplain at his receiving the Sacrament; Henry

III. stabbed by a monk; thirty assassinations projected against Henry IV.,

several of them put in execution, and the last bereaving that great monarch of

his life. Weigh, I say, all these wicked attempts, and then judge.


  LETTER IX.

  ON THE GOVERNMENT


  That  mixture  in  the  English  Government,  that  harmony  between  King,

Lords, and commons, did not always subsist. England was enslaved for a

long series of years by the Romans, the Saxons, the Danes, and the French

successively. William the Conqueror particularly, ruled them with a rod of

iron. He disposed as absolutely of the lives and fortunes of his conquered

subjects as an eastern monarch; and forbade, upon pain of death, the English

either fire or candle in their houses after eight o’clock; whether was this toprevent their nocturnal meetings, or only to try, by an odd and whimsical

prohibition, how far it was possible for one man to extend his power over his

fellow-creatures. It is true, indeed, that the English had Parliaments before

and after William the Conqueror, and they boast of them, as though these

assemblies then called Parliaments, composed of ecclesiastical tyrants and of

plunderers entitled barons, had been the guardians of the public liberty and

happiness.


  The barbarians who came from the shores of the Baltic, and settled in the

rest of Europe, brought with them the form of government called States or

Parliaments, about which so much noise is made, and which are so little

understood. Kings,  indeed,  were  not  absolute  in  those  days;  but  then  the

people were more wretched upon that very account, and more completely

enslaved. The  chiefs  of  these  savages,  who  had  laid  waste  France,  Italy,

Spain,  and  England,  made  themselves  monarchs. Their  generals  divided

among themselves the several countries they had conquered, whence sprung

those margraves, those peers, those barons, those petty tyrants, who often

contested with their sovereigns for the spoils of whole nations. These were

birds of prey fighting with an eagle for doves whose blood the victorious was

to suck. Every nation, instead of being governed by one master, was trampled

upon  by  a  hundred  tyrants. The  priests  soon  played  a  part  among  them.

Before this it had been the fate of the Gauls, the Germans, and the Britons, to

be always governed by their Druids and the chiefs of their villages, an ancient

kind of barons, not so tyrannical as their successors. These Druids pretended

to be mediators between God and man. They enacted laws, they fulminated

their excommunications, and sentenced to death. The bishops succeeded, by

insensible  degrees,  to  their  temporal  authority  in  the  Goth  and  Vandal

government. The popes set themselves at their head, and armed with their

briefs, their bulls, and reinforced by monks, they made even kings tremble,

deposed and assassinated them at pleasure, and employed every artifice to

draw into their own purses moneys from all parts of Europe. The weak Ina,

one of the tyrants of the Saxon Heptarchy in England, was the first monarch

who  submitted,  in  his  pilgrimage  to  Rome,  to  pay  St.  Peter’s  penny

(equivalent very near to a French crown) for every house in his dominions.

The whole island soon followed his example; England became insensibly oneof the Pope’s provinces, and the Holy Father used to send from time to time

his legates thither to levy exorbitant taxes. At last King John delivered up by

a  public  instrument  the  kingdom  of  England  to  the  Pope,  who  had

excommunicated  him;  but  the  barons,  not  finding  their  account  in  this

resignation, dethroned the wretched King John and seated Louis, father to St.

Louis, King of France, in his place. However, they were soon weary of their

new monarch, and accordingly obliged him to return to France.


  Whilst that the barons, the bishops, and the popes, all laid waste England,

where all were for ruling the most numerous, the most useful, even the most

virtuous, and consequently the most venerable part of mankind, consisting of

those who study the laws and the sciences, of traders, of artificers, in a word,

of all who were not tyrants-that is, those who are called the people: these, I

say, were by them looked upon as so many animals beneath the dignity of the

human species. The Commons in those ages were far from sharing in the

government,  they  being  villains  or  peasants,  whose  labour,  whose  blood,

were the property of their masters who entitled themselves the nobility. The

major part of men in Europe were at that time what they are to this day in

several parts of the world-they were villains or bondsmen of lords-that is, a

kind of cattle bought and sold with the land. Many ages passed away before

justice could be done to human nature-before mankind were conscious that it

was abominable for many to sow, and but few reap. And was not France very

happy, when the power and authority of those petty robbers was abolished by

the lawful authority of kings and of the people?


  Happily, in the violent shocks which the divisions between kings and the

nobles  gave  to  empires,  the  chains  of  nations  were  more  or  less  heavy.

Liberty in England sprang from the quarrels of tyrants. The barons forced

King John and King Henry III. to grant the famous Magna Charta, the chief

design of which was indeed to make kings dependent on the Lords; but then

the rest of the nation were a little favoured in it, in order that they might join

on proper occasions with their pretended masters. This great Charter, which

is considered as the sacred origin of the English liberties, shows in itself how

little liberty was known.  The  title  alone  proves  that  the  king  thought  he  had  a  just  right  to  be

absolute; and that the barons, and even the clergy, forced him to give up the

pretended right, for no other reason but because they were the most powerful.


  Magna Charta begins in this style: “We grant, of our own free will, the

following privileges to the archbishops, bishops, priors, and barons of our

kingdom,” etc.


  The  House  of  Commons  is  not  once  mentioned  in  the  articles  of  this

Charter-a proof that it did not yet exist, or that it existed without power.

Mention is therein made, by name, of the freemen of England-a melancholy

proof  that  some  were  not  so. It  appears,  by  Article  XXXII.,  that  these

pretended freemen owed service to their lords. Such a liberty as this was not

many removes from slavery.


  By Article XXI., the king ordains that his officers shall not henceforward

seize upon, unless they pay for them, the horses and carts of freemen. The

people considered this ordinance as a real liberty, though it was a greater

tyranny. Henry VII., that happy usurper and great politician, who pretended

to love the barons, though he in reality hated and feared them, got their lands

alienated. By  this  means  the  villains,  afterwards  acquiring  riches  by  their

industry, purchased the estates and country seats of the illustrious peers who

had ruined themselves by their folly and extravagance, and all the lands got

by insensible degrees into other hands.


  The power of the House of Commons increased every day. The families of

the ancient peers were at last extinct; and as peers only are properly noble in

England, there would be no such thing in strictness of law as nobility in that

island, had not the kings created new barons from time to time, and preserved

the body of peers, once a terror to them, to oppose them to the Commons,

since become so formidable.


  All these new peers who compose the Higher House receive nothing but

their titles from the king, and very few of them have estates in those placeswhence they take their titles. One shall be Duke of D-, though he has not a

foot of land in Dorsetshire; and another is Earl of a village, though he scarce

knows  where  it  is  situated. The  peers  have  power,  but  it  is  only  in  the

Parliament House.


  There is no such thing here as haute, moyenne, and basse justice-that is, a

power to judge in all matters civil and criminal; nor a right or privilege of

hunting in the grounds of a citizen, who at the same time is not permitted to

fire a gun in his own field.


  No one is exempted in this country from paying certain taxes because he is

a  nobleman  or  a  priest. All  duties  and  taxes  are  settled  by  the  House  of

Commons, whose power is greater than that of the Peers, though inferior to it

in dignity. The spiritual as well as temporal Lords have the liberty to reject a

Money Bill brought in by the Commons; but they are not allowed to alter

anything in it, and must either pass or throw it out without restriction. When

the Bill has passed the Lords and is signed by the king, then the whole nation

pays, every man in proportion to his revenue or estate, not according to his

title, which would be absurd. There is no such thing as an arbitrary subsidy or

poll-tax, but a real tax on the lands, of all which an estimate was made in the

reign of the famous King William III.


  The land-tax continues still upon the same foot, though the revenue of the

lands is increased. Thus no one is tyrannised over, and every one is easy. The

feet of the peasants are not bruised by wooden shoes; they eat white bread,

are well clothed, and are not afraid of increasing their stock of cattle, nor of

tiling their houses, from any apprehension that their taxes will be raised the

year following. The annual income of the estates of a great many commoners

in England amounts to two hundred thousand livres, and yet these do not

think it beneath them to plough the lands which enrich them, and on which

they enjoy their liberty.


  LETTER X.

  ON TRADE  As  trade  enriched  the  citizens  in  England,  so  it  contributed  to  their

freedom,  and  this  freedom  on  the  other  side  extended  their  commerce,

whence arose the grandeur of the State. Trade raised by insensible degrees

the naval power, which gives the English a superiority over the seas, and they

now are masters of very near two hundred ships of war. Posterity will very

probably be surprised to hear that an island whose only produce is a little

lead, tin, fuller’s-earth, and coarse wool, should become so powerful by its

commerce, as to be able to send, in 1723, three fleets at the same time to

three different and far distanced parts of the globe. One before Gibraltar,

conquered  and  still  possessed  by  the  English;  a  second  to  Portobello,  to

dispossess the King of Spain of the treasures of the West Indies; and a third

into  the  Baltic,  to  prevent  the  Northern  Powers  from  coming  to  an

engagement.


  At the time when Louis XIV. made all Italy tremble, and that his armies,

which had already possessed themselves of Savoy and Piedmont, were upon

the  point  of  taking  Turin;  Prince  Eugene  was  obliged  to  march  from  the

middle of Germany in order to succour Savoy. Having no money, without

which cities cannot be either taken or defended, he addressed himself to some

English  merchants. These,  at  an  hour  and  half’s  warning,  lent  him  five

millions, whereby he was enabled to deliver Turin, and to beat the French;

after  which  he  wrote  the  following  short  letter  to  the  persons  who  had

disbursed him the above-mentioned sums: “Gentlemen, I have received your

money, and flatter myself that I have laid it out to your satisfaction.” Such a

circumstance as this raises a just pride in an English merchant, and makes

him  presume  (not  without  some  reason)  to  compare  himself  to  a  Roman

citizen;  and,  indeed,  a  peer’s  brother  does  not  think  traffic  beneath  him.

When  the  Lord  Townshend  was  Minister  of  State,  a  brother  of  his  was

content  to  be  a  City  merchant;  and  at  the  time  that  the  Earl  of  Oxford

governed  Great  Britain,  a  younger  brother  was  no  more  than  a  factor  in

Aleppo,  where  he  chose  to  live,  and  where  he  died. This  custom,  which

begins,  however,  to  be  laid  aside,  appears  monstrous  to  Germans,  vainly

puffed up with their extraction. These think it morally impossible that the son

of an English peer should be no more than a rich and powerful citizen, for allare princes in Germany. There have been thirty highnesses of the same name,

all whose patrimony consisted only in their escutcheons and their pride.


  In France the title of marquis is given gratis to any one who will accept of

it;  and  whosoever  arrives  at  Paris  from  the  midst  of  the  most  remote

provinces with money in his purse, and a name terminating in ac or ille, may

strut about, and cry, “Such a man as I! A man of my rank and figure!” and

may look down upon a trader with sovereign contempt; whilst the trader on

the other side, by thus often hearing his profession treated so disdainfully, is

fool enough to blush at it. However, I need not say which is most useful to a

nation; a lord, powdered in the tip of the mode, who knows exactly at what

o’clock the king rises and goes to bed, and who gives himself airs of grandeur

and state, at the same time that he is acting the slave in the ante-chamber of a

prime minister; or a merchant, who enriches his country, despatches orders

from his counting-house to Surat and Grand Cairo, and contributes to the

well-being of the world.


  LETTER XI.

  ON INOCULATION


  It is inadvertently affirmed in the Christian countries of Europe that the

English are fools and madmen. Fools, because they give their children the

small-pox to prevent their catching it; and madmen, because they wantonly

communicate a certain and dreadful distemper to their children, merely to

prevent an uncertain evil. The English, on the other side, call the rest of the

Europeans  cowardly  and  unnatural. Cowardly,  because  they  are  afraid  of

putting their children to a little pain; unnatural, because they expose them to

die one time or other of the small-pox. But that the reader may be able to

judge whether the English or those who differ from them in opinion are in the

right, here follows the history of the famed inoculation, which is mentioned

with so much dread in France.


  The Circassian women have, from time immemorial, communicated the

small-pox to their children when not above six months old by making anincision in the arm, and by putting into this incision a pustule, taken carefully

from the body of another child. This pustule produces the same effect in the

arm it is laid in as yeast in a piece of dough; it ferments, and diffuses through

the  whole  mass  of  blood  the  qualities  with  which  it  is  impregnated. The

pustules  of  the  child  in  whom  the  artificial  small-pox  has  been  thus

inoculated are employed to communicate the same distemper to others. There

is an almost perpetual circulation of it in Circassia; and when unhappily the

small-pox  has  quite  left  the  country,  the  inhabitants  of  it  are  in  as  great

trouble and perplexity as other nations when their harvest has fallen short.


  The circumstance that introduced a custom in Circassia, which appears so

singular to others, is nevertheless a cause common to all nations, I mean

maternal tenderness and interest.


  The Circassians are poor, and their daughters are beautiful, and indeed, it

is in them they chiefly trade. They furnish with beauties the seraglios of the

Turkish  Sultan,  of  the  Persian  Sophy,  and  of  all  those  who  are  wealthy

enough to purchase and maintain such precious merchandise. These maidens

are very honourably and virtuously instructed to fondle and caress men; are

taught dances of a very polite and effeminate kind; and how to heighten by

the  most  voluptuous  artifices  the  pleasures  of  their  disdainful  masters  for

whom they are designed. These unhappy creatures repeat their lesson to their

mothers, in the same manner as little girls among us repeat their catechism

without understanding one word they say.


  Now it often happened that, after a father and mother had taken the utmost

care of the education of their children, they were frustrated of all their hopes

in an instant. The small-pox getting into the family, one daughter died of it,

another lost an eye, a third had a great nose at her recovery, and the unhappy

parents  were  completely  ruined. Even,  frequently,  when  the  small-pox

became epidemical, trade was suspended for several years, which thinned

very considerably the seraglios of Persia and Turkey.


  A trading nation is always watchful over its own interests, and grasps atevery discovery that may be of advantage to its commerce. The Circassians

observed that scarce one person in a thousand was ever attacked by a small-

pox of a violent kind. That some, indeed, had this distemper very favourably

three or four times, but never twice so as to prove fatal; in a word, that no one

ever had it in a violent degree twice in his life. They observed farther, that

when the small-pox is of the milder sort, and the pustules have only a tender,

delicate skin to break through, they never leave the least scar in the face.

From these natural observations they concluded, that in case an infant of six

months or a year old should have a milder sort of small-pox, he would not die

of it, would not be marked, nor be ever afflicted with it again.


  In order, therefore, to preserve the life and beauty of their children, the

only thing remaining was to give them the small-pox in their infant years.

This they did by inoculating in the body of a child a pustule taken from the

most regular and at the same time the most favourable sort of small-pox that

could be procured.


  The experiment could not possibly fail. The Turks, who are people of

good sense, soon adopted this custom, insomuch that at this time there is not

a bassa in Constantinople but communicates the small-pox to his children of

both sexes immediately upon their being weaned.


  Some pretend that the Circassians borrowed this custom anciently from

the Arabians; but we shall leave the clearing up of this point of history to

some learned Benedictine, who will not fail to compile a great many folios on

this subject, with the several proofs or authorities. All I have to say upon it is

that,  in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  King  George  I.,  the  Lady  Wortley

Montague, a woman of as fine a genius, and endued with as great a strength

of mind, as any of her sex in the British Kingdoms, being with her husband,

who  was  ambassador  at  the  Porte,  made  no  scruple  to  communicate  the

small-pox to an infant of which she was delivered in Constantinople. The

chaplain  represented  to  his  lady,  but  to  no  purpose,  that  this  was  an

unchristian  operation,  and  therefore  that  it  could  succeed  with  none  but

infidels. However, it had the most happy effect upon the son of the Lady

Wortley  Montague,  who,  at  her  return  to  England,  communicated  theexperiment  to  the  Princess  of  Wales,  now  Queen  of  England. It  must  be

confessed that this princess, abstracted from her crown and titles, was born to

encourage the whole circle of arts, and to do good to mankind. She appears as

an amiable philosopher on the throne, having never let slip one opportunity of

improving the great talents she received from Nature, nor of exerting her

beneficence. It is she who, being informed that a daughter of Milton was

living, but in miserable circumstances, immediately sent her a considerable

present. It is she who protects the learned Father Courayer. It is she who

condescended to attempt a reconciliation between Dr. Clark and Mr. Leibnitz.

The moment this princess heard of inoculation, she caused an experiment of

it to be made on four criminals sentenced to die, and by that means preserved

their lives doubly; for she not only saved them from the gallows, but by

means of this artificial small-pox prevented their ever having that distemper

in a natural way, with which they would very probably have been attacked

one time or other, and might have died of in a more advanced age.


  The princess being assured of the usefulness of this operation, caused her

own children to be inoculated. A great part of the kingdom followed her

example, and since that time ten thousand children, at least, of persons of

condition  owe  in  this  manner  their  lives  to  her  Majesty  and  to  the  Lady

Wortley Montague; and as many of the fair sex are obliged to them for their

beauty.


  Upon a general calculation, threescore persons in every hundred have the

small-pox. Of these threescore, twenty die of it in the most favourable season

of life, and as many more wear the disagreeable remains of it in their faces so

long as they live. Thus, a fifth part of mankind either die or are disfigured by

this distemper. But it does not prove fatal to so much as one among those

who are inoculated in Turkey or in England, unless the patient be infirm, or

would have died had not the experiment been made upon him. Besides, no

one is disfigured, no one has the small-pox a second time, if the inoculation

was  perfect. It  is  therefore  certain,  that  had  the  lady  of  some  French

ambassador  brought  this  secret  from  Constantinople  to  Paris,  the  nation

would have been for ever obliged to her. Then the Duke de Villequier, father

to the Duke d’Aumont, who enjoys the most vigorous constitution, and is thehealthiest man in France, would not have been cut off in the flower of his

age.


  The Prince of Soubise, happy in the finest flush of health, would not have

been  snatched  away  at  five-and-twenty,  nor  the  Dauphin,  grandfather  to

Louis XV., have been laid in his grave in his fiftieth year. Twenty thousand

persons whom the small-pox swept away at Paris in 1723 would have been

alive  at  this  time. But  are  not  the  French  fond  of  life,  and  is  beauty  so

inconsiderable an advantage as to be disregarded by the ladies? It must be

confessed that we are an odd kind of people. Perhaps our nation will imitate

ten years hence this practice of the English, if the clergy and the physicians

will but give them leave to do it; or possibly our countrymen may introduce

inoculation  three  months  hence  in  France  out  of  mere  whim,  in  case  the

English should discontinue it through fickleness.


  I am informed that the Chinese have practised inoculation these hundred

years, a circumstance that argues very much in its favour, since they are

thought to be the wisest and best governed people in the world. The Chinese,

indeed, do not communicate this distemper by inoculation, but at the nose, in

the same manner as we take snuff. This is a more agreeable way, but then it

produces the like effects; and proves at the same time that had inoculation

been practised in France it would have saved the lives of thousands.


  LETTER XII.

  ON THE LORD BACON


  Not long since the trite and frivolous question following was debated in a

very polite and learned company, viz., Who was the greatest man, Cæsar,

Alexander, Tamerlane, Cromwell, &c.?


  Somebody  answered  that  Sir  Isaac  Newton  excelled  them  all. The

gentleman’s assertion was very just; for if true greatness consists in having

received  from  heaven  a  mighty  genius,  and  in  having  employed  it  to

enlighten our own mind and that of others, a man like Sir Isaac Newton,whose equal is hardly found in a thousand years, is the truly great man. And

those politicians and conquerors (and all ages produce some) were generally

so many illustrious wicked men. That man claims our respect who commands

over the minds of the rest of the world by the force of truth, not those who

enslave their fellow-creatures: he who is acquainted with the universe, not

they who deface it.


  Since,  therefore,  you  desire  me  to  give  you  an  account  of  the  famous

personages whom England has given birth to, I shall begin with Lord Bacon,

Mr. Locke, Sir Isaac Newton, &c. Afterwards the warriors and Ministers of

State shall come in their order.


  I must begin with the celebrated Viscount Verulam, known in Europe by

the name of Bacon, which was that of his family. His father had been Lord

Keeper, and himself was a great many years Lord Chancellor under King

James I. Nevertheless, amidst the intrigues of a Court, and the affairs of his

exalted employment, which alone were enough to engross his whole time, he

yet found so much leisure for study as to make himself a great philosopher, a

good historian, and an elegant writer; and a still more surprising circumstance

is that he lived in an age in which the art of writing justly and elegantly was

little known, much less true philosophy. Lord Bacon, as is the fate of man,

was more esteemed after his death than in his lifetime. His enemies were in

the British Court, and his admirers were foreigners.


  When  the  Marquis  d’Effiat  attended  in  England  upon  the  Princess

Henrietta Maria, daughter to Henry IV., whom King Charles I. had married,

that Minister went and visited the Lord Bacon, who, being at that time sick in

his bed, received him with the curtains shut close. “You resemble the angels,”

says the Marquis to him; “we hear those beings spoken of perpetually, and

we believe them superior to men, but are never allowed the consolation to see

them.”


  You know that this great man was accused of a crime very unbecoming a

philosopher: I mean bribery and extortion. You know that he was sentencedby the House of Lords to pay a fine of about four hundred thousand French

livres, to lose his peerage and his dignity of Chancellor; but in the present age

the English revere his memory to such a degree, that they will scarce allow

him to have been guilty. In case you should ask what are my thoughts on this

head, I shall answer you in the words which I heard the Lord Bolingbroke use

on another occasion. Several gentlemen were speaking, in his company, of

the avarice with which the late Duke of Marlborough had been charged, some

examples whereof being given, the Lord Bolingbroke was appealed to (who,

having been in the opposite party, might perhaps, without the imputation of

indecency, have been allowed to clear up that matter): “He was so great a

man,” replied his lordship, “that I have forgot his vices.”


  I shall therefore confine myself to those things which so justly gained

Lord Bacon the esteem of all Europe.


  The most singular and the best of all his pieces is that which, at this time,

is  the  most  useless  and  the  least  read,  I  mean  his  Novum  Scientiarum

Organum. This is the scaffold with which the new philosophy was raised; and

when the edifice was built, part of it at least, the scaffold was no longer of

service.


  The Lord Bacon was not yet acquainted with Nature, but then he knew,

and pointed out, the several paths that lead to it. He had despised in his

younger years the thing called philosophy in the Universities, and did all that

lay  in  his  power  to  prevent  those  societies  of  men  instituted  to  improve

human  reason  from  depraving  it  by  their  quiddities,  their  horrors  of  the

vacuum, their substantial forms, and all those impertinent terms which not

only ignorance had rendered venerable, but which had been made sacred by

their being ridiculously blended with religion.


  He is the father of experimental philosophy. It must, indeed, be confessed

that  very  surprising  secrets  had  been  found  out  before  his  time-the  sea-

compass, printing, engraving on copper plates, oil-painting, looking-glasses;

the art of restoring, in some measure, old men to their sight by spectacles;gunpowder, &c., had been discovered. A new world had been fought for,

found, and conquered. Would not one suppose that these sublime discoveries

had  been  made  by  the  greatest  philosophers,  and  in  ages  much  more

enlightened than the present? But it was far otherwise; all these great changes

happened in the most stupid and barbarous times. Chance only gave birth to

most of those inventions; and it is very probable that what is called chance

contributed  very  much  to  the  discovery  of  America;  at  least,  it  has  been

always thought that Christopher Columbus undertook his voyage merely on

the relation of a captain of a ship which a storm had driven as far westward as

the Caribbean Islands. Be this as it will, men had sailed round the world, and

could destroy cities by an artificial thunder more dreadful than the real one;

but, then, they were not acquainted with the circulation of the blood, the

weight of the air, the laws of motion, light, the number of our planets, &c.

And  a  man  who  maintained  a  thesis  on  Aristotle’s  “Categories,”  on  the

universals a parte rei, or such-like nonsense, was looked upon as a prodigy.


  The  most  astonishing,  the  most  useful  inventions,  are  not  those  which

reflect the greatest honour on the human mind. It is to a mechanical instinct,

which is found in many men, and not to true philosophy, that most arts owe

their origin.


  The discovery of fire, the art of making bread, of melting and preparing

metals, of building houses, and the invention of the shuttle, are infinitely

more beneficial to mankind than printing or the sea-compass: and yet these

arts were invented by uncultivated, savage men.


  What  a  prodigious  use  the  Greeks  and  Romans  made  afterwards  of

mechanics! Nevertheless, they believed that there were crystal heavens, that

the stars were small lamps which sometimes fell into the sea, and one of their

greatest philosophers, after long researches, found that the stars were so many

flints which had been detached from the earth.


  In  a  word,  no  one  before  the  Lord  Bacon  was  acquainted  with

experimental philosophy, nor with the several physical experiments whichhave been made since his time. Scarce one of them but is hinted at in his

work, and he himself had made several. He made a kind of pneumatic engine,

by which he guessed the elasticity of the air. He approached, on all sides as it

were, to the discovery of its weight, and had very near attained it, but some

time  after  Torricelli  seized  upon  this  truth. In  a  little  time  experimental

philosophy began to be cultivated on a sudden in most parts of Europe. It was

a hidden treasure which the Lord Bacon had some notion of, and which all

the philosophers, encouraged by his promises, endeavoured to dig up.


  But that which surprised me most was to read in his work, in express

terms,  the  new  attraction,  the  invention  of  which  is  ascribed  to  Sir  Isaac

Newton.


  We must search, says Lord Bacon, whether there may not be a kind of

magnetic power which operates between the earth and heavy bodies, between

the moon and the ocean, between the planets, &c. In another place he says

either heavy bodies must be carried towards the centre of the earth, or must

be reciprocally attracted by it; and in the latter case it is evident that the

nearer bodies, in their falling, draw towards the earth, the stronger they will

attract one another. We must, says he, make an experiment to see whether the

same clock will go faster on the top of a mountain or at the bottom of a mine;

whether the strength of the weights decreases on the mountain and increases

in the mine. It is probable that the earth has a true attractive power.


  This forerunner in philosophy was also an elegant writer, an historian, and

a wit.


  His moral essays are greatly esteemed, but they were drawn up in the view

of  instructing  rather  than  of  pleasing;  and,  as  they  are  not  a  satire  upon

mankind, like Rochefoucauld’s “Maxims,” nor written upon a sceptical plan,

like Montaigne’s “Essays,” they are not so much read as those two ingenious

authors.


  His History of Henry VII. was looked upon as a masterpiece, but how is itpossible that some persons can presume to compare so little a work with the

history of our illustrious Thuanus?


  Speaking about the famous impostor Perkin, son to a converted Jew, who

assumed boldly the name and title of Richard IV., King of England, at the

instigation of the Duchess of Burgundy, and who disputed the crown with

Henry VII., the Lord Bacon writes as follows:-


  “At this time the King began again to be haunted with sprites, by the

magic and curious arts of the Lady Margaret, who raised up the ghost of

Richard, Duke of York, second son to King Edward IV., to walk and vex the

King.


  “After  such  time  as  she  (Margaret  of  Burgundy)  thought  he  (Perkin

Warbeck) was perfect in his lesson, she began to cast with herself from what

coast this blazing star should first appear, and at what time it must be upon

the horizon of Ireland; for there had the like meteor strong influence before.”


  Methinks our sagacious Thuanus does not give in to such fustian, which

formerly  was  looked  upon  as  sublime,  but  in  this  age  is  justly  called

nonsense.


  LETTER XIII.

  ON MR. LOCKE


  Perhaps no man ever had a more judicious or more methodical genius, or

was a more acute logician than Mr. Locke, and yet he was not deeply skilled

in the mathematics. This great man could never subject himself to the tedious

fatigue of calculations, nor to the dry pursuit of mathematical truths, which

do not at first present any sensible objects to the mind; and no one has given

better proofs than he, that it is possible for a man to have a geometrical head

without  the  assistance  of  geometry. Before  his  time,  several  great

philosophers had declared, in the most positive terms, what the soul of manis; but as these absolutely knew nothing about it, they might very well be

allowed to differ entirely in opinion from one another.


  In Greece, the infant seat of arts and of errors, and where the grandeur as

well as folly of the human mind went such prodigious lengths, the people

used to reason about the soul in the very same manner as we do.


  The  divine  Anaxagoras,  in  whose  honour  an  altar  was  erected  for  his

having taught mankind that the sun was greater than Peloponnesus, that snow

was black, and that the heavens were of stone, affirmed that the soul was an

aërial spirit, but at the same time immortal. Diogenes (not he who was a

cynical philosopher after having coined base money) declared that the soul

was a portion of the substance of God: an idea which we must confess was

very sublime. Epicurus maintained that it was composed of parts in the same

manner as the body.


  Aristotle,  who  has  been  explained  a  thousand  ways,  because  he  is

unintelligible, was of opinion, according to some of his disciples, that the

understanding in all men is one and the same substance.


  The divine Plato, master of the divine Aristotle,-and the divine Socrates,

master of the divine Plato-used to say that the soul was corporeal and eternal.

No doubt but the demon of Socrates had instructed him in the nature of it.

Some people, indeed, pretend that a man who boasted his being attended by a

familiar genius must infallibly be either a knave or a madman, but this kind

of people are seldom satisfied with anything but reason.


  With regard to the Fathers of the Church, several in the primitive ages

believed that the soul was human, and the angels and God corporeal. Men

naturally  improve  upon  every  system. St.  Bernard,  as  Father  Mabillon

confesses, taught that the soul after death does not see God in the celestial

regions, but converses with Christ’s human nature only. However, he was not

believed this time on his bare word; the adventure of the crusade having a

little sunk the credit of his oracles. Afterwards a thousand schoolmen arose,such as the Irrefragable Doctor, the Subtile Doctor, the Angelic Doctor, the

Seraphic Doctor, and the Cherubic Doctor, who were all sure that they had a

very clear and distinct idea of the soul, and yet wrote in such a manner, that

one would conclude they were resolved no one should understand a word in

their writings. Our Descartes, born to discover the errors of antiquity, and at

the same time to substitute his own, and hurried away by that systematic

spirit which throws a cloud over the minds of the greatest men, thought he

had demonstrated that the soul is the same thing as thought, in the same

manner as matter, in his opinion, is the same as extension. He asserted, that

man  thinks  eternally,  and  that  the  soul,  at  its  coming  into  the  body,  is

informed  with  the  whole  series  of  metaphysical  notions:  knowing  God,

infinite  space,  possessing  all  abstract  ideas-in  a  word,  completely  endued

with the most sublime lights, which it unhappily forgets at its issuing from

the womb.


  Father  Malebranche,  in  his  sublime  illusions,  not  only  admitted  innate

ideas, but did not doubt of our living wholly in God, and that God is, as it

were, our soul.


  Such a multitude of reasoners having written the romance of the soul, a

sage at last arose, who gave, with an air of the greatest modesty, the history

of it. Mr. Locke has displayed the human soul in the same manner as an

excellent anatomist explains the springs of the human body. He everywhere

takes the light of physics for his guide. He sometimes presumes to speak

affirmatively, but then he presumes also to doubt. Instead of concluding at

once what we know not, he examines gradually what we would know. He

takes an infant at the instant of his birth; he traces, step by step, the progress

of his understanding; examines what things he has in common with beasts,

and what he possesses above them. Above all, he consults himself: the being

conscious that he himself thinks.


  “I shall leave,” says he, “to those who know more of this matter than

myself, the examining whether the soul exists before or after the organisation

of our bodies. But I confess that it is my lot to be animated with one of those

heavy souls which do not think always; and I am even so unhappy as not toconceive that it is more necessary the soul should think perpetually than that

bodies should be for ever in motion.”


  With regard to myself, I shall boast that I have the honour to be as stupid

in this particular as Mr. Locke. No one shall ever make me believe that I

think always: and I am as little inclined as he could be to fancy that some

weeks after I was conceived I was a very learned soul; knowing at that time a

thousand things which I forgot at my birth; and possessing when in the womb

(though to no manner of purpose) knowledge which I lost the instant I had

occasion for it; and which I have never since been able to recover perfectly.


  Mr.  Locke,  after  having  destroyed  innate  ideas;  after  having  fully

renounced the vanity of believing that we think always; after having laid

down, from the most solid principles, that ideas enter the mind through the

senses; having examined our simple and complex ideas; having traced the

human  mind  through  its  several  operations;  having  shown  that  all  the

languages in the world are imperfect, and the great abuse that is made of

words every moment, he at last comes to consider the extent or rather the

narrow limits of human knowledge. It was in this chapter he presumed to

advance, but very modestly, the following words: “We shall, perhaps, never

be capable of knowing whether a being, purely material, thinks or not.” This

sage assertion was, by more divines than one, looked upon as a scandalous

declaration that the soul is material and mortal. Some Englishmen, devout

after their way, sounded an alarm. The superstitious are the same in society as

cowards  in  an  army;  they  themselves  are  seized  with  a  panic  fear,  and

communicate it to others. It was loudly exclaimed that Mr. Locke intended to

destroy religion; nevertheless, religion had nothing to do in the affair, it being

a  question  purely  philosophical,  altogether  independent  of  faith  and

revelation. Mr.  Locke’s  opponents  needed  but  to  examine,  calmly  and

impartially,  whether  the  declaring  that  matter  can  think,  implies  a

contradiction; and whether God is able to communicate thought to matter.

But divines are too apt to begin their declarations with saying that God is

offended when people differ from them in opinion; in which they too much

resemble  the  bad  poets,  who  used  to  declare  publicly  that  Boileau  spake

irreverently  of  Louis  XIV.,  because  he  ridiculed  their  stupid  productions.Bishop  Stillingfleet  got  the  reputation  of  a  calm  and  unprejudiced  divine

because he did not expressly make use of injurious terms in his dispute with

Mr. Locke. That divine entered the lists against him, but was defeated; for he

argued  as  a  schoolman,  and  Locke  as  a  philosopher,  who  was  perfectly

acquainted with the strong as well as the weak side of the human mind, and

who fought with weapons whose temper he knew. If I might presume to give

my opinion on so delicate a subject after Mr. Locke, I would say, that men

have long disputed on the nature and the immortality of the soul. With regard

to its immortality, it is impossible to give a demonstration of it, since its

nature is still the subject of controversy; which, however, must be thoroughly

understood before a person can be able to determine whether it be immortal

or  not. Human  reason  is  so  little  able,  merely  by  its  own  strength,  to

demonstrate  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  that  it  was  absolutely  necessary

religion should reveal it to us. It is of advantage to society in general, that

mankind should believe the soul to be immortal; faith commands us to do

this; nothing more is required, and the matter is cleared up at once. But it is

otherwise with respect to its nature; it is of little importance to religion, which

only requires the soul to be virtuous, whatever substance it may be made of.

It is a clock which is given us to regulate, but the artist has not told us of what

materials the spring of this chock is composed.


  I am a body, and, I think, that’s all I know of the matter. Shall I ascribe to

an unknown cause, what I can so easily impute to the only second cause I am

acquainted with? Here all the school philosophers interrupt me with their

arguments, and declare that there is only extension and solidity in bodies, and

that there they can have nothing but motion and figure. Now motion, figure,

extension  and  solidity  cannot  form  a  thought,  and  consequently  the  soul

cannot  be  matter. All  this  so  often  repeated  mighty  series  of  reasoning,

amounts to no more than this: I am absolutely ignorant what matter is; I

guess, but imperfectly, some properties of it; now I absolutely cannot tell

whether  these  properties  may  be  joined  to  thought. As  I  therefore  know

nothing, I maintain positively that matter cannot think. In this manner do the

schools reason.


  Mr.  Locke  addressed  these  gentlemen  in  the  candid,  sincere  mannerfollowing: At least confess yourselves to be as ignorant as I. Neither your

imaginations nor mine are able to comprehend in what manner a body is

susceptible of ideas; and do you conceive better in what manner a substance,

of  what  kind  soever,  is  susceptible  of  them? As  you  cannot  comprehend

either matter or spirit, why will you presume to assert anything?


  The superstitious man comes afterwards and declares, that all those must

be burnt for the good of their souls, who so much as suspect that it is possible

for the body to think without any foreign assistance. But what would these

people say should they themselves be proved irreligious? And indeed, what

man  can  presume  to  assert,  without  being  guilty  at  the  same  time  of  the

greatest impiety, that it is impossible for the Creator to form matter with

thought and sensation? Consider only, I beg you, what a dilemma you bring

yourselves into, you who confine in this manner the power of the Creator.

Beasts have the same organs, the same sensations, the same perceptions as

we; they have memory, and combine certain ideas. In case it was not in the

power  of  God  to  animate  matter,  and  inform  it  with  sensation,  the

consequence would be, either that beasts are mere machines, or that they have

a spiritual soul.


  Methinks it is clearly evident that beasts cannot be mere machines, which

I prove thus. God has given to them the very same organs of sensation as to

us: if therefore they have no sensation, God has created a useless thing; now

according to your own confession God does nothing in vain; He therefore did

not create so many organs of sensation, merely for them to be uninformed

with  this  faculty;  consequently  beasts  are  not  mere  machines. Beasts,

according to your assertion, cannot be animated with a spiritual soul; you

will, therefore, in spite of yourself, be reduced to this only assertion, viz., that

God has endued the organs of beasts, who are mere matter, with the faculties

of sensation and perception, which you call instinct in them. But why may

not God, if He pleases, communicate to our more delicate organs, that faculty

of  feeling,  perceiving,  and  thinking,  which  we  call  human  reason? To

whatever side you turn, you are forced to acknowledge your own ignorance,

and the boundless power of the Creator. Exclaim therefore no more against

the sage, the modest philosophy of Mr. Locke, which so far from interferingwith religion, would be of use to demonstrate the truth of it, in case religion

wanted any such support. For what philosophy can be of a more religious

nature than that, which affirming nothing but what it conceives clearly, and

conscious of its own weakness, declares that we must always have recourse

to God in our examining of the first principles?


  Besides, we must not be apprehensive that any philosophical opinion will

ever prejudice the religion of a country. Though our demonstrations clash

directly with our mysteries, that is nothing to the purpose, for the latter are

not less revered upon that account by our Christian philosophers, who know

very well that the objects of reason and those of faith are of a very different

nature. Philosophers will never form a religious sect, the reason of which is,

their writings are not calculated for the vulgar, and they themselves are free

from enthusiasm. If we divide mankind into twenty parts, it will be found that

nineteen of these consist of persons employed in manual labour, who will

never know that such a man as Mr. Locke existed. In the remaining twentieth

part  how  few  are  readers? And  among  such  as  are  so,  twenty  amuse

themselves with romances to one who studies philosophy. The thinking part

of mankind is confined to a very small number, and these will never disturb

the peace and tranquillity of the world.


  Neither Montaigne, Locke, Bayle, Spinoza, Hobbes, the Lord Shaftesbury,

Collins, nor Toland lighted up the firebrand of discord in their countries; this

has generally been the work of divines, who being at first puffed up with the

ambition of becoming chiefs of a sect, soon grew very desirous of being at

the  head  of  a  party. But  what  do  I  say? All  the  works  of  the  modern

philosophers put together will never make so much noise as even the dispute

which arose among the Franciscans, merely about the fashion of their sleeves

and of their cowls.


  LETTER XIV.

  ON DESCARTES AND SIR ISAAC NEWTON


  A Frenchman who arrives in London, will find philosophy, like everythingelse, very much changed there. He had left the world a plenum, and he now

finds it a vacuum. At Paris the universe is seen composed of vortices of

subtile  matter;  but  nothing  like  it  is  seen  in  London. In  France,  it  is  the

pressure of the moon that causes the tides; but in England it is the sea that

gravitates towards the moon; so that when you think that the moon should

make it flood with us, those gentlemen fancy it should be ebb, which very

unluckily cannot be proved. For to be able to do this, it is necessary the moon

and  the  tides  should  have  been  inquired  into  at  the  very  instant  of  the

creation.


  You will observe farther, that the sun, which in France is said to have

nothing  to  do  in  the  affair,  comes  in  here  for  very  near  a  quarter  of  its

assistance. According  to  your  Cartesians,  everything  is  performed  by  an

impulsion, of which we have very little notion; and according to Sir Isaac

Newton, it is by an attraction, the cause of which is as much unknown to us.

At Paris you imagine that the earth is shaped like a melon, or of an oblique

figure; at London it has an oblate one. A Cartesian declares that light exists in

the air; but a Newtonian asserts that it comes from the sun in six minutes and

a half. The  several  operations  of  your  chemistry  are  performed  by  acids,

alkalies and subtile matter; but attraction prevails even in chemistry among

the English.


  The very essence of things is totally changed. You neither are agreed upon

the definition of the soul, nor on that of matter. Descartes, as I observed in

my last, maintains that the soul is the same thing with thought, and Mr. Locke

has given a pretty good proof of the contrary.


  Descartes asserts farther, that extension alone constitutes matter, but Sir

Isaac adds solidity to it.


  How furiously contradictory are these opinions!


  “Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites.”  VIRGIL, Eclog. III.


  “’Tis not for us to end such great disputes.”


  This  famous  Newton,  this  destroyer  of  the  Cartesian  system,  died  in

March, anno 1727. His countrymen honoured him in his lifetime, and interred

him as though he had been a king who had made his people happy.


  The English read with the highest satisfaction, and translated into their

tongue, the Elogium of Sir Isaac Newton, which M. de Fontenelle spoke in

the  Academy  of  Sciences. M.  de  Fontenelle  presides  as  judge  over

philosophers; and the English expected his decision, as a solemn declaration

of the superiority of the English philosophy over that of the French. But when

it was found that this gentleman had compared Descartes to Sir Isaac, the

whole Royal Society in London rose up in arms. So far from acquiescing

with  M.  Fontenelle’s  judgment,  they  criticised  his  discourse. And  even

several (who, however, were not the ablest philosophers in that body) were

offended at the comparison; and for no other reason but because Descartes

was a Frenchman.


  It  must  be  confessed  that  these  two  great  men  differed  very  much  in

conduct, in fortune, and in philosophy.


  Nature  had  indulged  Descartes  with  a  shining  and  strong  imagination,

whence  he  became  a  very  singular  person  both  in  private  life  and  in  his

manner of reasoning. This imagination could not conceal itself even in his

philosophical  works,  which  are  everywhere  adorned  with  very  shining,

ingenious metaphors and figures. Nature had almost made him a poet; and

indeed he wrote a piece of poetry for the entertainment of Christina, Queen of

Sweden, which however was suppressed in honour to his memory.


  He embraced a military life for some time, and afterwards becoming a

complete philosopher, he did not think the passion of love derogatory to his

character. He  had  by  his  mistress  a  daughter  called  Froncine,  who  diedyoung,  and  was  very  much  regretted  by  him. Thus  he  experienced  every

passion incident to mankind.


  He was a long time of opinion that it would be necessary for him to fly

from  the  society  of  his  fellow  creatures,  and  especially  from  his  native

country,  in  order  to  enjoy  the  happiness  of  cultivating  his  philosophical

studies in full liberty.


  Descartes  was  very  right,  for  his  contemporaries  were  not  knowing

enough to improve and enlighten his understanding, and were capable of little

else than of giving him uneasiness.


  He left France purely to go in search of truth, which was then persecuted

by the wretched philosophy of the schools. However, he found that reason

was  as  much  disguised  and  depraved  in  the  universities  of  Holland,  into

which he withdrew, as in his own country. For at the time that the French

condemned the only propositions of his philosophy which were true, he was

persecuted by the pretended philosophers of Holland, who understood him no

better; and who, having a nearer view of his glory, hated his person the more,

so that he was obliged to leave Utrecht. Descartes was injuriously accused of

being  an  atheist,  the  last  refuge  of  religious  scandal:  and  he  who  had

employed all the sagacity and penetration of his genius, in searching for new

proofs of the existence of a God, was suspected to believe there was no such

Being.


  Such a persecution from all sides, must necessarily suppose a most exalted

merit as well as a very distinguished reputation, and indeed he possessed

both. Reason at that time darted a ray upon the world through the gloom of

the  schools,  and  the  prejudices  of  popular  superstition. At  last  his  name

spread so universally, that the French were desirous of bringing him back into

his native country by rewards, and accordingly offered him an annual pension

of a thousand crowns. Upon these hopes Descartes returned to France; paid

the fees of his patent, which was sold at that time, but no pension was settled

upon him. Thus disappointed, he returned to his solitude in North Holland,where he again pursued the study of philosophy, whilst the great Galileo, at

fourscore years of age, was groaning in the prisons of the Inquisition, only for

having demonstrated the earth’s motion.


  At last Descartes was snatched from the world in the flower of his age at

Stockholm. His death was owing to a bad regimen, and he expired in the

midst  of  some  literati  who  were  his  enemies,  and  under  the  hands  of  a

physician to whom he was odious.


  The  progress  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton’s  life  was  quite  different. He  lived

happy, and very much honoured in his native country, to the age of fourscore

and five years.


  It was his peculiar felicity, not only to be born in a country of liberty, but

in an age when all scholastic impertinences were banished from the world.

Reason alone was cultivated, and mankind could only be his pupil, not his

enemy.


  One very singular difference in the lives of these two great men is, that Sir

Isaac, during the long course of years he enjoyed, was never sensible to any

passion, was not subject to the common frailties of mankind, nor ever had

any commerce with women-a circumstance which was assured me by the

physician and surgeon who attended him in his last moments.


  We may admire Sir Isaac Newton on this occasion, but then we must not

censure Descartes.


  The opinion that generally prevails in England with regard to these new

philosophers is, that the latter was a dreamer, and the former a sage.


  Very few people in England read Descartes, whose works indeed are now

useless. On the other side, but a small number peruse those of Sir Isaac,

because to do this the student must be deeply skilled in the mathematics,otherwise those works will be unintelligible to him. But notwithstanding this,

these great men are the subject of everyone’s discourse. Sir Isaac Newton is

allowed  every  advantage,  whilst  Descartes  is  not  indulged  a  single  one.

According to some, it is to the former that we owe the discovery of a vacuum,

that the air is a heavy body, and the invention of telescopes. In a word, Sir

Isaac Newton is here as the Hercules of fabulous story, to whom the ignorant

ascribed all the feats of ancient heroes.


  In a critique that was made in London on Mr. de Fontenelle’s discourse,

the writer presumed to assert that Descartes was not a great geometrician.

Those who make such a declaration may justly be reproached with flying in

their master’s face. Descartes extended the limits of geometry as far beyond

the place where he found them, as Sir Isaac did after him. The former first

taught the method of expressing curves by equations. This geometry which,

thanks to him for it, is now grown common, was so abstruse in his time, that

not so much as one professor would undertake to explain it; and Schotten in

Holland, and Format in France, were the only men who understood it.


  He applied this geometrical and inventive genius to dioptrics, which, when

treated of by him, became a new art. And if he was mistaken in some things,

the reason of that is, a man who discovers a new tract of land cannot at once

know all the properties of the soil. Those who come after him, and make

these lands fruitful, are at least obliged to him for the discovery. I will not

deny but that there are innumerable errors in the rest of Descartes’ works.


  Geometry was a guide he himself had in some measure fashioned, which

would  have  conducted  him  safely  through  the  several  paths  of  natural

philosophy. Nevertheless, he at last abandoned this guide, and gave entirely

into the humour of forming hypotheses; and then philosophy was no more

than an ingenious romance, fit only to amuse the ignorant. He was mistaken

in the nature of the soul, in the proofs of the existence of a God, in matter, in

the laws of motion, and in the nature of light. He admitted innate ideas, he

invented new elements, he created a world; he made man according to his

own fancy; and it is justly said, that the man of Descartes is, in fact, that of

Descartes only, very different from the real one.  He pushed his metaphysical errors so far, as to declare that two and two

make four for no other reason but because God would have it so. However, it

will not be making him too great a compliment if we affirm that he was

valuable even in his mistakes. He deceived himself; but then it was at least in

a methodical way. He destroyed all the absurd chimeras with which youth

had been infatuated for two thousand years. He taught his contemporaries

how to reason, and enabled them to employ his own weapons against himself.

If Descartes did not pay in good money, he however did great service in

crying down that of a base alloy.


  I indeed believe that very few will presume to compare his philosophy in

any respect with that of Sir Isaac Newton. The former is an essay, the latter a

masterpiece. But then the man who first brought us to the path of truth, was

perhaps as great a genius as he who afterwards conducted us through it.


  Descartes gave sight to the blind. These saw the errors of antiquity and of

the sciences. The path he struck out is since become boundless. Rohault’s

little work was, during some years, a complete system of physics; but now all

the Transactions of the several academies in Europe put together do not form

so much as the beginning of a system. In fathoming this abyss no bottom has

been found. We are now to examine what discoveries Sir Isaac Newton has

made in it.


  LETTER XV.

  ON ATTRACTION


  The discoveries which gained Sir Isaac Newton so universal a reputation,

relate to the system of the world, to light, to geometrical infinities; and, lastly,

to chronology, with which he used to amuse himself after the fatigue of his

severer studies.


  I will now acquaint you (without prolixity if possible) with the few thingsI have been able to comprehend of all these sublime ideas. With regard to the

system of our world, disputes were a long time maintained, on the cause that

turns the planets, and keeps them in their orbits: and on those causes which

make all bodies here below descend towards the surface of the earth.


  The system of Descartes, explained and improved since his time, seemed

to give a plausible reason for all those phenomena; and this reason seemed

more just, as it is simple and intelligible to all capacities. But in philosophy, a

student ought to doubt of the things he fancies he understands too easily, as

much as of those he does not understand.


  Gravity, the falling of accelerated bodies on the earth, the revolution of the

planets in their orbits, their rotations round their axis, all this is mere motion.

Now motion cannot perhaps be conceived any otherwise than by impulsion;

therefore all those bodies must be impelled. But by what are they impelled?

All space is full, it therefore is filled with a very subtile matter, since this is

imperceptible to us; this matter goes from west to east, since all the planets

are carried from west to east. Thus from hypothesis to hypothesis, from one

appearance to another, philosophers have imagined a vast whirlpool of subtile

matter, in which the planets are carried round the sun: they also have created

another particular vortex which floats in the great one, and which turns daily

round the planets. When all this is done, it is pretended that gravity depends

on this diurnal motion; for, say these, the velocity of the subtile matter that

turns round our little vortex, must be seventeen times more rapid than that of

the earth; or, in case its velocity is seventeen times greater than that of the

earth, its centrifugal force must be vastly greater, and consequently impel all

bodies  towards  the  earth. This  is  the  cause  of  gravity,  according  to  the

Cartesian system. But the theorist, before he calculated the centrifugal force

and  velocity  of  the  subtile  matter,  should  first  have  been  certain  that  it

existed.


  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  seems  to  have  destroyed  all  these  great  and  little

vortices, both that which carries the planets round the sun, as well as the

other which supposes every planet to turn on its own axis.  First,  with  regard  to  the  pretended  little  vortex  of  the  earth,  it  is

demonstrated  that  it  must  lose  its  motion  by  insensible  degrees;  it  is

demonstrated, that if the earth swims in a fluid, its density must be equal to

that  of  the  earth;  and  in  case  its  density  be  the  same,  all  the  bodies  we

endeavour to move must meet with an insuperable resistance.


  With regard to the great vortices, they are still more chimerical, and it is

impossible to make them agree with Kepler’s law, the truth of which has

been demonstrated. Sir Isaac shows, that the revolution of the fluid in which

Jupiter is supposed to be carried, is not the same with regard to the revolution

of the fluid of the earth, as the revolution of Jupiter with respect to that of the

earth. He proves, that as the planets make their revolutions in ellipses, and

consequently being at a much greater distance one from the other in their

Aphelia, and a little nearer in their Perihelia; the earth’s velocity, for instance,

ought to be greater when it is nearer Venus and Mars, because the fluid that

carries it along, being then more pressed, ought to have a greater motion; and

yet it is even then that the earth’s motion is slower.


  He proves that there is no such thing as a celestial matter which goes from

west to east since the comets traverse those spaces, sometimes from east to

west, and at other times from north to south.


  In fine, the better to resolve, if possible, every difficulty, he proves, and

even by experiments, that it is impossible there should be a plenum; and

brings back the vacuum, which Aristotle and Descartes had banished from

the world.


  Having  by  these  and  several  other  arguments  destroyed  the  Cartesian

vortices, he despaired of ever being able to discover whether there is a secret

principle in nature which, at the same time, is the cause of the motion of all

celestial bodies, and that of gravity on the earth. But being retired in 1666,

upon account of the Plague, to a solitude near Cambridge; as he was walking

one day in his garden, and saw some fruits fall from a tree, he fell into a

profound meditation on that gravity, the cause of which had so long beensought, but in vain, by all the philosophers, whilst the vulgar think there is

nothing mysterious in it. He said to himself; that from what height soever in

our hemisphere, those bodies might descend, their fall would certainly be in

the progression discovered by Galileo; and the spaces they run through would

be as the square of the times. Why may not this power which causes heavy

bodies to descend, and is the same without any sensible diminution at the

remotest  distance  from  the  centre  of  the  earth,  or  on  the  summits  of  the

highest mountains, why, said Sir Isaac, may not this power extend as high as

the moon? And in case its influence reaches so far, is it not very probable that

this power retains it in its orbit, and determines its motion? But in case the

moon  obeys  this  principle  (whatever  it  be)  may  we  not  conclude  very

naturally that the rest of the planets are equally subject to it? In case this

power exists (which besides is proved) it must increase in an inverse ratio of

the squares of the distances. All, therefore, that remains is, to examine how

far a heavy body, which should fall upon the earth from a moderate height,

would go; and how far in the same time, a body which should fall from the

orbit of the moon, would descend. To find this, nothing is wanted but the

measure of the earth, and the distance of the moon from it.


  Thus Sir Isaac Newton reasoned. But at that time the English had but a

very  imperfect  measure  of  our  globe,  and  depended  on  the  uncertain

supposition of mariners, who computed a degree to contain but sixty English

miles, whereas it consists in reality of near seventy. As this false computation

did not agree with the conclusions which Sir Isaac intended to draw from

them, he laid aside this pursuit. A half-learned philosopher, remarkable only

for his vanity, would have made the measure of the earth agree, anyhow, with

his system. Sir Isaac, however, chose rather to quit the researches he was then

engaged in. But after Mr. Picard had measured the earth exactly, by tracing

that meridian which redounds so much to the honour of the French, Sir Isaac

Newton  resumed  his  former  reflections,  and  found  his  account  in  Mr.

Picard’s calculation.


  A circumstance which has always appeared wonderful to me, is that such

sublime  discoveries  should  have  been  made  by  the  sole  assistance  of  a

quadrant and a little arithmetic.  The circumference of the earth is 123,249,600 feet. This, among other

things, is necessary to prove the system of attraction.


  The instant we know the earth’s circumference, and the distance of the

moon, we know that of the moon’s orbit, and the diameter of this orbit. The

moon performs its revolution in that orbit in twenty-seven days, seven hours,

forty-three minutes. It is demonstrated, that the moon in its mean motion

makes an hundred and fourscore and seven thousand nine hundred and sixty

feet (of Paris) in a minute. It is likewise demonstrated, by a known theorem,

that the central force which should make a body fall from the height of the

moon, would make its velocity no more than fifteen Paris feet in a minute of

time. Now, if the law by which bodies gravitate and attract one another in an

inverse ratio to the squares of the distances be true, if the same power acts

according to that law throughout all nature, it is evident that as the earth is

sixty semi-diameters distant from the moon, a heavy body must necessarily

fall (on the earth) fifteen feet in the first second, and fifty-four thousand feet

in the first minute.


  Now a heavy body falls, in reality, fifteen feet in the first second, and goes

in the first minute fifty-four thousand feet, which number is the square of

sixty multiplied by fifteen. Bodies, therefore, gravitate in an inverse ratio of

the squares of the distances; consequently, what causes gravity on earth, and

keeps the moon in its orbit, is one and the same power; it being demonstrated

that the moon gravitates on the earth, which is the centre of its particular

motion, it is demonstrated that the earth and the moon gravitate on the sun

which is the centre of their annual motion.


  The rest of the planets must be subject to this general law; and if this law

exists, these planets must follow the laws which Kepler discovered. All these

laws, all these relations are indeed observed by the planets with the utmost

exactness; therefore, the power of attraction causes all the planets to gravitate

towards the sun, in like manner as the moon gravitates towards our globe.  Finally, as in all bodies re-action is equal to action, it is certain that the

earth gravitates also towards the moon; and that the sun gravitates towards

both. That every one of the satellites of Saturn gravitates towards the other

four,  and  the  other  four  towards  it;  all  five  towards  Saturn,  and  Saturn

towards all. That it is the same with regard to Jupiter; and that all these globes

are attracted by the sun, which is reciprocally attracted by them.


  This power of gravitation acts proportionably to the quantity of matter in

bodies, a truth which Sir Isaac has demonstrated by experiments. This new

discovery has been of use to show that the sun (the centre of the planetary

system) attracts them all in a direct ratio of their quantity of matter combined

with their nearness. From hence Sir Isaac, rising by degrees to discoveries

which  seemed  not  to  be  formed  for  the  human  mind,  is  bold  enough  to

compute the quantity of matter contained in the sun and in every planet; and

in this manner shows, from the simple laws of mechanics, that every celestial

globe ought necessarily to be where it is placed.


  His bare principle of the laws of gravitation accounts for all the apparent

inequalities in the course of the celestial globes. The variations of the moon

are a necessary consequence of those laws. Moreover, the reason is evidently

seen why the nodes of the moon perform their revolutions in nineteen years,

and those of the earth in about twenty-six thousand. The several appearances

observed in the tides are also a very simple effect of this attraction. The

proximity of the moon, when at the full, and when it is new, and its distance

in the quadratures or quarters, combined with the action of the sun, exhibit a

sensible reason why the ocean swells and sinks.


  After having shown by his sublime theory the course and inequalities of

the  planets,  he  subjects  comets  to  the  same  law. The  orbit  of  these  fires

(unknown for so great a series of years), which was the terror of mankind and

the rock against which philosophy split, placed by Aristotle below the moon,

and sent back by Descartes above the sphere of Saturn, is at last placed in its

proper seat by Sir Isaac Newton.  He proves that comets are solid bodies which move in the sphere of the

sun’s activity, and that they describe an ellipsis so very eccentric, and so near

to parabolas, that certain comets must take up above five hundred years in

their revolution.


  The learned Dr. Halley is of opinion that the comet seen in 1680 is the

same which appeared in Julius Cæsar’s time. This shows more than any other

that comets are hard, opaque bodies; for it descended so near to the sun, as to

come  within  a  sixth  part  of  the  diameter  of  this  planet  from  it,  and

consequently  might  have  contracted  a  degree  of  heat  two  thousand  times

stronger than that of red-hot iron; and would have been soon dispersed in

vapour, had it not been a firm, dense body. The guessing the course of comets

began then to be very much in vogue. The celebrated Bernoulli concluded by

his system that the famous comet of 1680 would appear again the 17th of

May,  1719. Not  a  single  astronomer  in  Europe  went  to  bed  that  night.

However, they needed not to have broke their rest, for the famous comet

never appeared. There  is  at  least  more  cunning,  if  not  more  certainty,  in

fixing its return to so remote a distance as five hundred and seventy-five

years. As to Mr. Whiston, he affirmed very seriously that in the time of the

Deluge a comet overflowed the terrestrial globe. And he was so unreasonable

as to wonder that people laughed at him for making such an assertion. The

ancients were almost in the same way of thinking with Mr. Whiston, and

fancied  that  comets  were  always  the  forerunners  of  some  great  calamity

which was to befall mankind. Sir Isaac Newton, on the contrary, suspected

that they are very beneficent, and that vapours exhale from them merely to

nourish  and  vivify  the  planets,  which  imbibe  in  their  course  the  several

particles the sun has detached from the comets, an opinion which, at least, is

more probable than the former. But this is not all. If this power of gravitation

or attraction acts on all the celestial globes, it acts undoubtedly on the several

parts of these globes. For in case bodies attract one another in proportion to

the quantity of matter contained in them, it can only be in proportion to the

quantity  of  their  parts;  and  if  this  power  is  found  in  the  whole,  it  is

undoubtedly  in  the  half;  in  the  quarters  in  the  eighth  part,  and  so  on  in

infinitum.  This is attraction, the great spring by which all Nature is moved. Sir Isaac

Newton, after having demonstrated the existence of this principle, plainly

foresaw that its very name would offend; and, therefore, this philosopher, in

more places than one of his books, gives the reader some caution about it. He

bids him beware of confounding this name with what the ancients called

occult qualities, but to be satisfied with knowing that there is in all bodies a

central force, which acts to the utmost limits of the universe, according to the

invariable laws of mechanics.


  It is surprising, after the solemn protestations Sir Isaac made, that such

eminent men as Mr. Sorin and Mr. de Fontenelle should have imputed to this

great  philosopher  the  verbal  and  chimerical  way  of  reasoning  of  the

Aristotelians; Mr. Sorin in the Memoirs of the Academy of 1709, and Mr. de

Fontenelle in the very eulogium of Sir Isaac Newton.


  Most of the French (the learned and others) have repeated this reproach.

These are for ever crying out, “Why did he not employ the word impulsion,

which  is  so  well  understood,  rather  than  that  of  attraction,  which  is

unintelligible?”


  Sir  Isaac  might  have  answered  these  critics  thus:-“First,  you  have  as

imperfect an idea of the word impulsion as of that of attraction; and in case

you cannot conceive how one body tends towards the centre of another body,

neither can you conceive by what power one body can impel another.


  “Secondly, I could not admit of impulsion; for to do this I must have

known that a celestial matter was the agent. But so far from knowing that

there is any such matter, I have proved it to be merely imaginary.


  “Thirdly, I use the word attraction for no other reason but to express an

effect which I discovered in Nature-a certain and indisputable effect of an

unknown principle-a quality inherent in matter, the cause of which persons of

greater abilities than I can pretend to may, if they can, find out.”  “What have you, then, taught us?” will these people say further; “and to

what purpose are so many calculations to tell us what you yourself do not

comprehend?”


  “I  have  taught  you,”  may  Sir  Isaac  rejoin,  “that  all  bodies  gravitate

towards  one  another  in  proportion  to  their  quantity  of  matter;  that  these

central forces alone keep the planets and comets in their orbits, and cause

them to move in the proportion before set down. I demonstrate to you that it

is impossible there should be any other cause which keeps the planets in their

orbits than that general phenomenon of gravity. For heavy bodies fall on the

earth  according  to  the  proportion  demonstrated  of  central  forces;  and  the

planets finishing their course according to these same proportions, in case

there were another power that acted upon all those bodies, it would either

increase their velocity or change their direction. Now, not one of those bodies

ever has a single degree of motion or velocity, or has any direction but what

is  demonstrated  to  be  the  effect  of  the  central  forces. Consequently  it  is

impossible there should be any other principle.”


  Give me leave once more to introduce Sir Isaac speaking. Shall he not be

allowed to say? “My case and that of the ancients is very different. These

saw, for instance, water ascend in pumps, and said, ‘The water rises because

it abhors a vacuum.’ But with regard to myself; I am in the case of a man

who should have first observed that water ascends in pumps, but should leave

others to explain the cause of this effect. The anatomist, who first declared

that the motion of the arm is owing to the contraction of the muscles, taught

mankind an indisputable truth. But are they less obliged to him because he

did not know the reason why the muscles contract? The cause of the elasticity

of the air is unknown, but he who first discovered this spring performed a

very signal service to natural philosophy. The spring that I discovered was

more hidden and more universal, and for that very reason mankind ought to

thank me the more. I have discovered a new property of matter-one of the

secrets of the Creator-and have calculated and discovered the effects of it.

After this, shall people quarrel with me about the name I give it?”


  Vortices  may  be  called  an  occult  quality,  because  their  existence  wasnever proved. Attraction, on the contrary, is a real thing, because its effects

are demonstrated, and the proportions of it are calculated. The cause of this

cause is among the Arcana of the Almighty.


  “Precedes huc, et non amplius.”


  (Thus far shalt thou go, and no farther.)


  LETTER XVI.

  ON SIR ISAAC NEWTON’S OPTICS


  The  philosophers  of  the  last  age  found  out  a  new  universe;  and  a

circumstance which made its discovery more difficult was that no one had so

much as suspected its existence. The most sage and judicious were of opinion

that  it  was  a  frantic  rashness  to  dare  so  much  as  to  imagine  that  it  was

possible to guess the laws by which the celestial bodies move and the manner

how  light  acts. Galileo,  by  his  astronomical  discoveries,  Kepler,  by  his

calculation, Descartes (at least, in his dioptrics), and Sir Isaac Newton, in all

his works, severally saw the mechanism of the springs of the world. The

geometricians  have  subjected  infinity  to  the  laws  of  calculation. The

circulation  of  the  blood  in  animals,  and  of  the  sap  in  vegetables,  have

changed the face of Nature with regard to us. A new kind of existence has

been given to bodies in the air-pump. By the assistance of telescopes bodies

have  been  brought  nearer  to  one  another. Finally,  the  several  discoveries

which Sir Isaac Newton has made on light are equal to the boldest things

which  the  curiosity  of  man  could  expect  after  so  many  philosophical

novelties.


  Till Antonio de Dominis the rainbow was considered as an inexplicable

miracle. This philosopher guessed that it was a necessary effect of the sun

and rain. Descartes gained immortal fame by his mathematical explication of

this so natural a phenomenon. He calculated the reflections and refractions of

light in drops of rain. And his sagacity on this occasion was at that time

looked upon as next to divine.  But  what  would  he  have  said  had  it  been  proved  to  him  that  he  was

mistaken in the nature of light; that he had not the least reason to maintain

that it is a globular body? That it is false to assert that this matter, spreading

itself through the whole, waits only to be projected forward by the sun, in

order to be put in action, in like manner as a long staff acts at one end when

pushed forward by the other. That light is certainly darted by the sun; in fine,

that light is transmitted from the sun to the earth in about seven minutes,

though a cannonball, which were not to lose any of its velocity, could not go

that distance in less than twenty-five years. How great would have been his

astonishment  had  he  been  told  that  light  does  not  reflect  directly  by

impinging against the solid parts of bodies, that bodies are not transparent

when  they  have  large  pores,  and  that  a  man  should  arise  who  would

demonstrate all these paradoxes, and anatomise a single ray of light with

more  dexterity  than  the  ablest  artist  dissects  a  human  body. This  man  is

come. Sir Isaac Newton has demonstrated to the eye, by the bare assistance of

the prism, that light is a composition of coloured rays, which, being united,

form white colour. A single ray is by him divided into seven, which all fall

upon a piece of linen, or a sheet of white paper, in their order, one above the

other, and at unequal distances. The first is red, the second orange, the third

yellow, the fourth green, the fifth blue, the sixth indigo, the seventh a violet-

purple. Each of these rays, transmitted afterwards by a hundred other prisms,

will  never  change  the  colour  it  bears;  in  like  manner,  as  gold,  when

completely  purged  from  its  dross,  will  never  change  afterwards  in  the

crucible. As a superabundant proof that each of these elementary rays has

inherently in itself that which forms its colour to the eye, take a small piece of

yellow wood, for instance, and set it in the ray of a red colour; this wood will

instantly be tinged red. But set it in the ray of a green colour, it assumes a

green colour, and so of all the rest.


  From what cause, therefore, do colours arise in Nature? It is nothing but

the disposition of bodies to reflect the rays of a certain order and to absorb all

the rest.


  What, then, is this secret disposition? Sir Isaac Newton demonstrates thatit is nothing more than the density of the small constituent particles of which

a body is composed. And how is this reflection performed? It was supposed

to arise from the rebounding of the rays, in the same manner as a ball on the

surface  of  a  solid  body. But  this  is  a  mistake,  for  Sir  Isaac  taught  the

astonished  philosophers  that  bodies  are  opaque  for  no  other  reason  but

because their pores are large, that light reflects on our eyes from the very

bosom of those pores, that the smaller the pores of a body are the more such a

body is transparent. Thus paper, which reflects the light when dry, transmits

it when oiled, because the oil, by filling its pores, makes them much smaller.


  It is there that examining the vast porosity of bodies, every particle having

its pores, and every particle of those particles having its own, he shows we

are not certain that there is a cubic inch of solid matter in the universe, so far

are we from conceiving what matter is. Having thus divided, as it were, light

into its elements, and carried the sagacity of his discoveries so far as to prove

the method of distinguishing compound colours from such as are primitive,

he shows that these elementary rays, separated by the prism, are ranged in

their order for no other reason but because they are refracted in that very

order; and it is this property (unknown till he discovered it) of breaking or

splitting in this proportion; it is this unequal refraction of rays, this power of

refracting the red less than the orange colour, &c., which he calls the different

refrangibility. The most reflexible rays are the most refrangible, and from

hence he evinces that the same power is the cause both of the reflection and

refraction of light.


  But all these wonders are merely but the opening of his discoveries. He

found out the secret to see the vibrations or fits of light which come and go

incessantly,  and  which  either  transmit  light  or  reflect  it,  according  to  the

density of the parts they meet with. He has presumed to calculate the density

of the particles of air necessary between two glasses, the one flat, the other

convex  on  one  side,  set  one  upon  the  other,  in  order  to  operate  such  a

transmission or reflection, or to form such and such a colour.


  From all these combinations he discovers the proportion in which light

acts on bodies and bodies act on light.  He  saw  light  so  perfectly,  that  he  has  determined  to  what  degree  of

perfection the art of increasing it, and of assisting our eyes by telescopes, can

be carried.


  Descartes, from a noble confidence that was very excusable, considering

how strongly he was fired at the first discoveries he made in an art which he

almost first found out; Descartes, I say, hoped to discover in the stars, by the

assistance of telescopes, objects as small as those we discern upon the earth.


  But Sir Isaac has shown that dioptric telescopes cannot be brought to a

greater perfection, because of that refraction, and of that very refrangibility,

which at the same time that they bring objects nearer to us, scatter too much

the elementary rays. He has calculated in these glasses the proportion of the

scattering  of  the  red  and  of  the  blue  rays;  and  proceeding  so  far  as  to

demonstrate things which were not supposed even to exist, he examines the

inequalities which arise from the shape or figure of the glass, and that which

arises from the refrangibility. He finds that the object glass of the telescope

being convex on one side and flat on the other, in case the flat side be turned

towards the object, the error which arises from the construction and position

of the glass is above five thousand times less than the error which arises from

the refrangibility; and, therefore, that the shape or figure of the glasses is not

the cause why telescopes cannot be carried to a greater perfection, but arises

wholly from the nature of light.


  For  this  reason  he  invented  a  telescope,  which  discovers  objects  by

reflection, and not by refraction. Telescopes of this new kind are very hard to

make, and their use is not easy; but, according to the English, a reflective

telescope of but five feet has the same effect as another of a hundred feet in

length.


  LETTER XVII.

  ON  INFINITES  IN  GEOMETRY,  AND  SIR  ISAAC  NEWTON’S

CHRONOLOGY  The labyrinth and abyss of infinity is also a new course Sir Isaac Newton

has gone through, and we are obliged to him for the clue, by whose assistance

we are enabled to trace its various windings.

  Descartes  got  the  start  of  him  also  in  this  astonishing  invention. He

advanced with mighty steps in his geometry, and was arrived at the very

borders of infinity, but went no farther. Dr. Wallis, about the middle of the

last century, was the first who reduced a fraction by a perpetual division to an

infinite series.

  The Lord Brouncker employed this series to square the hyperbola.

  Mercator published a demonstration of this quadrature; much about which

time Sir Isaac Newton, being then twenty-three years of age, had invented a

general method, to perform on all geometrical curves what had just before

been tried on the hyperbola.

  It  is  to  this  method  of  subjecting  everywhere  infinity  to  algebraical

calculations, that the name is given of differential calculations or of fluxions

and integral calculation. It is the art of numbering and measuring exactly a

thing whose existence cannot be conceived.

  And,  indeed,  would  you  not  imagine  that  a  man  laughed  at  you  who

should  declare  that  there  are  lines  infinitely  great  which  form  an  angle

infinitely little?

  That a right line, which is a right line so long as it is finite, by changing

infinitely little its direction, becomes an infinite curve; and that a curve may

become infinitely less than another curve?

  That there are infinite squares, infinite cubes, and infinites of infinites, all

greater  than  one  another,  and  the  last  but  one  of  which  is  nothing  in

comparison of the last?

  All these things, which at first appear to be the utmost excess of frenzy,

are in reality an effort of the subtlety and extent of the human mind, and the

art of finding truths which till then had been unknown.

  This so bold edifice is even founded on simple ideas. The business is to

measure the diagonal of a square, to give the area of a curve, to find thesquare root of a number, which has none in common arithmetic. After all, the

imagination ought not to be startled any more at so many orders of infinites

than at the so well-known proposition, viz., that curve lines may always be

made to pass between a circle and a tangent; or at that other, namely, that

matter is divisible in infinitum. These two truths have been demonstrated

many years, and are no less incomprehensible than the things we have been

speaking of.

  For many years the invention of this famous calculation was denied to Sir

Isaac Newton. In Germany Mr. Leibnitz was considered as the inventor of the

differences  or  moments,  called  fluxions,  and  Mr.  Bernouilli  claimed  the

integral calculus. However, Sir Isaac is now thought to have first made the

discovery, and the other two have the glory of having once made the world

doubt whether it was to be ascribed to him or them. Thus some contested

with  Dr.  Harvey  the  invention  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  as  others

disputed with Mr. Perrault that of the circulation of the sap.

  Hartsocher  and  Leuwenhoek  disputed  with  each  other  the  honour  of

having  first  seen  the  vermiculi  of  which  mankind  are  formed. This

Hartsocher also contested with Huygens the invention of a new method of

calculating  the  distance  of  a  fixed  star. It  is  not  yet  known  to  what

philosopher we owe the invention of the cycloid.

  Be this as it will, it is by the help of this geometry of infinites that Sir

Isaac Newton attained to the most sublime discoveries. I am now to speak of

another  work,  which,  though  more  adapted  to  the  capacity  of  the  human

mind,  does  nevertheless  display  some  marks  of  that  creative  genius  with

which Sir Isaac Newton was informed in all his researches. The work I mean

is a chronology of a new kind, for what province soever he undertook he was

sure to change the ideas and opinions received by the rest of men.

  Accustomed to unravel and disentangle chaos, he was resolved to convey

at least some light into that of the fables of antiquity which are blended and

confounded with history, and fix an uncertain chronology. It is true that there

is no family, city, or nation, but endeavours to remove its original as far

backward as possible. Besides, the first historians were the most negligent in

setting down the eras: books were infinitely less common than they are at this

time,  and,  consequently,  authors  being  not  so  obnoxious  to  censure,  theytherefore imposed upon the world with greater impunity; and, as it is evident

that these have related a great number of fictitious particulars, it is probable

enough that they also gave us several false eras.

  It appeared in general to Sir Isaac that the world was five hundred years

younger than chronologers declare it to be. He grounds his opinion on the

ordinary course of Nature, and on the observations which astronomers have

made.

  By the course of Nature we here understand the time that every generation

of men lives upon the earth. The Egyptians first employed this vague and

uncertain method of calculating when they began to write the beginning of

their history. These computed three hundred and forty-one generations from

Menes to Sethon; and, having no fixed era, they supposed three generations

to consist of a hundred years. In this manner they computed eleven thousand

three hundred and forty years from Menes’s reign to that of Sethon.

  The Greeks before they counted by Olympiads followed the method of the

Egyptians, and even gave a little more extent to generations, making each to

consist of forty years.

  Now,  here,  both  the  Egyptians  and  the  Greeks  made  an  erroneous

computation. It is true, indeed, that, according to the usual course of Nature,

three generations last about a hundred and twenty years; but three reigns are

far from taking up so many. It is very evident that mankind in general live

longer than kings are found to reign, so that an author who should write a

history in which there were no dates fixed, and should know that nine kings

had  reigned  over  a  nation;  such  an  historian  would  commit  a  great  error

should  he  allow  three  hundred  years  to  these  nine  monarchs. Every

generation takes about thirty-six years; every reign is, one with the other,

about twenty. Thirty kings of England have swayed the sceptre from William

the Conqueror to George I., the years of whose reigns added together amount

to six hundred and forty-eight years; which, being divided equally among the

thirty kings, give to every one a reign of twenty-one years and a half very

near. Sixty-three kings of France have sat upon the throne; these have, one

with another, reigned about twenty years each. This is the usual course of

Nature. The  ancients,  therefore,  were  mistaken  when  they  supposed  the

durations in general of reigns to equal that of generations. They, therefore,allowed too great a number of years, and consequently some years must be

subtracted from their computation.

  Astronomical observations seem to have lent a still greater assistance to

our philosopher. He  appears  to  us  stronger  when  he  fights  upon  his  own

ground.

  You know that the earth, besides its annual motion which carries it round

the sun from west to east in the space of a year, has also a singular revolution

which was quite unknown till within these late years. Its poles have a very

slow  retrograde  motion  from  east  to  west,  whence  it  happens  that  their

position every day does not correspond exactly with the same point of the

heavens. This difference, which is so insensible in a year, becomes pretty

considerable in time; and in threescore and twelve years the difference is

found to be of one degree, that is to say, the three hundred and sixtieth part of

the  circumference  of  the  whole  heaven. Thus  after  seventy-two  years  the

colure of the vernal equinox which passed through a fixed star, corresponds

with another fixed star. Hence it is that the sun, instead of being in that part

of the heavens in which the Ram was situated in the time of Hipparchus, is

found to correspond with that part of the heavens in which the Bull was

situated; and the Twins are placed where the Bull then stood. All the signs

have  changed  their  situation,  and  yet  we  still  retain  the  same  manner  of

speaking as the ancients did. In this age we say that the sun is in the Ram in

the spring, from the same principle of condescension that we say that the sun

turns round.

  Hipparchus was the first among the Greeks who observed some change in

the constellations with regard to the equinoxes, or rather who learnt it from

the Egyptians. Philosophers ascribed this motion to the stars; for in those ages

people were far from imagining such a revolution in the earth, which was

supposed to be immovable in every respect. They therefore created a heaven

in which they fixed the several stars, and gave this heaven a particular motion

by which it was carried towards the east, whilst that all the stars seemed to

perform their diurnal revolution from east to west. To this error they added a

second of much greater consequence, by imagining that the pretended heaven

of the fixed stars advanced one degree eastward every hundred years. In this

manner they were no less mistaken in their astronomical calculation than in

their system of natural philosophy. As for instance, an astronomer in that agewould have said that the vernal equinox was in the time of such and such an

observation, in such a sign, and in such a star. It has advanced two degrees of

each  since  the  time  that  observation  was  made  to  the  present. Now  two

degrees are equivalent to two hundred years; consequently the astronomer

who made that observation lived just so many years before me. It is certain

that an astronomer who had argued in this manner would have mistook just

fifty-four  years;  hence  it  is  that  the  ancients,  who  were  doubly  deceived,

made  their  great  year  of  the  world,  that  is,  the  revolution  of  the  whole

heavens, to consist of thirty-six thousand years. But the moderns are sensible

that this imaginary revolution of the heaven of the stars is nothing else than

the revolution of the poles of the earth, which is performed in twenty-five

thousand nine hundred years. It may be proper to observe transiently in this

place, that Sir Isaac, by determining the figure of the earth, has very happily

explained the cause of this revolution.

  All this being laid down, the only thing remaining to settle chronology is

to see through what star the colure of the equinoxes passes, and where it

intersects at this time the ecliptic in the spring; and to discover whether some

ancient writer does not tell us in what point the ecliptic was intersected in his

time, by the same colure of the equinoxes.

  Clemens  Alexandrinus  informs  us,  that  Chiron,  who  went  with  the

Argonauts, observed the constellations at the time of that famous expedition,

and fixed the vernal equinox to the middle of the Ram; the autumnal equinox

to the middle of Libra; our summer solstice to the middle of Cancer, and our

winter solstice to the middle of Capricorn.

  A long time after the expedition of the Argonauts, and a year before the

Peloponnesian war, Methon observed that the point of the summer solstice

passed through the eighth degree of Cancer.

  Now every sign of the zodiac contains thirty degrees. In Chiron’s time, the

solstice was arrived at the middle of the sign, that is to say to the fifteenth

degree. A  year  before  the  Peloponnesian  war  it  was  at  the  eighth,  and

therefore it had retarded seven degrees. A degree is equivalent to seventy-two

years;  consequently,  from  the  beginning  of  the  Peloponnesian  war  to  the

expedition of the Argonauts, there is no more than an interval of seven times

seventy-two years, which make five hundred and four years, and not sevenhundred years as the Greeks computed. Thus in comparing the position of the

heavens at this time with their position in that age, we find that the expedition

of the Argonauts ought to be placed about nine hundred years before Christ,

and not about fourteen hundred; and consequently that the world is not so old

by five hundred years as it was generally supposed to be. By this calculation

all  the  eras  are  drawn  nearer,  and  the  several  events  are  found  to  have

happened  later  than  is  computed. I  do  not  know  whether  this  ingenious

system will be favourably received; and whether these notions will prevail so

far  with  the  learned,  as  to  prompt  them  to  reform  the  chronology  of  the

world. Perhaps these gentlemen would think it too great a condescension to

allow  one  and  the  same  man  the  glory  of  having  improved  natural

philosophy,  geometry,  and  history. This  would  be  a  kind  of  universal

monarchy, with which the principle of self-love that is in man will scarce

suffer him to indulge his fellow-creature; and, indeed, at the same time that

some very great philosophers attacked Sir Isaac Newton’s attractive principle,

others fell upon his chronological system. Time that should discover to which

of these the victory is due, may perhaps only leave the dispute still more

undetermined.


  LETTER XVIII.

  ON TRAGEDY


  The English as well as the Spaniards were possessed of theatres at a time

when the French had no more than moving, itinerant stages. Shakspeare, who

was  considered  as  the  Corneille  of  the  first-mentioned  nation,  was  pretty

nearly contemporary with Lopez de Vega, and he created, as it were, the

English theatre. Shakspeare boasted a strong fruitful genius. He was natural

and sublime, but had not so much as a single spark of good taste, or knew one

rule of the drama. I will now hazard a random, but, at the same time, true

reflection, which is, that the great merit of this dramatic poet has been the

ruin of the English stage. There are such beautiful, such noble, such dreadful

scenes in this writer’s monstrous farces, to which the name of tragedy is

given, that they have always been exhibited with great success. Time, which

alone gives reputation to writers, at last makes their very faults venerable.

Most of the whimsical gigantic images of this poet, have, through length oftime (it being a hundred and fifty years since they were first drawn) acquired

a right of passing for sublime. Most of the modern dramatic writers have

copied  him;  but  the  touches  and  descriptions  which  are  applauded  in

Shakspeare, are hissed at in these writers; and you will easily believe that the

veneration  in  which  this  author  is  held,  increases  in  proportion  to  the

contempt which is shown to the moderns. Dramatic writers don’t consider

that they should not imitate him; and the ill-success of Shakspeare’s imitators

produces no other effect, than to make him be considered as inimitable. You

remember  that  in  the  tragedy  of  Othello,  Moor  of  Venice,  a  most  tender

piece, a man strangles his wife on the stage, and that the poor woman, whilst

she is strangling, cries aloud that she dies very unjustly. You know that in

Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, two grave-diggers make a grave, and are all the

time  drinking,  singing  ballads,  and  making  humorous  reflections  (natural

indeed enough to persons of their profession) on the several skulls they throw

up with their spades; but a circumstance which will surprise you is, that this

ridiculous incident has been imitated. In the reign of King Charles II., which

was that of politeness, and the Golden Age of the liberal arts; Otway, in his

Venice Preserved, introduces Antonio the senator, and Naki, his courtesan, in

the midst of the horrors of the Marquis of Bedemar’s conspiracy. Antonio,

the  superannuated  senator  plays,  in  his  mistress’s  presence,  all  the  apish

tricks of a lewd, impotent debauchee, who is quite frantic and out of his

senses. He mimics a bull and a dog, and bites his mistress’s legs, who kicks

and whips him. However, the players have struck these buffooneries (which

indeed were calculated merely for the dregs of the people) out of Otway’s

tragedy; but they have still left in Shakspeare’s Julius Cæsar the jokes of the

Roman shoemakers and cobblers, who are introduced in the same scene with

Brutus and Cassius. You will undoubtedly complain, that those who have

hitherto  discoursed  with  you  on  the  English  stage,  and  especially  on  the

celebrated Shakspeare, have taken notice only of his errors; and that no one

has translated any of those strong, those forcible passages which atone for all

his faults. But to this I will answer, that nothing is easier than to exhibit in

prose all the silly impertinences which a poet may have thrown out; but that it

is a very difficult task to translate his fine verses. All your junior academical

sophs, who set up for censors of the eminent writers, compile whole volumes;

but methinks two pages which display some of the beauties of great geniuses,

are  of  infinitely  more  value  than  all  the  idle  rhapsodies  of  thosecommentators; and I will join in opinion with all persons of good taste in

declaring,  that  greater  advantage  may  be  reaped  from  a  dozen  verses  of

Homer of Virgil, than from all the critiques put together which have been

made on those two great poets.


  I have ventured to translate some passages of the most celebrated English

poets, and shall now give you one from Shakspeare. Pardon the blemishes of

the translation for the sake of the original; and remember always that when

you see a version, you see merely a faint print of a beautiful picture. I have

made choice of part of the celebrated soliloquy in Hamlet, which you may

remember is as follows:-


  “To be, or not to be? that is the question!

  Whether ’t is nobler in the mind to suffer

  The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,

  Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,

  And by opposing, end them? To die! to sleep!

  No more! and by a sleep to say we end

  The heart-ache, and the thousand natural shocks

  That flesh is heir to! ’Tis a consummation

  Devoutly to be wished. To die! to sleep!

  To sleep; perchance to dream! O, there’s the rub;

  For in that sleep of death, what dreams may come

  When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,

  Must give us pause. There’s the respect

  That makes calamity of so long life:

  For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,

  The oppressor’s wrong, the poor man’s contumely,

  The pangs of despised love, the law’s delay,  The insolence of office, and the spurns

  That patient merit of the unworthy takes,

  When he himself might his quietus make

  With a bare bodkin. Who would fardels bear

  To groan and sweat under a weary life,

  But that the dread of something after death,

  The undiscovered country, from whose bourn

  No traveller returns, puzzles the will,

  And makes us rather bear those ills we have,

  Than fly to others that we know not of?

  Thus conscience does make cowards of us all;

  And thus the native hue of resolution

  Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought:

  And enterprises of great weight and moment

  With this regard their currents turn awry,

  And lose the name of action-”


  My version of it runs thus:-


  “Demeure, il faut choisir et passer à l’instant

  De la vie, à la mort, ou de l’être au neant.

  Dieux cruels, s’il en est, éclairez mon courage.

  Faut-il vieillir courbé sous la main qui m’outrage,

  Supporter, ou finir mon malheur et mon sort?

  Qui suis je? Qui m’arrête! et qu’est-ce que la mort?

  C’est la fin de nos maux, c’est mon unique asile

  Après de longs transports, c’est un sommeil tranquile.  On s’endort, et tout meurt, mais un affreux reveil

  Doit succeder peut être aux douceurs du sommeil!

  On nous menace, on dit que cette courte vie,

  De tourmens éternels est aussi-tôt suivie.

  O mort! moment fatal! affreuse eternité!

  Tout coeur à ton seul nom se glace épouvanté.

  Eh! qui pourroit sans toi supporter cette vie,

  De nos prêtres menteurs benir l’hypocrisie:

  D’une indigne maitresse encenser les erreurs,

  Ramper sous un ministre, adorer ses hauteurs;

  Et montrer les langueurs de son ame abattüe,

  A des amis ingrats qui detournent la vüe?

  La mort seroit trop douce en ces extrémitez,

  Mais le scrupule parle, et nous crie, arrêtez;

  Il defend à nos mains cet heureux homicide

  Et d’un heros guerrier, fait un Chrétien timide,” &c.


  Do not imagine that I have translated Shakspeare in a servile manner. Woe

to the writer who gives a literal version; who by rendering every word of his

original, by that very means enervates the sense, and extinguishes all the fire

of it. It is on such an occasion one may justly affirm, that the letter kills, but

the Spirit quickens.


  Here  follows  another  passage  copied  from  a  celebrated  tragic  writer

among the English. It is Dryden, a poet in the reign of Charles II.-a writer

whose  genius  was  too  exuberant,  and  not  accompanied  with  judgment

enough. Had he written only a tenth part of the works he left behind him, his

character would have been conspicuous in every part; but his great fault is his

having endeavoured to be universal.  The passage in question is as follows:-


  “When I consider life, ’t is all a cheat,

  Yet fooled by hope, men favour the deceit;

  Trust on and think, to-morrow will repay;

  To-morrow’s falser than the former day;

  Lies more; and whilst it says we shall be blest

  With some new joy, cuts off what we possessed;

  Strange cozenage! none would live past years again,

  Yet all hope pleasure in what yet remain,

  And from the dregs of life think to receive

  What the first sprightly running could not give.

  I’m tired with waiting for this chymic gold,

  Which fools us young, and beggars us when old.”


  I shall now give you my translation:-


  “De desseins en regrets et d’erreurs en desirs

  Les mortals insensés promenent leur folie.

  Dans des malheurs presents, dans l’espoir des plaisirs

  Nous ne vivons jamais, nous attendons la vie.

  Demain, demain, dit-on, va combler tous nos voeux.

  Demain vient, et nous laisse encore plus malheureux.

  Quelle est l’erreur, helas! du soin qui nous dévore,

  Nul de nous ne voudroit recommencer son cours.

  De nos premiers momens nous maudissons l’aurore,

  Et de la nuit qui vient nous attendons encore,

  Ce qu’ont en vain promis les plus beaux de nos jours,” &c.  It is in these detached passages that the English have hitherto excelled.

Their dramatic pieces, most of which are barbarous and without decorum,

order, or verisimilitude, dart such resplendent flashes through this gleam, as

amaze and astonish. The style is too much inflated, too unnatural, too closely

copied  from  the  Hebrew  writers,  who  abound  so  much  with  the  Asiatic

fustian. But then it must be also confessed that the stilts of the figurative

style, on which the English tongue is lifted up, raises the genius at the same

time very far aloft, though with an irregular pace. The first English writer

who composed a regular tragedy, and infused a spirit of elegance through

every part of it, was the illustrious Mr. Addison. His “Cato” is a masterpiece,

both  with  regard  to  the  diction  and  to  the  beauty  and  harmony  of  the

numbers. The character of Cato is, in my opinion, vastly superior to that of

Cornelia in the “Pompey” of Corneille, for Cato is great without anything like

fustian,  and  Cornelia,  who  besides  is  not  a  necessary  character,  tends

sometimes  to  bombast. Mr.  Addison’s  Cato  appears  to  me  the  greatest

character that was ever brought upon any stage, but then the rest of them do

not correspond to the dignity of it, and this dramatic piece, so excellently well

writ, is disfigured by a dull love plot, which spreads a certain languor over

the whole, that quite murders it.


  The custom of introducing love at random and at any rate in the drama

passed from Paris to London about 1660, with our ribbons and our perruques.

The ladies who adorn the theatrical circle there, in like manner as in this city,

will suffer love only to be the theme of every conversation. The judicious Mr.

Addison  had  the  effeminate  complaisance  to  soften  the  severity  of  his

dramatic character, so as to adapt it to the manners of the age, and, from an

endeavour to please, quite ruined a masterpiece in its kind. Since his time the

drama is become more regular, the audience more difficult to be pleased, and

writers more correct and less bold. I have seen some new pieces that were

written with great regularity, but which, at the same time, were very flat and

insipid. One  would  think  that  the  English  had  been  hitherto  formed  to

produce irregular beauties only. The shining monsters of Shakspeare give

infinite more delight than the judicious images of the moderns. Hitherto the

poetical genius of the English resembles a tufted tree planted by the hand ofNature,  that  throws  out  a  thousand  branches  at  random,  and  spreads

unequally, but with great vigour. It dies if you attempt to force its nature, and

to lop and dress it in the same manner as the trees of the Garden of Marli.


  LETTER XIX.

  ON COMEDY


  I am surprised that the judicious and ingenious Mr. de Muralt, who has

published  some  letters  on  the  English  and  French  nations,  should  have

confined  himself;  in  treating  of  comedy,  merely  to  censure  Shadwell  the

comic writer. This author was had in pretty great contempt in Mr. de Muralt’s

time,  and  was  not  the  poet  of  the  polite  part  of  the  nation. His dramatic

pieces, which pleased some time in acting, were despised by all persons of

taste, and might be compared to many plays which I have seen in France, that

drew crowds to the playhouse, at the same time that they were intolerable to

read; and of which it might be said, that the whole city of Paris exploded

them, and yet all flocked to see them represented on the stage. Methinks Mr.

de Muralt should have mentioned an excellent comic writer (living when he

was  in  England),  I  mean  Mr.  Wycherley,  who  was  a  long  time  known

publicly to be happy in the good graces of the most celebrated mistress of

King Charles II. This gentleman, who passed his life among persons of the

highest distinction, was perfectly well acquainted with their lives and their

follies, and painted them with the strongest pencil, and in the truest colours.

He has drawn a misanthrope or man-hater, in imitation of that of Molière. All

Wycherley’s strokes are stronger and bolder than those of our misanthrope,

but  then  they  are  less  delicate,  and  the  rules  of  decorum  are  not  so  well

observed in this play. The English writer has corrected the only defect that is

in Molière’s comedy, the thinness of the plot, which also is so disposed that

the characters in it do not enough raise our concern. The English comedy

affects us, and the contrivance of the plot is very ingenious, but at the same

time it is too bold for the French manners. The fable is this:-A captain of a

man-of-war, who is very brave, open-hearted, and inflamed with a spirit of

contempt  for  all  mankind,  has  a  prudent,  sincere  friend,  whom  he  yet  is

suspicious  of;  and  a  mistress  that  loves  him  with  the  utmost  excess  of

passion. The captain so far from returning her love, will not even condescendto look upon her, but confides entirely in a false friend, who is the most

worthless wretch living. At the same time he has given his heart to a creature,

who is the greatest coquette and the most perfidious of her sex, and he is so

credulous as to be confident she is a Penelope, and his false friend a Cato. He

embarks on board his ship in order to go and fight the Dutch, having left all

his money, his jewels, and everything he had in the world to this virtuous

creature, whom at the same time he recommends to the care of his supposed

faithful friend. Nevertheless the real man of honour, whom he suspects so

unaccountably, goes on board the ship with him, and the mistress, on whom

he would not bestow so much as one glance, disguises herself in the habit of

a page, and is with him the whole voyage, without his once knowing that she

is of a sex different from that she attempts to pass for, which, by the way, is

not over natural.


  The captain having blown up his own ship in an engagement, returns to

England abandoned and undone, accompanied by his page and his friend,

without knowing the friendship of the one or the tender passion of the other.

Immediately  he  goes  to  the  jewel  among  women,  who  he  expected  had

preserved her fidelity to him and the treasure he had left in her hands. He

meets with her indeed, but married to the honest knave in whom he had

reposed so much confidence, and finds she had acted as treacherously with

regard to the casket he had entrusted her with. The captain can scarce think it

possible that a woman of virtue and honour can act so vile a part; but to

convince him still more of the reality of it, this very worthy lady falls in love

with the little page, and will force him to her embraces. But as it is requisite

justice  should  be  done,  and  that  in  a  dramatic  piece  virtue  ought  to  be

rewarded  and  vice  punished,  it  is  at  last  found  that  the  captain  takes  his

page’s place, and lies with his faithless mistress, cuckolds his treacherous

friend, thrusts his sword through his body, recovers his casket, and marries

his  page. You  will  observe  that  this  play  is  also  larded  with  a  petulant,

litigious  old  woman  (a  relation  of  the  captain),  who  is  the  most  comical

character that was ever brought upon the stage.


  Wycherley has also copied from Molière another play, of as singular and

bold a cast, which is a kind of Ecole des Femmes, or, School for MarriedWomen.


  The principal character in this comedy is one Homer, a sly fortune hunter,

and the terror of all the City husbands. This fellow, in order to play a surer

game, causes a report to be spread, that in his last illness, the surgeons had

found it necessary to have him made a eunuch. Upon his appearing in this

noble character, all the husbands in town flock to him with their wives, and

now poor Homer is only puzzled about his choice. However, he gives the

preference particularly to a little female peasant, a very harmless, innocent

creature, who enjoys a fine flush of health, and cuckolds her husband with a

simplicity that has infinitely more merit than the witty malice of the most

experienced ladies. This play cannot indeed be called the school of good

morals, but it is certainly the school of wit and true humour.


  Sir  John  Vanbrugh  has  written  several  comedies,  which  are  more

humorous than those of Mr. Wycherley, but not so ingenious. Sir John was a

man of pleasure, and likewise a poet and an architect. The general opinion is,

that he is as sprightly in his writings as he is heavy in his buildings. It is he

who  raised  the  famous  Castle  of  Blenheim,  a  ponderous  and  lasting

monument of our unfortunate Battle of Hochstet. Were the apartments but as

spacious as the walls are thick, this castle would be commodious enough.

Some wag, in an epitaph he made on Sir John Vanbrugh, has these lines:-


  “Earth lie light on him, for he

  Laid many a heavy load on thee.”


  Sir John having taken a tour into France before the glorious war that broke

out in 1701, was thrown into the Bastille, and detained there for some time,

without  being  ever  able  to  discover  the  motive  which  had  prompted  our

ministry  to  indulge  him  with  this  mark  of  their  distinction. He  wrote  a

comedy during his confinement; and a circumstance which appears to me

very extraordinary is, that we don’t meet with so much as a single satirical

stroke against the country in which he had been so injuriously treated.  The late Mr. Congreve raised the glory of comedy to a greater height than

any English writer before or since his time. He wrote only a few plays, but

they  are  all  excellent  in  their  kind. The  laws  of  the  drama  are  strictly

observed in them; they abound with characters all which are shadowed with

the utmost delicacy, and we don’t meet with so much as one low or coarse

jest. The language is everywhere that of men of honour, but their actions are

those of knaves-a proof that he was perfectly well acquainted with human

nature, and frequented what we call polite company. He was infirm and come

to the verge of life when I knew him. Mr. Congreve had one defect, which

was his entertaining too mean an idea of his first profession (that of a writer),

though it was to this he owed his fame and fortune. He spoke of his works as

of trifles that were beneath him; and hinted to me, in our first conversation,

that I should visit him upon no other footing than that of a gentleman who led

a life of plainness and simplicity. I answered, that had he been so unfortunate

as to be a mere gentleman, I should never have come to see him; and I was

very much disgusted at so unseasonable a piece of vanity.


  Mr. Congreve’s comedies are the most witty and regular, those of Sir John

Vanbrugh most gay and humorous, and those of Mr. Wycherley have the

greatest force and spirit. It may be proper to observe that these fine geniuses

never  spoke  disadvantageously  of  Molière;  and  that  none  but  the

contemptible  writers  among  the  English  have  endeavoured  to  lessen  the

character of that great comic poet. Such Italian musicians as despise Lully are

themselves persons of no character or ability; but a Buononcini esteems that

great artist, and does justice to his merit.


  The  English  have  some  other  good  comic  writers  living,  such  as  Sir

Richard Steele and Mr. Cibber, who is an excellent player, and also Poet

Laureate-a title which, how ridiculous soever it may be thought, is yet worth

a  thousand  crowns  a  year  (besides  some  considerable  privileges)  to  the

person who enjoys it. Our illustrious Corneille had not so much.


  To conclude. Don’t desire me to descend to particulars with regard to

these English comedies, which I am so fond of applauding; nor to give you a

single smart saying or humorous stroke from Wycherley or Congreve. Wedon’t laugh in rending a translation. If you have a mind to understand the

English comedy, the only way to do this will be for you to go to England, to

spend three years in London, to make yourself master of the English tongue,

and to frequent the playhouse every night. I receive but little pleasure from

the perusal of Aristophanes and Plautus, and for this reason, because I am

neither a Greek nor a Roman. The delicacy of the humour, the allusion, the à

propos-all these are lost to a foreigner.


  But it is different with respect to tragedy, this treating only of exalted

passions and heroical follies, which the antiquated errors of fable or history

have made sacred. Œdipus, Electra, and such-like characters, may with as

much propriety be treated of by the Spaniards, the English, or us, as by the

Greeks. But true comedy is the speaking picture of the follies and ridiculous

foibles of a nation; so that he only is able to judge of the painting who is

perfectly acquainted with the people it represents.


  LETTER XX.

  ON  SUCH  OF  THE  NOBILITY  AS  CULTIVATE  THE  BELLES

LETTRES


  There once was a time in France when the polite arts were cultivated by

persons  of  the  highest  rank  in  the  state. The  courtiers  particularly  were

conversant in them, although indolence, a taste for trifles, and a passion for

intrigue, were the divinities of the country. The Court methinks at this time

seems to have given into a taste quite opposite to that of polite literature, but

perhaps the mode of thinking may be revived in a little time. The French are

of so flexible a disposition, may be moulded into such a variety of shapes,

that the monarch needs but command and he is immediately obeyed. The

English generally think, and learning is had in greater honour among them

than in our country-an advantage that results naturally from the form of their

government. There are about eight hundred persons in England who have a

right to speak in public, and to support the interest of the kingdom; and near

five or six thousand may in their turns aspire to the same honour. The whole

nation set themselves up as judges over these, and every man has the libertyof publishing his thoughts with regard to public affairs, which shows that all

the  people  in  general  are  indispensably  obliged  to  cultivate  their

understandings. In England the governments of Greece and Rome are the

subject  of  every  conversation,  so  that  every  man  is  under  a  necessity  of

perusing such authors as treat of them, how disagreeable soever it may be to

him; and this study leads naturally to that of polite literature. Mankind in

general speak well in their respective professions. What is the reason why our

magistrates, our lawyers, our physicians, and a great number of the clergy,

are abler scholars, have a finer taste, and more wit, than persons of all other

professions? The  reason  is,  because  their  condition  of  life  requires  a

cultivated and enlightened mind, in the same manner as a merchant is obliged

to be acquainted with his traffic. Not long since an English nobleman, who

was very young, came to see me at Paris on his return from Italy. He had

written  a  poetical  description  of  that  country,  which,  for  delicacy  and

politeness, may vie with anything we meet with in the Earl of Rochester, or

in our Chaulieu, our Sarrasin, or Chapelle. The translation I have given of it

is so inexpressive of the strength and delicate humour of the original, that I

am obliged seriously to ask pardon of the author and of all who understand

English. However, as this is the only method I have to make his lordship’s

verses known, I shall here present you with them in our tongue:-


  “Qu’ay je donc vû dans l’Italie?

  Orgueil, astuce, et pauvreté,

  Grands complimens, peu de bonté

  Et beaucoup de ceremonie.


  “L’extravagante comedie

  Que souvent l’Inquisition

  Vent qu’on nomme religion

  Mais qu’ici nous nommons folie.


  “La Nature en vain bienfaisante  Vent enricher ses lieux charmans,

  Des prêtres la main desolante

  Etouffe ses plus beaux présens.


  “Les monsignors, soy disant Grands,

  Seuls dans leurs palais magnifiques

  Y sont d’illustres faineants,

  Sans argent, et sans domestiques.


  “Pour les petits, sans liberté,

  Martyrs du joug qui les domine,

  Ils ont fait voeu de pauvreté,

  Priant Dieu par oisiveté

  Et toujours jeunant par famine.


  “Ces beaux lieux du Pape benis

  Semblent habitez par les diables;

  Et les habitans miserables

  Sont damnes dans le Paradis.”


  LETTER XXI.

  ON THE EARL OF ROCHESTER AND MR. WALLER


  The Earl of Rochester’s name is universally known. Mr. de St. Evremont

has made very frequent mention of him, but then he has represented this

famous nobleman in no other light than as the man of pleasure, as one who

was the idol of the fair; but, with regard to myself, I would willingly describe

in him the man of genius, the great poet. Among other pieces which display

the shining imagination, his lordship only could boast he wrote some satires

on the same subjects as those our celebrated Boileau made choice of. I do notknow  any  better  method  of  improving  the  taste  than  to  compare  the

productions of such great geniuses as have exercised their talent on the same

subject. Boileau declaims as follows against human reason in his “Satire on

Man:”


  “Cependant à le voir plein de vapeurs légeres,

  Soi-même se bercer de ses propres chimeres,

  Lui seul de la nature est la baze et l’appui,

  Et le dixieme ciel ne tourne que pour lui.

  De tous les animaux il est ici le maître;

  Qui pourroit le nier, poursuis tu? Moi peut-être.

  Ce maître prétendu qui leur donne des loix,

  Ce roi des animaux, combien a-t’il de rois?”


  “Yet, pleased with idle whimsies of his brain,

  And puffed with pride, this haughty thing would fain

  Be think himself the only stay and prop

  That holds the mighty frame of Nature up.

  The skies and stars his properties must seem,

  * * *

  Of all the creatures he’s the lord, he cries.

  * * *

  And who is there, say you, that dares deny

  So owned a truth? That may be, sir, do I.

  * * *

  This boasted monarch of the world who awes

  The creatures here, and with his nod gives laws

  This self-named king, who thus pretends to be  The lord of all, how many lords has he?”


  OLDHAM, a little altered.


  The  Lord  Rochester  expresses  himself,  in  his  “Satire  against  Man,”  in

pretty  near  the  following  manner. But  I  must  first  desire  you  always  to

remember that the versions I give you from the English poets are written with

freedom  and  latitude,  and  that  the  restraint  of  our  versification,  and  the

delicacies of the French tongue, will not allow a translator to convey into it

the licentious impetuosity and fire of the English numbers:-


  “Cet esprit que je haïs, cet esprit plein d’erreur,

  Ce n’est pas ma raison, c’est la tienne, docteur.

  C’est la raison frivôle, inquiete, orgueilleuse

  Des sages animaux, rivale dédaigneuse,

  Qui croit entr’eux et l’Ange, occuper le milieu,

  Et pense être ici bas l’image de son Dieu.

  Vil atôme imparfait, qui croit, doute, dispute

  Rampe, s’élève, tombe, et nie encore sa chûte,

  Qui nous dit je suis libre, en nous montrant ses fers,

  Et dont l’œil trouble et faux, croit percer l’univers.

  Allez, reverends fous, bienheureux fanatiques,

  Compilez bien l’amas de vos riens scholastiques,

  Pères de visions, et d’enigmes sacres,

  Auteurs du labirinthe, où vous vous égarez.

  Allez obscurement éclaircir vos mistères,

  Et courez dans l’école adorer vos chimères.

  Il est d’autres erreurs, il est de ces dévots

  Condamné par eux mêmes à l’ennui du repos.  Ce mystique encloîtré, fier de son indolence

  Tranquille, au sein de Dieu. Que peut il faire? Il pense.

  Non, tu ne penses point, misérable, tu dors:

  Inutile à la terre, et mis au rang des morts.

  Ton esprit énervé croupit dans la molesse.

  Reveille toi, sois homme, et sors de ton ivresse.

  L’homme est né pour agir, et tu pretens penser?” &c.


  The original runs thus:-


  “Hold mighty man, I cry all this we know,

  And ’tis this very reason I despise,

  This supernatural gift that makes a mite

  Think he’s the image of the Infinite;

  Comparing his short life, void of all rest,

  To the eternal and the ever blest.

  This busy, puzzling stirrer up of doubt,

  That frames deep mysteries, then finds them out,

  Filling, with frantic crowds of thinking fools,

  Those reverend bedlams, colleges, and schools;

  Borne on whose wings each heavy sot can pierce

  The limits of the boundless universe.

  So charming ointments make an old witch fly,

  And bear a crippled carcase through the sky.

  ’Tis this exalted power, whose business lies

  In nonsense and impossibilities.

  This made a whimsical philosopher  Before the spacious world his tub prefer;

  And we have modern cloistered coxcombs, who

  Retire to think, ’cause they have naught to do.

  But thoughts are given for action’s government,

  Where action ceases, thought’s impertinent.”


  Whether these ideas are true or false, it is certain they are expressed with

an energy and fire which form the poet. I shall be very far from attempting to

examine philosophically into these verses, to lay down the pencil, and take up

the rule and compass on this occasion; my only design in this letter being to

display the genius of the English poets, and therefore I shall continue in the

same view.


  The celebrated Mr. Waller has been very much talked of in France, and

Mr. De la Fontaine, St. Evremont, and Bayle have written his eulogium, but

still his name only is known. He had much the same reputation in London as

Voiture had in Paris, and in my opinion deserved it better. Voiture was born

in an age that was just emerging from barbarity; an age that was still rude and

ignorant, the people of which aimed at wit, though they had not the least

pretensions to it, and sought for points and conceits instead of sentiments.

Bristol stones are more easily found than diamonds. Voiture, born with an

easy and frivolous, genius, was the first who shone in this aurora of French

literature. Had he come into the world after those great geniuses who spread

such a glory over the age of Louis XIV., he would either have been unknown,

would  have  been  despised,  or  would  have  corrected  his  style. Boileau

applauded him, but it was in his first satires, at a time when the taste of that

great poet was not yet formed. He was young, and in an age when persons

form a judgment of men from their reputation, and not from their writings.

Besides, Boileau was very partial both in his encomiums and his censures. He

applauded Segrais, whose works nobody reads; he abused Quinault, whose

poetical pieces every one has got by heart; and is wholly silent upon La

Fontaine. Waller, though a better poet than Voiture, was not yet a finished

poet. The graces breathe in such of Waller’s works as are writ in a tender

strain; but then they are languid through negligence, and often disfiguredwith false thoughts. The English had not in his time attained the art of correct

writing. But his serious compositions exhibit a strength and vigour which

could not have been expected from the softness and effeminacy of his other

pieces. He wrote an elegy on Oliver Cromwell, which, with all its faults, is

nevertheless looked upon as a masterpiece. To understand this copy of verses

you are to know that the day Oliver died was remarkable for a great storm.

His poem begins in this manner:-


  “Il n’est plus, s’en est fait, soumettons nous au sort,

  Le ciel a signalé ce jour par des tempêtes,

  Et la voix des tonnerres éclatant sur nos têtes

  Vient d’annoncer sa mort.


  “Par ses derniers soupirs il ébranle cet île;

  Cet île que son bras fit trembler tant de fois,

  Quand dans le cours de ses exploits,

  Il brisoit la téte des Rois,

  Et soumettoit un peuple à son joug seul docile.


  “Mer tu t’en es troublé; O mer tes flots émus

  Semblent dire en grondant aux plus lointains rivages

  Que l’effroi de la terre et ton maître n’est plus.


  “Tel au ciel autrefois s’envola Romulus,

  Tel il quitta la Terre, au milieu des orages,

  Tel d’un peuple guerrier il reçut les homages;

  Obéï dans sa vie, sa mort adoré,

  Son palais fut un Temple,” &c.


  * * * * *  “We must resign! heaven his great soul does claim

  In storms as loud as his immortal fame;

  His dying groans, his last breath shakes our isle,

  And trees uncut fall for his funeral pile:

  About his palace their broad roots are tost

  Into the air; so Romulus was lost!

  New Rome in such a tempest missed her king,

  And from obeying fell to worshipping.

  On Œta’s top thus Hercules lay dead,

  With ruined oaks and pines about him spread.

  Nature herself took notice of his death,

  And, sighing, swelled the sea with such a breath,

  That to remotest shores the billows rolled,

  Th’ approaching fate of his great ruler told.”


  WALLER.


  It was this elogium that gave occasion to the reply (taken notice of in

Bayle’s Dictionary), which Waller made to King Charles II. This king, to

whom  Waller  had  a  little  before  (as  is  usual  with  bards  and  monarchs)

presented a copy of verses embroidered with praises, reproached the poet for

not writing with so much energy and fire as when he had applauded the

Usurper  (meaning  Oliver). “Sir,”  replied  Waller  to  the  king,  “we  poets

succeed better in fiction than in truth.” This answer was not so sincere as that

which a Dutch ambassador made, who, when the same monarch complained

that his masters paid less regard to him than they had done to Cromwell. “Ah,

sir!” says the Ambassador, “Oliver was quite another man-” It is not my

intent to give a commentary on Waller’s character, nor on that of any other

person; for I consider men after their death in no other light than as they werewriters,  and  wholly  disregard  everything  else. I  shall  only  observe  that

Waller, though born in a court, and to an estate of five or six thousand pounds

sterling a year, was never so proud or so indolent as to lay aside the happy

talent which Nature had indulged him. The Earls of Dorset and Roscommon,

the  two  Dukes  of  Buckingham,  the  Lord  Halifax,  and  so  many  other

noblemen, did not think the reputation they obtained of very great poets and

illustrious  writers,  any  way  derogatory  to  their  quality. They  are  more

glorious for their works than for their titles. These cultivated the polite arts

with as much assiduity as though they had been their whole dependence.


  They also have made learning appear venerable in the eyes of the vulgar,

who have need to be led in all things by the great; and who, nevertheless,

fashion their manners less after those of the nobility (in England I mean) than

in any other country in the world.


  LETTER XXII.

  ON MR. POPE AND SOME OTHER FAMOUS POETS


  I intended to treat of Mr. Prior, one of the most amiable English poets,

whom you saw Plenipotentiary and Envoy Extraordinary at Paris in 1712. I

also designed to have given you some idea of the Lord Roscommon’s and the

Lord Dorset’s muse; but I find that to do this I should be obliged to write a

large volume, and that, after much pains and trouble, you would have but an

imperfect idea of all those works. Poetry is a kind of music in which a man

should have some knowledge before he pretends to judge of it. When I give

you a translation of some passages from those foreign poets, I only prick

down, and that imperfectly, their music; but then I cannot express the taste of

their harmony.


  There  is  one  English  poem  especially  which  I  should  despair  of  ever

making you understand, the title whereof is “Hudibras.” The subject of it is

the  Civil  War  in  the  time  of  the  grand  rebellion,  and  the  principles  and

practice of the Puritans are therein ridiculed. It is Don Quixote, it is our

“Satire Menippée” blended together. I never found so much wit in one singlebook as in that, which at the same time is the most difficult to be translated.

Who  would  believe  that  a  work  which  paints  in  such  lively  and  natural

colours the several foibles and follies of mankind, and where we meet with

more  sentiments  than  words,  should  baffle  the  endeavours  of  the  ablest

translator? But  the  reason  of  this  is,  almost  every  part  of  it  alludes  to

particular  incidents. The  clergy  are  there  made  the  principal  object  of

ridicule, which is understood but by few among the laity. To explain this a

commentary would be requisite, and humour when explained is no longer

humour. Whoever sets up for a commentator of smart sayings and repartees is

himself a blockhead. This is the reason why the works of the ingenious Dean

Swift,  who  has  been  called  the  English  Rabelais,  will  never  be  well

understood  in  France. This  gentleman  has  the  honour  (in  common  with

Rabelais) of being a priest, and, like him, laughs at everything; but, in my

humble opinion, the title of the English Rabelais which is given the dean is

highly  derogatory  to  his  genius. The  former  has  interspersed  his

unaccountably-fantastic and unintelligible book with the most gay strokes of

humour;  but  which,  at  the  same  time,  has  a  greater  proportion  of

impertinence. He has been vastly lavish of erudition, of smut, and insipid

raillery. An agreeable tale of two pages is purchased at the expense of whole

volumes of nonsense. There are but few persons, and those of a grotesque

taste, who pretend to understand and to esteem this work; for, as to the rest of

the nation, they laugh at the pleasant and diverting touches which are found

in  Rabelais  and  despise  his  book. He  is  looked  upon  as  the  prince  of

buffoons. The readers are vexed to think that a man who was master of so

much wit should have made so wretched a use of it; he is an intoxicated

philosopher who never wrote but when he was in liquor.


  Dean  Swift  is  Rabelais  in  his  senses,  and  frequenting  the  politest

company. The  former,  indeed,  is  not  so  gay  as  the  latter,  but  then  he

possesses all the delicacy, the justness, the choice, the good taste, in all which

particulars  our  giggling  rural  Vicar  Rabelais  is  wanting. The  poetical

numbers of Dean Swift are of a singular and almost inimitable taste; true

humour,  whether  in  prose  or  verse,  seems  to  be  his  peculiar  talent;  but

whoever is desirous of understanding him perfectly must visit the island in

which he was born.  It will be much easier for you to form an idea of Mr. Pope’s works. He is,

in my opinion, the most elegant, the most correct poet; and, at the same time,

the  most  harmonious  (a  circumstance  which  redounds  very  much  to  the

honour of this muse) that England ever gave birth to. He has mellowed the

harsh  sounds  of  the  English  trumpet  to  the  soft  accents  of  the  flute. His

compositions  may  be  easily  translated,  because  they  are  vastly  clear  and

perspicuous;  besides,  most  of  his  subjects  are  general,  and  relative  to  all

nations.


  His “Essay on Criticism” will soon be known in France by the translation

which l’Abbé de Resnel has made of it.


  Here is an extract from his poem entitled the “Rape of the Lock,” which I

just now translated with the latitude I usually take on these occasions; for,

once again, nothing can be more ridiculous than to translate a poet literally:-


  “Umbriel, à l’instant, vieil gnome rechigné,

  Va d’une aîle pesante et d’un air renfrogné

  Chercher en murmurant la caverne profonde,

  Où loin des doux raïons que répand l’œil du monde

  La Déesse aux Vapeurs a choisi son séjour,

  Les Tristes Aquilons y sifflent à l’entour,

  Et le souffle mal sain de leur aride haleine

  Y porte aux environs la fievre et la migraine.

  Sur un riche sofa derrière un paravent

  Loin des flambeaux, du bruit, des parleurs et du vent,

  La quinteuse déesse incessamment repose,

  Le coeur gros de chagrin, sans en savoir la cause.

  N’aiant pensé jamais, l’esprit toujours troublé,  L’œil chargé, le teint pâle, et l’hypocondre enflé.

  La médisante Envie, est assise auprès d’elle,

  Vieil spectre féminin, décrépite pucelle,

  Avec un air devot déchirant son prochain,

  Et chansonnant les Gens l’Evangile à la main.

  Sur un lit plein de fleurs negligemment panchée

  Une jeune beauté non loin d’elle est couchée,

  C’est l’Affectation qui grassaïe en parlant,

  Écoute sans entendre, et lorgne en regardant.

  Qui rougit sans pudeur, et rit de tout sans joie,

  De cent maux différens prétend qu’elle est la proïe;

  Et pleine de santé sous le rouge et le fard,

  Se plaint avec molesse, et se pame avec art.”


  “Umbriel, a dusky, melancholy sprite

  As ever sullied the fair face of light,

  Down to the central earth, his proper scene,

  Repairs to search the gloomy cave of Spleen.

  Swift on his sooty pinions flits the gnome,

  And in a vapour reached the dismal dome.

  No cheerful breeze this sullen region knows,

  The dreaded east is all the wind that blows.

  Here, in a grotto, sheltered close from air,

  And screened in shades from day’s detested glare,

  She sighs for ever on her pensive bed,

  Pain at her side, and Megrim at her head,

  Two handmaids wait the throne. Alike in place,  But differing far in figure and in face,

  Here stood Ill-nature, like an ancient maid,

  Her wrinkled form in black and white arrayed;

  With store of prayers for mornings, nights, and noons,

  Her hand is filled; her bosom with lampoons.

  There Affectation, with a sickly mien,

  Shows in her cheek the roses of eighteen,

  Practised to lisp, and hang the head aside,

  Faints into airs, and languishes with pride;

  On the rich quilt sinks with becoming woe,

  Wrapt in a gown, for sickness and for show.”


  This extract, in the original (not in the faint translation I have given you of

it),  may  be  compared  to  the  description  of  la  Molesse  (softness  or

effeminacy), in Boileau’s “Lutrin.”


  Methinks I now have given you specimens enough from the English poets.

I have made some transient mention of their philosophers, but as for good

historians among them, I don’t know of any; and, indeed, a Frenchman was

forced to write their history. Possibly  the  English  genius,  which  is  either

languid or impetuous, has not yet acquired that unaffected eloquence, that

plain but majestic air which history requires. Possibly too, the spirit of party

which exhibits objects in a dim and confused light may have sunk the credit

of their historians. One half of the nation is always at variance with the other

half. I have met with people who assured me that the Duke of Marlborough

was a coward, and that Mr. Pope was a fool; just as some Jesuits in France

declare Pascal to have been a man of little or no genius, and some Jansenists

affirm  Father  Bourdaloüe  to  have  been  a  mere  babbler. The  Jacobites

consider Mary Queen of Scots as a pious heroine, but those of an opposite

party  look  upon  her  as  a  prostitute,  an  adulteress,  a  murderer. Thus  the

English have memorials of the several reigns, but no such thing as a history.

There is, indeed, now living, one Mr. Gordon (the public are obliged to himfor a translation of Tacitus), who is very capable of writing the history of his

own country, but Rapin de Thoyras got the start of him. To conclude, in my

opinion the English have not such good historians as the French have no such

thing as a real tragedy, have several delightful comedies, some wonderful

passages in certain of their poems, and boast of philosophers that are worthy

of instructing mankind. The English have reaped very great benefit from the

writers of our nation, and therefore we ought (since they have not scrupled to

be in our debt) to borrow from them. Both the English and we came after the

Italians, who have been our instructors in all the arts, and whom we have

surpassed in some. I cannot determine which of the three nations ought to be

honoured with the palm; but happy the writer who could display their various

merits.


  LETTER XXIII.

  ON  THE  REGARD  THAT  OUGHT  TO  BE  SHOWN  TO  MEN  OF

LETTERS


  Neither the English nor any other people have foundations established in

favour of the polite arts like those in France. There are Universities in most

countries,  but  it  is  in  France  only  that  we  meet  with  so  beneficial  an

encouragement for astronomy and all parts of the mathematics, for physic, for

researches into antiquity, for painting, sculpture, and architecture. Louis XIV.

has immortalised his name by these several foundations, and this immortality

did not cost him two hundred thousand livres a year.


  I must confess that one of the things I very much wonder at is, that as the

Parliament of Great Britain have promised a reward of £20,000 sterling to

any person who may discover the longitude, they should never have once

thought to imitate Louis XIV. in his munificence with regard to the arts and

sciences.


  Merit,  indeed,  meets  in  England  with  rewards  of  another  kind,  which

redound  more  to  the  honour  of  the  nation. The  English  have  so  great  a

veneration for exalted talents, that a man of merit in their country is alwayssure of making his fortune. Mr. Addison in France would have been elected a

member of one of the academies, and, by the credit of some women, might

have obtained a yearly pension of twelve hundred livres, or else might have

been  imprisoned  in  the  Bastile,  upon  pretence  that  certain  strokes  in  his

tragedy of Cato had been discovered which glanced at the porter of some man

in  power. Mr.  Addison  was  raised  to  the  post  of  Secretary  of  State  in

England. Sir  Isaac  Newton  was  made  Master  of  the  Royal  Mint. Mr.

Congreve had a considerable employment. Mr. Prior was Plenipotentiary. Dr.

Swift is Dean of St. Patrick in Dublin, and is more revered in Ireland than the

Primate  himself. The  religion  which  Mr.  Pope  professes  excludes  him,

indeed,  from  preferments  of  every  kind,  but  then  it  did  not  prevent  his

gaining two hundred thousand livres by his excellent translation of Homer. I

myself saw a long time in France the author of Rhadamistus ready to perish

for hunger. And the son of one of the greatest men our country ever gave

birth to, and who was beginning to run the noble career which his father had

set him, would have been reduced to the extremes of misery had he not been

patronised by Monsieur Fagon.


  But the circumstance which mostly encourages the arts in England is the

great veneration which is paid them. The picture of the Prime Minister hangs

over the chimney of his own closet, but I have seen that of Mr. Pope in

twenty noblemen’s houses. Sir Isaac Newton was revered in his lifetime, and

had a due respect paid to him after his death; the greatest men in the nation

disputing  who  should  have  the  honour  of  holding  up  his  pall. Go  into

Westminster Abbey, and you will find that what raises the admiration of the

spectator is not the mausoleums of the English kings, but the monuments

which the gratitude of the nation has erected to perpetuate the memory of

those illustrious men who contributed to its glory. We view their statues in

that  abbey  in  the  same  manner  as  those  of  Sophocles,  Plato,  and  other

immortal personages were viewed in Athens; and I am persuaded that the

bare sight of those glorious monuments has fired more than one breast, and

been the occasion of their becoming great men.


  The  English  have  even  been  reproached  with  paying  too  extravagant

honours to mere merit, and censured for interring the celebrated actress Mrs.Oldfield  in  Westminster  Abbey,  with  almost  the  same  pomp  as  Sir  Isaac

Newton. Some  pretend  that  the  English  had  paid  her  these  great  funeral

honours, purposely to make us more strongly sensible of the barbarity and

injustice  which  they  object  to  us,  for  having  buried  Mademoiselle  Le

Couvreur ignominiously in the fields.


  But  be  assured  from  me,  that  the  English  were  prompted  by  no  other

principle in burying Mrs. Oldfield in Westminster Abbey than their good

sense. They are far from being so ridiculous as to brand with infamy an art

which has immortalised a Euripides and a Sophocles; or to exclude from the

body of their citizens a set of people whose business is to set off with the

utmost grace of speech and action those pieces which the nation is proud of.


  Under the reign of Charles I. and in the beginning of the civil wars raised

by a number of rigid fanatics, who at last were the victims to it; a great many

pieces  were  published  against  theatrical  and  other  shows,  which  were

attacked  with  the  greater  virulence  because  that  monarch  and  his  queen,

daughter to Henry I. of France, were passionately fond of them.


  One  Mr.  Prynne,  a  man  of  most  furiously  scrupulous  principles,  who

would have thought himself damned had he worn a cassock instead of a short

cloak, and have been glad to see one-half of mankind cut the other to pieces

for the glory of God, and the Propaganda Fide; took it into his head to write a

most  wretched  satire  against  some  pretty  good  comedies,  which  were

exhibited very innocently every night before their majesties. He quoted the

authority of the Rabbis, and some passages from St. Bonaventure, to prove

that the Œdipus of Sophocles was the work of the evil spirit; that Terence

was excommunicated ipso facto; and added, that doubtless Brutus, who was a

very  severe  Jansenist,  assassinated  Julius  Cæsar  for  no  other  reason  but

because he, who was Pontifex Maximus, presumed to write a tragedy the

subject of which was Œdipus. Lastly, he declared that all who frequented the

theatre were excommunicated, as they thereby renounced their baptism. This

was casting the highest insult on the king and all the royal family; and as the

English loved their prince at that time, they could not bear to hear a writer

talk  of  excommunicating  him,  though  they  themselves  afterwards  cut  hishead off. Prynne  was  summoned  to  appear  before  the  Star  Chamber;  his

wonderful book, from which Father Le Brun stole his, was sentenced to be

burnt by the common hangman, and himself to lose his ears. His trial is now

extant.


  The Italians are far from attempting to cast a blemish on the opera, or to

excommunicate Signor Senesino or Signora Cuzzoni. With regard to myself,

I could presume to wish that the magistrates would suppress I know not what

contemptible  pieces  written  against  the  stage. For  when  the  English  and

Italians hear that we brand with the greatest mark of infamy an art in which

we excel; that we excommunicate persons who receive salaries from the king;

that  we  condemn  as  impious  a  spectacle  exhibited  in  convents  and

monasteries; that we dishonour sports in which Louis XIV. and Louis XV.,

performed as actors; that we give the title of the devil’s works to pieces

which  are  received  by  magistrates  of  the  most  severe  character,  and

represented before a virtuous queen; when, I say, foreigners are told of this

insolent  conduct,  this  contempt  for  the  royal  authority,  and  this  Gothic

rusticity which some presume to call Christian severity, what an idea must

they  entertain  of  our  nation? And  how  will  it  be  possible  for  them  to

conceive, either that our laws give a sanction to an art which is declared

infamous,  or  that  some  persons  dare  to  stamp  with  infamy  an  art  which

receives  a  sanction  from  the  laws,  is  rewarded  by  kings,  cultivated  and

encouraged by the greatest men, and admired by whole nations? And that

Father Le Brun’s impertinent libel against the stage is seen in a bookseller’s

shop, standing the very next to the immortal labours of Racine, of Corneille,

of Molière, &c.


  LETTER XXIV.

  ON THE ROYAL SOCIETY AND OTHER ACADEMIES


  The English had an Academy of Sciences many years before us, but then it

is not under such prudent regulations as ours, the only reason of which very

possibly is, because it was founded before the Academy of Paris; for had it

been founded after, it would very probably have adopted some of the sagelaws of the former and improved upon others.


  Two things, and those the most essential to man, are wanting in the Royal

Society of London, I mean rewards and laws. A seat in the Academy at Paris

is a small but secure fortune to a geometrician or a chemist; but this is so far

from being the case at London, that the several members of the Royal Society

are at a continual, though indeed small expense. Any man in England who

declares  himself  a  lover  of  the  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy,  and

expresses an inclination to be a member of the Royal Society, is immediately

elected into it. But in France it is not enough that a man who aspires to the

honour  of  being  a  member  of  the  Academy,  and  of  receiving  the  royal

stipend, has a love for the sciences; he must at the same time be deeply

skilled in them; and is obliged to dispute the seat with competitors who are so

much  the  more  formidable  as  they  are  fired  by  a  principle  of  glory,  by

interest, by the difficulty itself; and by that inflexibility of mind which is

generally found in those who devote themselves to that pertinacious study,

the mathematics.


  The Academy of Sciences is prudently confined to the study of Nature,

and, indeed, this is a field spacious enough for fifty or threescore persons to

range in. That of London mixes indiscriminately literature with physics; but

methinks  the  founding  an  academy  merely  for  the  polite  arts  is  more

judicious,  as  it  prevents  confusion,  and  the  joining,  in  some  measure,  of

heterogeneals, such as a dissertation on the head-dresses of the Roman ladies

with a hundred or more new curves.


  As there is very little order and regularity in the Royal Society, and not the

least encouragement; and that the Academy of Paris is on a quite different

foot, it is no wonder that our transactions are drawn up in a more just and

beautiful manner than those of the English. Soldiers who are under a regular

discipline,  and  besides  well  paid,  must  necessarily  at  last  perform  more

glorious achievements than others who are mere volunteers. It must indeed be

confessed that the Royal Society boast their Newton, but then he did not owe

his knowledge and discoveries to that body; so far from it, that the latter were

intelligible to very few of his fellow members. A genius like that of Sir Isaacbelonged to all the academies in the world, because all had a thousand things

to learn of him.


  The celebrated Dean Swift formed a design, in the latter end of the late

Queen’s reign, to found an academy for the English tongue upon the model

of that of the French. This project was promoted by the late Earl of Oxford,

Lord High Treasurer, and much more by the Lord Bolingbroke, Secretary of

State, who had the happy talent of speaking without premeditation in the

Parliament House with as much purity as Dean Swift wrote in his closet, and

who would have been the ornament and protector of that academy. Those

only would have been chosen members of it whose works will last as long as

the  English  tongue,  such  as  Dean  Swift,  Mr.  Prior,  whom  we  saw  here

invested with a public character, and whose fame in England is equal to that

of La Fontaine in France; Mr. Pope, the English Boileau, Mr. Congreve, who

may be called their Molière, and several other eminent persons whose names

I have forgot; all these would have raised the glory of that body to a great

height even in its infancy. But Queen Anne being snatched suddenly from the

world,  the  Whigs  were  resolved  to  ruin  the  protectors  of  the  intended

academy, a circumstance that was of the most fatal consequence to polite

literature. The  members  of  this  academy  would  have  had  a  very  great

advantage over those who first formed that of the French, for Swift, Prior,

Congreve, Dryden, Pope, Addison, &c. had fixed the English tongue by their

writings; whereas Chapelain, Colletet, Cassaigne, Faret, Perrin, Cotin, our

first academicians, were a disgrace to their country; and so much ridicule is

now attached to their very names, that if an author of some genius in this age

had the misfortune to be called Chapelain or Cotin, he would be under a

necessity of changing his name.


  One circumstance, to which the English Academy should especially have

attended, is to have prescribed to themselves occupations of a quite different

kind from those with which our academicians amuse themselves. A wit of

this country asked me for the memoirs of the French Academy. I answered,

they have no memoirs, but have printed threescore or fourscore volumes in

quarto  of  compliments. The  gentleman  perused  one  or  two  of  them,  but

without being able to understand the style in which they were written, thoughhe understood all our good authors perfectly. “All,” says he, “I see in these

elegant discourses is, that the member elect having assured the audience that

his predecessor was a great man, that Cardinal Richelieu was a very great

man, that the Chancellor Seguier was a pretty great man, that Louis XIV. was

a more than great man, the director answers in the very same strain, and adds,

that the member elect may also be a sort of great man, and that himself, in

quality of director, must also have some share in this greatness.”


  The cause why all these academical discourses have unhappily done so

little honour to this body is evident enough. Vitium est temporis potiùs quam

hominis (the fault is owing to the age rather than to particular persons). It

grew  up  insensibly  into  a  custom  for  every  academician  to  repeat  these

elogiums at his reception; it was laid down as a kind of law that the public

should be indulged from time to time the sullen satisfaction of yawning over

these productions. If the reason should afterwards be sought, why the greatest

geniuses who have been incorporated into that body have sometimes made

the worst speeches, I answer, that it is wholly owing to a strong propension,

the gentlemen in question had to shine, and to display a thread-bare, worn-out

subject in a new and uncommon light. The necessity of saying something, the

perplexity of having nothing to say, and a desire of being witty, are three

circumstances which alone are capable of making even the greatest writer

ridiculous. These gentlemen, not being able to strike out any new thoughts,

hunted after a new play of words, and delivered themselves without thinking

at  all:  in  like  manner  as  people  who  should  seem  to  chew  with  great

eagerness, and make as though they were eating, at the same time that they

were just starved.


  It is a law in the French Academy, to publish all those discourses by which

only they are known, but they should rather make a law never to print any of

them.


  But the Academy of the Belles Lettres have a more prudent and more

useful object, which is, to present the public with a collection of transactions

that  abound  with  curious  researches  and  critiques. These  transactions  are

already esteemed by foreigners; and it were only to be wished that somesubjects in them had been more thoroughly examined, and that others had not

been treated at all. As, for instance, we should have been very well satisfied,

had they omitted I know not what dissertation on the prerogative of the right

hand over the left; and some others, which, though not published under so

ridiculous a title, are yet written on subjects that are almost as frivolous and

silly.


  The Academy of Sciences, in such of their researches as are of a more

difficult kind and a more sensible use, embrace the knowledge of nature and

the improvements of the arts. We may presume that such profound, such

uninterrupted  pursuits  as  these,  such  exact  calculations,  such  refined

discoveries,  such  extensive  and  exalted  views,  will,  at  last,  produce

something that may prove of advantage to the universe. Hitherto, as we have

observed together, the most useful discoveries have been made in the most

barbarous  times. One  would  conclude  that  the  business  of  the  most

enlightened ages and the most learned bodies, is, to argue and debate on

things which were invented by ignorant people. We know exactly the angle

which the sail of a ship is to make with the keel in order to its sailing better;

and yet Columbus discovered America without having the least idea of the

property of this angle: however, I am far from inferring from hence that we

are to confine ourselves merely to a blind practice, but happy it were, would

naturalists and geometricians unite, as much as possible, the practice with the

theory.


  Strange, but so it is, that those things which reflect the greatest honour on

the  human  mind  are  frequently  of  the  least  benefit  to  it! A  man  who

understands the four fundamental rules of arithmetic, aided by a little good

sense,  shall  amass  prodigious  wealth  in  trade,  shall  become  a  Sir  Peter

Delmé,  a  Sir  Richard  Hopkins,  a  Sir  Gilbert  Heathcote,  whilst  a  poor

algebraist spends his whole life in searching for astonishing properties and

relations in numbers, which at the same time are of no manner of use, and

will not acquaint him with the nature of exchanges. This is very nearly the

case with most of the arts: there is a certain point beyond which all researches

serve to no other purpose than merely to delight an inquisitive mind. Those

ingenious and useless truths may be compared to stars which, by being placedat too great a distance, cannot afford us the least light.


  With regard to the French Academy, how great a service would they do to

literature, to the language, and the nation, if, instead of publishing a set of

compliments annually, they would give us new editions of the valuable works

written in the age of Louis XIV., purged from the several errors of diction

which are crept into them. There are many of these errors in Corneille and

Molière, but those in La Fontaine are very numerous. Such as could not be

corrected might at least be pointed out. By this means, as all the Europeans

read those works, they would teach them our language in its utmost purity-

which, by that means, would be fixed to a lasting standard; and valuable

French books being then printed at the King’s expense, would prove one of

the most glorious monuments the nation could boast. I have been told that

Boileau formerly made this proposal, and that it has since been revived by a

gentleman eminent for his genius, his fine sense, and just taste for criticism;

but this thought has met with the fate of many other useful projects, of being

applauded and neglected.Mahomet

 

  Voltaire

  Mahomet

Translated by William F. Fleming


  DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

  Mahomet.

  Zopir, Sheik of Mecca.

  Omar, General and second in command to Mahomet.

  Seid, Slave to Mahomet.

  Palmira, Slave to Mahomet.

  Phanor, Senator of Mecca.

  Company of Meccans.

  Company of Mussulmans.


  Scene, Mecca.


  TABLE

  ACT I

  ACT II

  ACT III

  ACT IV

  ACT V


  ACT I. 


  SCENE I.  ZOPIR, PHANOR.


  ZOPIR.

  Thinkest thou thy friend will ever bend the knee

  To this proud hypocrite; shall I fall down

  And worship, I who banished him from Mecca?

  No: punish me, just heaven, as I deserve,

  If e’er this hand, the friend of innocence

  And freedom, stoop to cherish foul rebellion,

  Or aid imposture to deceive mankind!

  PHANOR.

  Thy zeal is noble, and becomes the chief

  Of Ishmael’s sacred senate, but may prove

  Destructive to the cause it means to serve:

  Thy ardor cannot check the rapid power

  Of Mahomet, and but provokes his vengeance:

  There was a time when you might safely draw

  The sword of justice, to defend the rights

  Of Mecca, and prevent the flames of war

  From spreading o’er the land; then Mahomet

  Was but a bold and factious citizen,

  But now he is a conqueror, and a king;

  Mecca’s impostor at Medina shines

  A holy prophet; nations bend before him,

  And learn to worship crimes which we abhor.

  Even here, a band of wild enthusiasts, drunk

  With furious zeal, support his fond delusions,  His idle tales, and fancied miracles:

  These spread sedition through the gaping throng,

  Invite his forces, and believe a God

  Inspires and renders him invincible.

  The lovers of their country think with you,

  But wisest counsels are not always followed;

  False zeal, and fear, and love of novelty

  Alarm the crowd; already half our city

  Is left unpeopled; Mecca cries aloud

  To thee her father, and demands a peace.

  ZOPIR.

  Peace with a traitor! coward nation, what

  Can you expect but slavery from a tyrant!

  Go, bend your supple knees, and prostrate fall

  Before the idol whose oppressive hand

  Shall crush you all: for me, I hate the traitor;

  This heart’s too deeply wounded to forgive:

  The savage murderer robbed me of a wife

  And two dear children: nor is his resentment

  Less fierce than mine; I forced his camp, pursued

  The coward to his tent, and slew his son:

  The torch of hatred is lit up between us,

  And time can never extinguish it.

  PHANOR.

  I hope

  It never will; yet thou shouldst hide the flame,

  And sacrifice thy griefs to public good:  What if he lay this noble city waste,

  Will that avenge thee, will that serve thy cause?

  Thou hast lost all, son, brother, daughter, wife.

  Mecca alone remains to give thee comfort,

  Do not lose that, do not destroy thy country.

  ZOPIR.

  Kingdoms are lost by cowardice alone.

  PHANOR.

  As oft perhaps by obstinate resistance.

  ZOPIR.

  Then let us perish, if it be our fate.

  PHANOR.

  When thou art almost in the harbor, thus

  To brave the storm is false and fatal courage:

  Kind heaven, thou seest, points out to thee the means

  To soften this proud tyrant; fair Palmira,

  Thy beautous captive, brought up in the camp

  Of this destructive conqueror, was sent

  By gracious heaven, the messenger of peace,

  Thy guardian angel, to appease the wrath

  Of Mahomet; already by his herald

  He has demanded her.

  ZOPIR.

  And wouldst thou have me

  Give up so fair a prize to this barbarian?

  What! whilst the tyrant spreads destruction round him,

  Unpeoples kingdoms, and destroys mankind,  Shall beauty’s charms be sacrificed to bribe

  A madman’s frenzy? I should envy him

  That lovely fair one more than all his glory;

  Not that I feel the stings of wild desire,

  Or, in the evening of my days, indulge,

  Old as I am, a shameless passion for her;

  But, whether objects born like her to please,

  Spite of ourselves, demand our tenderest pity,

  Or that perhaps a childless father hopes

  To find in her another daughter, why

  I know not, but for that unhappy maid

  Still am I anxious; be it weakness in me,

  Or reason’s powerful voice, I cannot bear

  To see her in the hands of Mahomet;

  Would I could mould her to my wishes, form

  Her willing mind, and make her hate the tyrant

  As I do! She has sent to speak with me

  Here in the sacred porch and lo! she comes:

  On her fair cheek the blush of modesty

  And candor speaks the virtues of her heart.


  SCENE II.

  ZOPIR, PALMIRA.


  ZOPIR.

  Hail, lovely maid! the chance of cruel war

  Hath made thee Zopir’s captive, but thou art not  Amongst barbarians; all with me revere

  Palmira’s virtues, and lament her fate,

  Whilst youth with innocence and beauty plead

  Thy cause; whatever thou askest in Zopir’s power,

  Thou shalt not ask in vain: my life declines

  Towards its period, and if my last hours

  Can give Palmira joy, I shall esteem them

  The best, the happiest I have ever known.

  PALMIRA.

  These two months past, my lord, your prisoner here,

  Scarce have I felt the yoke of slavery;

  Your generous hand, still raised to soothe affliction,

  Hath wiped the tears of sorrow from my eyes,

  And softened all the rigor of my fate:

  Forgive me, if emboldened by your goodness

  I ask for more, and centre every hope

  Of future happiness on you alone;

  Forgive me, if to Mahomet’s request

  I join Palmira’s, and implore that freedom

  He hath already asked: O listen to him,

  And let me say, that after heaven and him

  I am indebted most to generous Zopir.

  ZOPIR.

  Has then oppression such enticing charms

  That thou shouldst wish and beg to be the slave

  Of Mahomet, to hear the clash of arms,

  With him to live in deserts, and in caves,  And wander o’er his ever shifting country?

  PALMIRA.

  Where’er the mind with ease and pleasure dwells,

  There is our home, and there our native country:

  He formed my soul; to Mahomet I owe

  The kind instruction of my earlier years;

  Taught by the happy partners of his bed,

  Who still adoring and adored by him

  Send up their prayers to heaven for his dear safety,

  I lived in peace and joy! for ne’er did woe

  Pollute that seat of bliss till the sad hour

  Of my misfortune, when wide-wasting war

  Rushed in upon us and enslaved Palmira:

  Pity, my lord, a heart oppressed with grief,

  That sighs for objects far, far distant from her.

  ZOPIR.

  I understand you, madam; you expect

  The tyrant’s hand, and hope to share his throne.

  PALMIRA.

  I honor him, my lord; my trembling soul

  Looks up to Mahomet with holy fear

  As to a god; but never did this heart

  E’er cherish the vain hope that he would deign

  To wed Palmira: No: such splendor ill

  Would suit my humble state.

  ZOPIR.

  Whoe’er thou art,  He was not born, I trust, to be thy husband,

  No, nor thy master; much I err, or thou

  Springest from a race designed by heaven to check

  This haughty Arab, and give laws to him

  Who thus assumes the majesty of kings.

  PALMIRA.

  Alas! we know not what it is to boast

  Of birth or fortune; from our infant years

  Without or parents, friends, or country, doomed

  To slavery; here resigned to our hard fate,

  Strangers to all but to that God we serve,

  We live content in humble poverty.

  ZOPIR.

  And can ye be content? and are ye strangers,

  Without a father, and without a home?

  I am a childless, poor, forlorn, old man;

  You might have been the comfort of my age:

  To form a plan of future happiness

  For you, had softened my own wretchedness,

  And made me some amends for all my wrongs:

  But you abhor my country and my law.

  PALMIRA.

  I am not mistress of myself, and how

  Can I be thine? I pity thy misfortunes,

  And bless thee for thy goodness to Palmira;

  But Mahomet has been a father to me.

  ZOPIR.  A father! ye just gods! the vile impostor!

  PALMIRA.

  Can he deserve that name, the holy prophet,

  The great ambassador of heaven, sent down

  To interpret its high will?

  ZOPIR.

  Deluded mortals!

  How blind ye are, to follow this proud madman,

  This happy robber, whom my justice spared,

  And raise him from the scaffold to a throne!

  PALMIRA.

  My lord, I shudder at your imprecations;

  Though I am bound by honor and the ties

  Of gratitude to love thee for thy bounties,

  This blasphemy against my kind protector

  Cancels the bond, and fills my soul with horror.

  O superstition, how thy savage power

  Deprives at once the best and tenderest hearts

  Of their humanity!

  ZOPIR.

  Alas! Palmira,

  Spite of myself, I feel for thy misfortunes,

  Pity thy weakness, and lament thy fate.

  PALMIRA.

  You will not grant me then

  ZOPIR.

  I cannot yield thee  To him who has deceived thy easy heart,

  To a base tyrant; No: thou art a treasure

  Too precious to be parted with, and makest

  This hypocrite but more detested.

  SCENE III.

  ZOPIR, PALMIRA, PHANOR.

  ZOPIR.

  Phanor,

  What wouldst thou?

  PHANOR.

  At the city gate that leads

  To Moad’s fertile plain, the valiant Omar

  Is just arrived.

  ZOPIR.

  Indeed; the tyrant’s friend,

  The fierce, vindictive Omar, his new convert,

  Who had so long opposed him, and still fought

  For us!

  PHANOR.

  Perhaps he yet may serve his country,

  Already he hath offered terms of peace;

  Our chiefs have parleyed with him, he demands

  An hostage, and I hear they’ve granted him

  The noble Seid.

  PALMIRA.

  Seid? gracious heaven!

  PHANOR.  Behold! my lord, he comes.

  ZOPIR.

  Ha! Omar here!

  There’s no retreating now, he must be heard;

  Palmira, you may leave us.-O ye gods

  Of my forefathers, you who have protected

  The sons of Ishmael these three thousand years,

  And thou, O Sun, with all those sacred lights

  That glitter round us, witness to my truth,

  Aid and support me in the glorious conflict

  With proud iniquity!


  SCENE IV.

  ZOPIR, OMAR, PHANOR, Attendants.


  ZOPIR.

  At length, it seems,

  Omar returns, after a three years’ absence,

  To visit that loved country which his hand

  So long defended, and his honest heart

  Has now betrayed: deserter of our gods,

  Deserter of our laws, how darest thou thus

  Approach these sacred walls to persecute

  And to oppress; a public robber’s slave;

  What is thy errand? wherefore comest thou hither?

  OMAR.

  To pardon thee: by me our holy prophet,  In pity to thy age, thy well-known valor,

  And past misfortunes, offers thee his hand:

  Omar is come to bring thee terms of peace.

  ZOPIR.

  And shall a factious rebel offer peace

  Who should have sued for pardon? gracious gods!

  Will ye permit him to usurp your power,

  And suffer Mahomet to rule mankind?

  Dost thou not blush, vile minion as thou art,

  To serve a traitor? hast thou not beheld him

  Friendless and poor, an humble citizen,

  And ranking with the meanest of the throng?

  How little then in fortune or in fame!

  OMAR.

  Thus low and grovelling souls like thine pretend

  To judge of merit, whilst in fortune’s scale

  Ye weigh the worth of men: proud, empty being,

  Dost thou not know that the poor worm which crawls

  Low on the earth, and the imperial eagle

  That soars to heaven, in the all-seeing eye

  Of their eternal Maker are the same,

  And shrink to nothing? men are equal all;

  From virtue only true distinction springs,

  And not from birth: there are exalted spirits

  Who claim respect and honor from themselves

  And not their ancestors: these, these, my lord,

  Are heaven’s peculiar care, and such is he  Whom I obey, and who alone deserves

  To be a master; all mankind like me

  Shall one day fall before the conqueror’s feet,

  And future ages follow my example.

  ZOPIR.

  Omar, I know thee well; thy artful hand

  In vain hath drawn the visionary portrait;

  Thou mayest deceive the multitude, but know,

  What Mecca worships Zopir can despise:

  Be honest then, and with the impartial eye

  Of reason look on Mahomet; behold him

  But as a mortal, and consider well

  By what base arts the vile impostor rose,

  A camel-driver, a poor abject slave,

  Who first deceived a fond, believing woman,

  And now supported by an idle dream

  Draws in the weak and credulous multitude:

  Condemned to exile, I chastised the rebel

  Too lightly, and his insolence returns

  With double force to punish my indulgence.

  He fled with Fatima from cave to cave,

  And suffered chains, contempt and banishment;

  Meantime the fury which he called divine

  Spread like a subtle poison through the crowd;

  Medina was infected: Omar then,

  To reason’s voice attentive, would have stopped

  The impetuous torrent; he had courage then  And virtue to attack the proud usurper,

  Though now he crouches to him like a slave.

  If thy proud master be indeed a prophet,

  How didst thou dare to punish him? or why,

  If an impostor, wilt thou dare to serve him?

  OMAR.

  I punished him because I knew him not;

  But now, the veil of ignorance removed,

  I see him as he is; behold him born

  To change the astonished world, and rule mankind:

  When I beheld him rise in awful pomp,

  Intrepid, eloquent, by all admired,

  By all adored; beheld him speak and act,

  Punish and pardon like a god, I lent

  My little aid, and joined the conqueror.

  Altars, thou knowest, and thrones were our reward;

  Once I was blind, like thee, but, thanks to heaven!

  My eyes are opened now; would, Zopir, thine

  Were open, too! let me entreat thee, change,

  As I have done; no longer boast thy zeal

  And cruel hatred, nor blaspheme our God,

  But fall submissive at the hero’s feet

  Whom thou hast injured; kiss the hand that bears

  The angry lightning, lest it fall upon thee.

  Omar is now the second of mankind;

  A place of honor yet remains for thee,

  If prudent thou wilt yield, and own a master:  What we have been thou knowest, and what we are:

  The multitude are ever weak and blind,

  Made for our use, born but to serve the great,

  But to admire, believe us, and obey:

  Reign then with us, partake the feast of grandeur,

  No longer deign to imitate the crowd,

  But henceforth make them tremble.

  ZOPIR.

  Tremble thou,

  And Mahomet, with all thy hateful train:

  Thinkest thou that Mecca’s faithful chief will fall

  At an impostor’s feet, and crown a rebel?

  I am no stranger to his specious worth;

  His courage and his conduct have my praise;

  Were he but virtuous I like thee should love him;

  But as he is I hate the tyrant: hence,

  Nor talk to me of his deceitful mercy,

  His clemency and goodness; all his aim

  Is cruelty and vengeance: with this hand

  I slew his darling son; I banished him:

  My hatred is inflexible, and so

  Is Mahomet’s resentment: if he e’er

  Re-enters Mecca, he must cut his way

  Through Zopir’s blood, for he is deeply stained

  With crimes that justice never can forgive.

  OMAR.

  To show thee Mahomet is merciful,  That he can pardon though thou canst not, here

  I offer thee the third of all our spoils

  Which we have taken from tributary kings;

  Name your conditions, and the terms of peace;

  Set your own terms on fair Palmira; take

  Our treasures, and be happy.

  ZOPIR.

  Thinkest thou Zopir

  Will basely sell his honor and his country,

  Will blast his name with infamy for wealth,

  The foul reward of guilt, or that Palmira

  Will ever own a tyrant for her master?

  She is too virtuous e’er to be the slave

  Of Mahomet, nor will I suffer her

  To fall a sacrifice to base impostors

  Who would subvert the laws, and undermine

  The safety and the virtue of mankind.

  OMAR.

  Implacably severe; thou talkest to Omar

  As if he were a criminal, and thou

  His judge; but henceforth I would have thee act

  A better part, and treat me as a friend,

  As the ambassador of Mahomet,

  A conqueror and a king.

  ZOPIR.

  A king! who made,

  Who crowned him?  OMAR.

  Victory: respect his glory,

  And tremble at his power: amidst his conquests

  The hero offers peace; our swords are still

  Unsheathed, and woe to this rebellious city

  If she submits not: think what blood must flow,

  The blood of half our fellow-citizens;

  Consider, Zopir, Mahomet is here,

  And even now requests to speak with thee.

  ZOPIR.

  Ha! Mahomet!

  OMAR.

  Yes, he conjures thee.

  ZOPIR.

  Traitor!

  Were I the sole despotic ruler here

  He should be answered soonby chastisement.

  OMAR.

  I pity, Zopir, thy pretended virtue;

  But since the senate insolently claim

  Divided empire with thee, to the senate

  Let us begone; Omar will meet thee there.

  ZOPIR.

  I’ll follow thee: we then shall see who best

  Can plead his cause: I will defend my gods,

  My country, and her laws; thy impious voice

  Shall bellow for thy vengeful deity,  Thy persecuting god, and his false prophet.

  [Turning to Phanor.

  Haste, Phanor, and with me repulse the traitor;

  Who spares a villain is a villain:-come,

  Let us, my friend, unite to crush his pride,

  Subvert his wily purposes, destroy him,

  Or perish in the attempt: If Mecca listens

  To Zopir’s councils, I shall free my country

  From a proud tyrant’s power, and save mankind.


  End of the First Act.


  ACT II. 


  SCENE I.

  Seid, Palmira.


  PALMIRA.

  Welcome, my Seid, do I see thee here

  Once more in safety? What propitious god

  Conducted thee? At length Palmira's woes

  Shall have an end, and we may yet be happy.

  SEID.

  Thou sweetest charmer, balm of every woe,

  Dear object of my wishes and my tears,

  O since that day of blood when flushed with conquest

  The fierce barbarian snatched thee from my arms,

  When midst a heap of slaughtered friends I lay  Expiring on the ground, and called on death,

  But called in vain, to end my hated being,

  What have I suffered for my dear Palmira!

  How have I cursed the tardy hours that long

  Withheld my vengeance! my distracted soul's

  Impatience thirsted for the bloody field,

  That with these hands I might lay waste this seat

  Of slavery, where Palmira mourned so long

  In sad captivity; but thanks to heaven!

  Our holy prophet, whose deep purposes

  Are far beyond the ken of human wisdom,

  Hath hither sent his chosen servant Omar;

  I flew to meet him, they required a hostage;

  I gave my faith, and they received it; firm

  In my resolve to live or die for thee.

  PALMIRA.

  Seid, the very moment ere thou camest

  To calm my fears, and save me from despair,

  Was I entreating the proud ravisher;

  Thou knowest, I cried, the only good on earth

  I prized is left behind, restore it to me:

  Then clasped his knees, fell at the tyrant's feet,

  And bathed them with my tears, but all in vain:

  How his unkind refusal shocked my soul!

  My eyes grew dim, and motionless I stood

  As one deprived of life; no succor nigh,

  No ray of hope was left, when Seid came  To ease my troubled heart, and bring me comfort.

  SEID.

  Who could behold unmoved Palmira's woes?

  PALMIRA.

  The cruel Zopir; not insensible

  He seemed to my misfortunes, yet at last

  Unkindly told me, I must never hope

  To leave these walls, for naught should tear me from him.

  SEID.

  'Tis false; for Mahomet, my royal master,

  With the victorious Omar, and forgive me,

  If to these noble friends I proudly add

  The name of Seid, these shall set thee free,

  Dry up thy tears, and make Palmira happy:

  The God of Mahomet, our great protector,

  That God whose sacred standard I have borne;

  He who destroyed Medina's haughty ramparts

  Shall lay rebellious Mecca at our feet;

  Omar is here, and the glad people look

  With eyes of friendship on him; in the name

  Of Mahomet he comes, and meditates

  Some noble purpose.

  PALMIRA.

  Mahomet indeed

  Might free us, and unite two hearts long since

  Devoted to his cause; but he, alas!

  Is far removed, and we abandoned captives.  SCENE II.

  Palmira, Seid, Omar.


  OMAR

  Despair not; heaven perhaps may yet reward you,

  For Mahomet and liberty are nigh.

  SEID.

  Is he then come?

  PALMIRA.

  Our friend and father?

  OMAR

  Yes.

  I met the council, and by Mahomet

  Inspired, addressed them thus: “Within these walls,

  Even here,” I cried, “the favorite of heaven,

  Our holy prophet, first drew breath; the great,

  The mighty conqueror, the support of kings;

  And will ye not permit him but to rank

  As friend and fellow-citizen? He comes not

  To ruin or enslave, but to protect,

  To teach you and to save, to fix his power,

  And hold dominion o'er the conquered heart.”

  I spoke; the hoary sages smiled applause,

  And all inclined to favor us; but Zopir,

  Still resolute and still inflexible,

  Declared, the people should be called together,  And give their general voice: the people met,

  Again I spoke, addressed the citizens,

  Exhorted, threatened, practiced every art

  To win their favor, and at length prevailed;

  The gates are opened to great Mahomet,

  Who after fifteen years of cruel exile

  Returns to bless once more his native land;

  With him the gallant Ali, brave Hercides,

  And Ammon the invincible, besides

  A numerous train of chosen followers:

  The people throng around him; some with looks

  Of hatred, some with smiles of cordial love;

  Some bless the hero, and some curse the tyrant:

  Some threaten and blaspheme, whilst others fall

  Beneath his feet, embrace and worship him;

  Meantime the names of God, of peace and freedom,

  Are echoed through the all-believing crowd;

  Whilst Zopir's dying party bellows forth

  In idle threats its impotent revenge:

  Amidst their cries, unruffled and serene,

  In triumph walks the god-like Mahomet,

  Bearing the olive in his hand; already

  Peace is proclaimed, and see! The conqueror comes.


  SCENE III.

  Mahomet, Omar, Hercides, Seid, Palmira, Attendants.  MAHOMET.

  My friends, and fellow-laborers, valiant Ali,

  Morad, and Ammon, and Hericides, hence

  To your great work, and in my name instruct

  The people, lead them to the paths of truth,

  Promise and threaten; let my God alone

  Be worshipped, and let those who will not love

  Be taught to fear him-Seid, art thou here?

  SEID.

  My ever-honored father, and King,

  Led by that power divine who guided thee

  To Mecca's walls, preventing your commands

  I came, prepared to live or die with thee.

  MAHOMET.

  You should have waited for my orders; he

  Who goes beyond his duty knows it not;

  I am heaven's minister, and thou art mine;

  Learn then of me to serve and to obey.

  PALMIRA.

  Forgive, my lord, a youth's impatient ardor:

  Brought up together from our infant years,

  The same our fortunes, and our thoughts the same:

  Alas! My life has been a life of sorrow;

  Long have I languished in captivity,

  Far from my friends, from Seid, and from thee;

  And now at last, when I beheld a ray

  Of comfort shining of me, they unkindness  Blasts my fair hopes, and darkens all the scene.

  MAHOMET.

  Palmira, 'tis enough : I know thy virtues;

  Let naught disturb thee: spite of all my cares,

  Glory, and empire, and the weight of war,

  I will remember thee; Palmira still

  Lives in my heart, and shares it with mankind:

  Seid shall join troops: thou, gentle maid,

  Mayest serve they God in peace: fear naught but Zopir.


  SCENE IV.

  Mahomet, Omar,


  MAHOMET.

  Brave Omar, stay, for in thy faithful bosom

  Will I repose the secrets of my soul:

  The lingering progress of a doubtful siege

  May stop our rapid course; we must not give

  These weak deluded mortals too much time

  To pry into our actions; prejudice

  Rules o'er the vulgar with despotic sway.

  Thou knowest there is a tale which I have spread

  And they believe, that universal empire

  Awaits the prophet, who to Mecca's walls

  Shall lead his conquering bands, and bring her peace.

  'Tis mine to mark the errors of mankind,

  And to avail me of them; but whilst thus  I try each art to soothe this fickle people

  What thinks my friend of Seid and Palmira?

  OMAR.

  I think most nobly of them, that amidst

  Those few staunch followers who own no God,

  No faith but thine, who love thee as their father,

  Their friend, and benefactor, none obey

  Or serve thee with an humbler, better mind:

  They are most faithful.

  MAHOMET.

  Omar, thou art deceived;

  They are my worst foes, they love each other.

  OMAR.

  And can you blame their tenderness?

  MAHOMET.

  My friend,

  I'll tell thee all my weakness.

  OMAR.

  How my Lord!

  MAHOMET.

  Thou knowest the reigning passion of my soul;

  Whilst proud ambition and the cares of empire

  Weighed heavy on me, Mahomet's hard life

  Has been a conflict with opposing Nature,

  Whom I have vanquished by austerity,

  And self denial; have banished from me

  That baleful poison which unnerves mankind,  Which only serves to fire them into madness,

  And brutal follies; on the burning sand

  Or desert rocks I brave the inclement sky,

  And bear the seasons' rough vicissitude:

  Love is my only solace, the dear object

  O fall my toils, the idol I adore,

  The god of Mahomet, the powerful rival

  Of my ambition: know, midst all my queens,

  Palmira reigns sole mistress of my heart:

  Think then what pangs of jealousy thy friend

  Must feel when she expressed her fatal passion

  For Seid.

  OMAR.

  But thou art revenged.

  MAHOMET.

  Judge thou

  If soon I ought not to take vengeance on them;

  That thou mayest hate my rival more, I'll tell thee

  Who Seid and Palmira are-the children

  Of him whom I abhor, my deadliest foe.

  OMAR.

  Ha! Zopir!

  MAHOMET.

  Is their father: fifteen years

  Are past since brave Hercides to my care

  Gave up their infant years; they know not yet

  Or who or what they are; I brought them up  Together; I indulged their lawless passion.,

  And added fuel to the guilty flame.

  Methinks it is as if the hand of heaven

  Had meant in them to center every crime.

  But I must- Ha! Their father comes this way,

  His eyes are full of bitterness and wrath

  Against me-now be vigilant, my Omar,

  Hercides must be careful to possess

  This most important pass; return, and tell me

  Whether 'tis most expedient to declare

  Against him, or retreat: away.


  SCENE V.

  Zopir, Mahomet,


  ZOPIR.

  Hard fate!

  Unhappy Zopir! Thus compelled to meet

  My worst of foes, the foe of all mankind!

  Since 'tis the will of heaven that Mahomet

  And Zopir should at length untie, approach

  Without a blush, and fearless tell thy tale.

  I blush for thee alone, whose baneful arts

  Have drawn thy country to the brink of ruin;

  Who in the bosom of fair peace wouldst wage

  Intestine war, loosen the sacred bonds

  Of friendship, and destroy our happiness;  Beneath the veil of proffered terms thou meanest

  But to betray, whilst discord stalks before thee:

  Thou vile assemblage of hypocrisy

  And insolence, abhorred tyrant! Thus

  Do the chosen ministers of heaven dispense

  Its sacred blessings, and announce their God?

  MAHOMET.

  Wert thou not Zopir, I would answer thee

  As thou deservest, in thunder, by the voice

  Of that offended Being thou deridest:

  Armed with the hallowed Koran I would teach thee

  To tremble and obey in humble silence:

  And with the subject world to kneel before me;

  But I will talk to thee without disguise,

  As man to man should speak, and friend to friend:

  I have ambition, Zopir; where's the man

  Who has it not? But never citizen,

  Or chief, or priest, or king projected aught

  So noble as the plan of Mahomet;

  In acts or arms hath every nation shone

  Superior in its turn; Arabia now

  Steps forth; that generous people, long unknown

  And unrespected, saw her glories sunk,

  Her honors lost; but lo! The hour is come

  When she shall rise to victory and renown;

  The world lies desolate from pole to pole;

  India's slaves and bleeding Persia mourns  Her slaughtered sons; whilst Egypt hangs the head

  Dejected; from the walls of Constantine

  Splendor is fled; the Roman Empire torn

  By discord, sees its scattered members spread

  On every side inglorious;let us raise

  Arabia on the ruins of mankind:

  The blind and tottering universe demands

  Another worship, and another God.

  Crete had her Minos, Egypt her Osiris,

  To Asia Zoroaster gave his laws,

  And Numa was in Italy adored:

  O'er savage nations where nor monarchs ruled

  Nor manners softened, nor religion taught,

  Hath many a sage his fruitless maxims spread;

  Beneath a nobler yoke I mean to bend

  The prostrate world, and change their feeble laws,

  Abolish their false worship, pull down

  Their powerless gods, and on my purer faith

  Found universal empire: say not Zopir,

  That Mahomet betrays his country, no:

  I mean but to destroy its weak supports,

  And banishing idolatry, unite it

  Beneath one king, one prophet, and one God;

  I shall subdue it but to make it glorious.

  ZOPIR.

  Is this thy purpose then, and darest thou thus

  Avow it? Canst thou change the hearts of men,  And make them think like thee? Are war and slaughter

  The harbingers of wisdom and of peace;

  Can he who ravages instruct mankind?

  If in the night of ignorance and error

  We long have wandrered, must thy dreadful torch

  Enlighten us? What right hast thou to empire?

  MAHOMET.

  That right which firm, exalted spirits claim

  O'er vulgar minds.

  ZOPIR.

  Thus every bold impostor

  May forge new fetters, and enslave mankind:

  He has a right, it seems, to cheat the world

  If he can dot it with an air of grandeur.

  MAHOMET.

  I know your people well; I know they want

  A leader; my religion, true or false,

  Is needful to them: what have all your gods

  And all your idols done? What laurels grow

  Beneath their altars? Your low, groveling sect

  Debases man, unnerves his active soul,

  And makes it heavy, phlegmatic, and mean;

  Whilst mine exalts it, gives it strength and courage:

  My law forms heroes.

  ZOPIR.

  Rather call them robbers:

  Away; not bring thy hateful lessons here;  Go to the school of tyrants, boast thy frauds

  To lost Medina, where thou reignest supreme

  Where blinded bigots bend beneath thy power,

  And thou beholdest thy equals at thy feet.

  MAHOMET.

  My equals! Mahomet has none; long since

  I passed them all; Medina is my own,

  And Mecca trembles at me; if thou holdest

  Thy safety dear, receive the peace I offer.

  ZOPIR.

  Thou talkest of peace, but 'tis not thy heart;

  I'm not to be deceived.

  MAHOMET.

  I would not have thee;

  The weak deceive, the powerful command:

  To-morrow I shall force thee to submit;

  To-day, observe, I would have been they friend.

  ZOPIR.

  Can we be friends? Can Mahomet and Zopir

  E'er be united? Say, what god shall work

  A miracle like that?

  MAHOMET.

  I'll tell thee one,

  A powerful God, one that is always heard,

  By me he speaks to thee.

  ZOPIR.

  Who is it? Name him.  MAHOMET.

  Interest, thy own dear interest.

  ZOPIR.

  Sooner heaven

  And hell shall be united; interest

  May be the god of Mahomet, but mine

  Is-justice: what shall join them to each other?

  Where is the cement that must bind our friendship?

  Is that the son I slew, or the warm blood

  Of Zopir's house which thou has shed?

  MAHOMET.

  It is

  Thy blood, thy son's-for now I will unveil

  A secret to thee, known to none but me:

  Thou weepest thy children dead; they both are-living.

  ZOPIR.

  What sayest thou? Living? Unexpected bliss!

  My children living?

  MAHOMET.

  Yes; and both-my prisoners.

  ZOPIR.

  My children slaves to thee? Impossible!

  MAHOMET.

  My bounty nourished them.

  ZOPIR.

  And couldst thou spare

  A child of Zopir's?  MAHOMET.

  For their father's faults

  I will not punish them

  ZOPIR.

  But tell me, say,

  For what are they reserved?

  MAHOMET.

  Their life or death

  Depend on me: speak but the word, and thou

  Art master of their fate.

  ZOPIR.

  O name the price

  And thou shalt have it; must I give my blood,

  Or must I bear their chains, and be the slave

  Of Mahomet?

  MAHOMET.

  I ask not either of thee:

  Lend me thy aid but to subdue the world;

  Surrender Mecca to me and give up

  Your temple, bid the astonished people read

  My sacred Koran; be thou my vassal,

  And fall before me, then will I restore

  Thy son, perhaps hereafter may reward thee

  With honors, and contract a closer tie

  With Zopir.

  ZOPIR.

  Mahomet, thou seest in me  A tender father: after fifteen years

  Of cruel absence, to behold my children,

  To die in their embraces, were the first

  And fairest blessings that my soul could wish for;

  But if to thee I must betray my country,

  Or sacrifice my children, know, proud tyrant,

  The choice is made already-fare thee well.

  MAHOMET.

  Inexorable dotard! But henceforth

  I will be more implacable, more cruel

  Even than thyself.


  SCENE VI

  Mahomet, Omar.


  OMAR.

  And so indeed thou must be,

  Or all is lost: already I have bought

  Their secret counsels: Mahomet, to-morrow

  The truce expires, and Zopir reassumes

  His power; thy life's in danger: half the senate

  Are leagued against thee: those who dare not fight

  May hire the dark assassin to destroy thee;

  May screen their guilt beneath the mask of justice,

  And call the murder legal punishment.

  MAHOMET.

  First they shall feel my vengeance: persecution,  Thou knowest, has ever been my best support.

  Zopir must die.

  OMAR.

  'Tis well resolved: his fate

  Will teach the rest obedience: lose no time.

  MAHOMET.

  Yet, spite of my resentment, I must hide

  The murderous hand that deals the blow. To 'scape

  Suspicion's watchful eye, and not incense

  The multitude.

  OMAR.

  They are not worth our care.

  MAHOMET.

  And yet they must be pleased: I want an arm

  That will strike boldly.

  OMAR.

  Seid is the man;

  I'll answer for him.

  MAHOMET.

  Seid?

  OMAR.

  Ay: the best,

  The fittest instrument to serve our purpose:

  As Zopir's hostage he may find occasion

  To speak with him, and soon avenge his master.

  Thy other favorites are too wise, too prudent

  For such a dangerous enterprise; old age  Takes off the bandage of credulity

  From mortal eyes; but the young, simple heart,

  The willing slave to its own fond opinions,

  And void of guile, will act as we direct it:

  Youth is the proper period for delusion.

  Seid, thou knowest, is superstitious, bold,

  And violent, but easy to be lead;

  Like a tame lion, to his keeper's voice

  Obedient.

  MAHOMET.

  What! The brother of Palmira?

  OMAR.

  Ay; Seid, the fierce son of thy proud foe,

  The incestuous rival of great Mahomet,

  His master's rival.

  MAHOMET.

  I detest him, Omar,

  Abhor his very name; my murdered son

  Cries out for vengeance on him; but thou knowest

  The object of my love, and whence she sprung;

  Thou seest I am oppressed on every side;

  I would have altars, victims, and a throne;

  I would have Zopir's blood, and Seid's too:

  I must consult my interest, my revenge,

  My honor, and my love, that fatal passion,

  Which, spite of my resentment, holds this heart

  In shameful chains: I must consult religion,  All powerful motive, and necessity

  That throws a veil o'er every crime: away.


  End of the Second Act


  ACT III. 


  SCENE I.

  Seid, Palmira


  PALMIRA.

  O Seid, keep me not in dread suspense,

  What is this secret sacrifice? What blood

  Hath heaven demanded?

  SEID.

  The eternal power

  Deigns to accept my service, calls on me

  To execute its purposes divine;

  To him this heart's devoted, and for him

  This arm shall rise in vengeance; I am bound

  To Omar and to Mahomet, have sworn

  To perish in the glorious cause of heaven:

  My next and dearest care shall be Palmira.

  PALMIRA.

  Why was not I a witness to thy oath?

  Had I been with thee, I had been less wretched;

  But doubts distract me: Omar talks of treason,

  Of blood that soon must flow; the senate's rage,  And Zopir's dark intrigues: the flames of war

  Once more are kindled, and the sword is drawn

  Heaven only knows when to be sheathed again:

  So says our prophet, he who cannot lie,

  Cannot deceive us: O I fear for Seid,

  Fear all from Zopir.

  SEID.

  So base and so perfidious? But this morning,

  When as a hostage, I appeared before him,

  I thought him noble, generous and humane;

  Some power invincible in secret worked,

  And won me to him; whether the respect

  Due to his name, or specious form external

  Concealed the blackness of his heart I know not;

  Whether thy presence filled my raptured soul

  With joy that drove out every painful sense,

  And would not let me think of aught but thee:

  Whate'er the cause, methought I was most happy

  When nearest him: that he should thus seduce

  My easy heart makes me detest him more;

  And yet how hard it is to look on those

  With eyes of hatred whom we wish to love!

  PALMIRA.

  By every bond hath heaven united us,

  And Seid and Palmira are the same:

  Were I not bound to thee, and to that faith

  Which Mahomet inspires, I too had pleaded  The cause of Zopir; but religion, love,

  And nature, all forbid it.

  SEID.

  Think no more

  Of vain remorse, but listen to the voice

  Of heaven, the God we serve will be propitious:

  Our holy prophet who protects his children

  Will bless our faithful love: for thy dear sake

  I hazard all. Farewell.


  SCENE II.

  Palmira (Alone.)


  PALIMRA

  Some dark presage

  Of future misery hangs o'er me still:

  That love which made my happiness, this day,

  So often wished for, is a day of horror:

  What is this dreadful oath, this solemn compact

  Which Seid talks of? I've a thousand fears

  Upon me when I think of Zopir: oft

  As I invoke great Mahomet, I feel

  A secret dread, and tremble as I worship:

  O save me, heaven! Fearful I obey,

  And blind I follow” O direct my steps

  Aright, and deign to wash my tears away!


  SCENE III.  Mahomet, Palmira.


  PALMIRA.

  Propitious heaven hath heard my prayers; he comes

  The prophet comes. O gracious Mahomet, My Seid-

  MAHOMET.

  What of him? Thou seemest disturbed;

  What should Palmira fear when I am with her!

  PALMIRA.

  Have I not cause when Mahomet himself

  Seems touched with grief?

  MAHOMET.

  Perhaps it is for thee:

  Darest thou, imprudent maid, avow a passion

  Ere I approved it: is the heart I formed

  Turned rebel to its master, to my laws

  Unfaithful? O ingratitude!

  PALMIRA.

  My lord,

  Behold me at your feet, and pity me

  Didst thou not once propitious smile upon us,

  And give thy sanction to our growing love?

  Thou knowest the virtuous passion that unites us

  Is but a chain that binds us more to thee.

  MAHOMET.

  The bonds that folly and imprudence knit

  Are dangerous! Guilt doth sometimes follow close  The steps of innocence: our hearts deceive us,

  And love, with all his store of dear delights,

  May cost us tears, and dip his shafts in blood.

  PALMIRA.

  Nor would I murmur if it flowed for Seid.

  MAHOMET.

  Are you indeed so fond?

  PALMIRA.

  E'er since the day

  When good Hercides to thy sacred power

  Consigned us both, unconquerable instinct,

  Still growing with our years, united us

  In tender friendship; 'twas the work of heaven

  That guides our every action, and o'errules

  The fate of mortals; so thy doctrines teach:

  God cannot change, nor gracious heaven condemn

  That love itself inspired: what once was right

  Is always so; canst thou then blame Palmira?

  MAHOMET.

  I can, and must; nay, thou wilt tremble more

  When I reveal the horrid secret to thee.

  Attend, rash maid, and let me teach thy soul

  What to avoid, and what to follow: listen

  To me alone.

  PALMIRA.

  To thee alone Palmira

  Will listen ever the obedient slave  Of Mahomet; this heart can never lose

  It's veneration for thy sacred name.

  MOHAMET.

  That veneration in excess may lead

  To foul ingratitude.

  PALMIRA.

  When I forget

  Thy goodness, then may Seid punish me!

  MAHOMET.

  Seid!

  PALMIRA.

  O why, my lord, that cruel frown,

  And look severe?

  MAHOMET.

  Be not alarmed; I meant

  But to explore the secrets of thy heart

  And try if thou were worthy to be saved:

  Be confident, and rest on my protection;

  On your obedience will depend your fate;

  If ye expect a blessing at my hands,

  Be careful to deserve it, and whate'er

  The will of heaven determines touching Seid,

  Be thou his guide, direct him in the paths

  Of duty and religion; let him keep

  His promise, and be worthy of Palmira.

  PALMIRA.

  O he will keep it; doubt him not, my lord,  I'll answer for his heart as for my own;

  Seid adores thee, worships Mahomet

  More than he loves Palmira; thou are all

  To him, his friend, his father, and his king:

  I'll fly, and urge him to his duty.


  SCENE IV.

  Mahomet (Alone.)


  MAHOMET

  Well:

  Spite of myself I must, it seems, be made

  A confidant; the simple girl betrayed

  Her guilty flame, and innocently plunged

  The dagger in my heart: unhappy race!

  Father and children, all my foes, all doomed

  To make me wretched! But ye soon shall prove

  That dreadful is my hatred-and my love.


  SCENE V.

  Mahomet ,Omar


  OMAR.

  At length the hour is come, to seize Palmira,

  To conquer Mecca, and to punish Zopir;

  His  death  alone  can  prop  our  feeble  cause,  And  humble  these  proud

citizens: brave Seid

  Can best avenge thee; he has free access  To Zopir: yonder gloomy passage leads

  To his abode; there the rebellious chief

  His idle vows and flattering incense ours

  Before his fancied deities; there Seid,

  Full of the law divine by thee inspired,

  Shall sacrifice the traitor to the God

  Of Mahomet

  MAHOMET.

  He shall: that youth was born

  For crimes of deepest dye: he shall be the first

  My useful slave, my instrument, and then

  The victim of my rage; it must be so:

  My safety, my resentment, and my love,

  My holy faith, and the decrees of my fate

  Irrevocable, all require it of me:

  But thinkest thou, Omar, he hath all the warmth

  Of wild fanaticism?

  OMAR.

  I know he has,

  And suits our purpose well; Palmira too,

  Will urge him on: religion, love, resentment

  Will bind his headstrong youth, and hurry him

  To madness.

  MAHOMET.

  Hast thou bound him by an oath?

  OMAR.

  O yes; in all the gloomy pomp of rites  Nocturnal, oaths, and altars, we have fixed

  His superstitious soul, placed in his hand

  The sacred sword, and fired him with the rage

  Of fierce enthusiasm-but behold him.


  SCENE VI.

  Mahomet, Omar, Seid


  MAHOMET.

  Child

  Of heaven, decreed to execute the laws

  Of an offended God, now hear by me

  His sacred will: thou must avenge his cause.

  SEID.

  O thou, to whom my soul devoted bends

  In humblest adoration, king, and prophet,

  Sovereign, acknowledged by the voice of heave,

  O'er prostrate nations-I am wholly thine:

  But O enlighten my dark mind! O say,

  How can weak man avenge his God?

  MAHOMET.

  Oft-times

  Doth he make use of feeble hands like thine

  To punish impious mortals, and assert

  His power divine.

  SEID.

  Will he, whose perfect image  Is seen in Mahomet, thus condescend

  To honor Seid?

  MAHOMET.

  Do as he ordains;

  That is the highest honor man can boast,

  Blindly to execute his great decree:

  Be thankful for the choice, and strike the blow:

  The angel of destruction shall assist,

  The God of armies shall protect thee.

  SEID.

  Speak;

  What tyrant must be slain? What blood must flow?

  MAHOMET.

  The murderer's blood whom Mahomet abhors,

  Who persecutes our faith, and spurns our God,

  Who slew my son; the worst of all my foes,

  The cruel Zopir.

  SEID.

  Ha! Must Zopir fall?

  MAHOMET.

  And dost thou pause? Presumptuous youth! 'tis impedious

  But to deliberate: far from Mahomet

  Be all who for themselves shall dare to judge

  Audacious: those who reason are not oft

  Prone to believe; thy part is to obey.

  Have it not told thee what the will of heaven

  Determines? If it be decreed that Mecca,  Spite of her crimes and base idolatry,

  Shall be the promised temple, the chosen seat

  Of empire, where I am appointed king,

  And pontiff, knowest thou holy Abram here

  Was born, that here his sacred ashes rest?

  He who, obedient to the voice of God,

  Stifled the cries of nature, and gave up

  His darling child: the same all powerful Being

  Requires of thee a sacrifice; to thee

  He calls for blood; and darest thou hesitate

  When God commands? Hence, vile idolater,

  Unworthy Mussulman, away, and seek

  Another master; go, and love Palmira;

  But thou despiset her, and bravest the wrath

  Of angry heaven; away, forsake thy lord,

  And serve his deadliest foes.

  SEID.

  It is the voice

  Of God that speaks in Mahomet-command,

  And I obey.

  MAHOMET.

  Strike, then, and by the blood

  Of Zopir merit life eternal.-Omar,

  Attend and watch him well.


  SCENE VII.

  Seid ( Alone)  SEID.

  To sacrifice

  A poor, defenseless, weak old man!- no matter:

  How many victims at the altar fall

  As helpless! Yet their blood in grateful streams

  Rises to heaven: God hath sworn, and Seid shall perform

  His sacred promise-O assist me now,

  Illustrious spirits, you who have destroyed

  The tyrants of the earth, O join your rage

  To mine, o guide this trembling hand, and thou

  Exterminating angel who defendest

  The cause of Mahomet, inspire this heart

  With all thy fierceness!-ha! What do I see?


  SCENE VIII.

  Zopir, Seid.


  ZOPIR.

  Seid, thou seemest disturbed; unhappy youth!

  Why art thou ranked amongst my foes? My heart

  Feels for thy woes, and trembles at thy danger;

  My house may be a shelter from the storm.

  Accept it, thou art welcome, for the life

  Is dear to Zopir.

  SEID.

  Gracious heaven! Wilt thou  Protect me thus? Will Zopir guard his foe?

  What do I hear! O duty, conscience, virtue!

  O Mahomet, this rives my heart.

  ZOPIR.

  Perhaps

  Thou art surprised to find that I can pity

  An enemy, and wish for Seid's welfare;

  I am a man like thee; that tie alone

  Demands at least a sympathetic tear

  For innocence afflicted: gracious gods,

  Drive from this earth those base and savage men,

  Who shed with joy their fellow-creatures' blood.

  SEID.

  O glorious sentiments! And can there be

  Such virtue in an infidel?

  ZOPIR.

  Thou knowest

  But little of that virtue, thus stand

  Astonished at it! O mistaken youth,

  In what a maze of errors art thou lost!\

  Bound by a tyrant's savage laws, thou thinkest

  Virtue resides in Mussulmans alone;

  Thy master rules thee with a rod of iron,

  And shackles thy free soul in shameful bonds;

  Zopir thou hatest, alas! Thou knowest him not:

  I pardon thee because thou are the slave

  Of Mahomet; but how cants thou believe  A God who teaches hatred, and delights

  In discord?

  SEID.

  O I never can obey him!

  I know, and feel I cannot hate thee, Zopir.

  ZOPIR.

  Alas! The more I talk to him, the more

  He gains upon me: his ingenuous look,

  His youth, his candor, all conspire to charm me;

  How could a follower of this vile impostor

  This win my heart! Who gave thee birth what art

  Thou?

  SEID.

  A wretched orphan; all I have on earth

  Is a kind master, whom I never met

  Have disobeyed; howe'er my love for thee

  May tempt me to betray him.

  ZOPIR.

  Knowest thou not

  Thy parents then?

  SEID.

  His camp was the first object

  My eyes beheld; his temple is my country;

  I know no other; and amidst the crowd

  Of yearly tributes to our holy prophet,

  None e'er was treated with more tenderness

  Than Seid was.  ZOPIR.

  I love his gratitude:

  Thy kind return for benefits received

  Merits my praise:O why did heaven employ

  The hand of Mahomet in such an office?

  He was thy father, and Palmira's too;

  Why dost thou sigh? Why dost thou tremble thus?

  Why turn thee from me? Sure some dreadful thought

  Hangs on the mind.

  SEID.

  It must be so: the times

  Are full of terror.

  ZOPIR.

  If thou feelest remorse

  Thy heart is guiltless; murder is abroad,

  Let me preserve thy life.

  SEID.

  O gracious heaven!

  And can I have a thought of taking thine?

  Palmira! O my oath! O God of vengeance!

  ZOPIR.

  For the last time remember I entreat thee

  To follow me; away thy fate depends

  Upon this moment.


  SCENE IX.

  Zopir, Seid. ,Omar  OMAR.

  Traitor, Mahomet

  Expects thee.

  SEID.

  O I know not where or what

  I am; destruction, ruin and despair

  On every side await me: wither now

  Shall wretched Seid fly?

  OMAR.

  To him whom God

  Hath chosen, thy injured king, and master.

  SEID.

  Yes:

  And there abjure the dreadful oath I made.


  SCENE X.

  Zopir (Alone)


  ZOPIR.

  The desperate youth is gone-I know not why,

  But my heart beats for his distress; his looks,

  His pity, his remorse, his every action

  Affect me deeply: I must follow him.


  SCENE XI.

  Zopir, Phanor  PHANOR.

  This letter, sir, was by an Arab given

  In secret to me.

  ZOPIR.

  From Hercides! Gods,

  What do I read? Will heaven in tenderest pity

  At length replay me for a life of sorrows?

  Hercides begs to see me-he who snatched

  From this fond bosom my two helpless children;

  They yet are living, so this paper tells me,

  Slaves to the tyrant-Seid and Palmira

  Are orphans both, and know not whence they sprang,

  Perhaps my children-O delusive hope,

  Why wilt thou flatter me? It cannot be;

  Fain would I credit thee, thou sweet deceiver:

  I fly to meet and to embrace my children;

  Yes, I will see Hercides: let him come

  At midnight to me, to this holy altar

  Where I so often have invoked the gods,

  At last, perhaps, propitious to my vows:

  O ye immortal powers, restore my children,

  Give back to virtue's paths two generous hearts

  Corrupted by an impious, vile usurper!

  If Seid and Palmira are not mine,

  If such is my heart fate, I will adopt

  The noble pair, and be their fathers still  End of the Third Act.


  ACT IV. 


  SCENE I

  Mahomet, Omar.


  OMAR.

  My lord, our secret is discovered; Seid

  Has told Hercides; we are on the verge

  Of ruin, yet I know he will obey.

  MAHOMET.

  Revealed it, sayest thou?

  OMAR.

  Yes: Hercides loves him

  With tenderness.

  MAHOMET.

  Indeed! What said he to it?

  OMAR.

  He stood aghast, and seemed to pity Zopir.

  MAHOMET.

  He's weak, and therefore not to be entrusted;

  Fools ever will be traitors; but no matter,

  Let him take heed; a method may be found

  To rid us of such dangerous witnesses:

  Say, Omar, have my orders been obeyed?

  OMAR.

  They have, my lord.  MAHOMET.

  'Tis well: remember, Omar,

  In one important hour or Mahomet

  Or Zopir is no more; if Zopir dies,

  The credulous people will adore that God

  Who thus declared for me, and saved his prophet:

  Be this our first great object; that once done,

  Take care of Seid; art thou sure the poison

  Will do its office?

  OMAR.

  Fear it not, my lord.

  MAHOMET,

  O we must work in secret, the dark shades

  Of death must hide our purpose-while we shed

  Old Zopir's blood, be sure you keep Palmira

  In deepest ignorance; she must not know

  The secret of her birth: her bliss and mine

  Depend upon it; well thou knowest, my triumphs

  From error's fruitful source incessant flow:

  The ties of blood, and all their boasted power

  Are mere delusions: what are nature's bonds?

  Nothing but habit, the mere force of custom:

  Palmira knows no duty but obedience

  To me; I am her lord, her king, her father,

  Perhaps may add the name of husband to them:

  Her little heart will beat with proud ambition

  To captivate her master-but the hour  Approaches that must rid me of my foe,

  The hated Zopir: Seid is prepared-

  And see, he comes: let us retire.

  OMAR.

  Observe

  His wild demeanor; rage and fierce resentment

  Possess his soul.


  SCENE II

  Mahomet, Omar. retired to one side of the stage; Seid at the farther end.


  SEID.

  This dreadful duty then

  Must be fulfilled.

  MAHOMET. To Omar.

  Let us begone, in search

  Of other means to make our power secure.

  Exit with Omar.

  SEID. Alone.

  I could not answer: one reproachful word

  From Mahomet sufficed: I stood abashed,

  But not convinced: if heaven requires it of me,

  I must obey; but it will cost me dear.


  SCENE III

  Seid, Palmira.


  SEID.  Palmira, art thou here? What fatal cause

  Hath led thee to this seat of horror?

  PALMIRA.

  Fear,

  And love directed me to find thee, Seid,

  To ask thee what dread sacrifice thou meanest

  To offer here; do heaven and Mahomet

  Demand it from thee, must it be? O speak.

  SEID.

  Palmira, thou commandest my every thought

  And every action; all depend on thee:

  Direct them as thou wilt, inform my soul,

  And guide my hand: be thou my guardian god,

  Explain the will of heaven which yet I know not;

  Why am I chosen to be its instrument

  Of vengeance? are the prophet's dread commands

  Irrevocable?

  PALMIRA.

  Seid, we must yield in silence,

  Nor dare to question his decrees; he hears

  Our secret sighs, nor are our sorrows hid

  From Mahomet's all seeing eye: to doubt

  Is profanation of the deity.

  His God is God alone; he could not else

  Be thus victorious, thus invincible.

  SEID.

  He must be Seid's God who is Palmira's:  Yet cannot my astonished could conceive

  A being, tender, merciful, and kind,

  Commanding murder; then again I think

  To doubt is guilt: the priest without remorse

  Destroys the victim: by the voice of heaven

  I know that Zopir was condemned, I know

  That Seid was predestined to support

  The law divine: so Mahomet ordained,

  And I obey him: fired with holy zeal

  I go to slay the enemy of God;

  And yet methinks another deity

  Draws back my arm, bids me spare the victim.

  Religion lost her power when I beheld

  The wretched Zopir; duty urged in vain

  Her cruel plea, exhorting me to murder;

  With joy I listened to the plaintive voice

  Of soft humanity: but Mahomet-

  How awful! How majestic! Who can bear

  His wrath? His frowns reproached my shameful weakness;

  Religion is a dreadful power: alas!

  Palmira, I am lost in doubts and fears,

  Discordant passions tear this feeble heart:

  I must be impious, must desert my faith,

  Or be a murderer: Seid was not formed

  For an assassin; but 'tis heaven's command,

  And I have promised to avenge its cause:

  The tears of grief and rage united flow,  Contending duties raise a storm within,

  And thou alone, Palmira, must appease it;

  Fix my uncertain heart, and give it peace:

  Alas! Without dreadful sacrifice,

  The tie that binds us is forever broke;

  This only can secure thee.

  PALMIRA.

  Am I then

  The price of blood, of Zopir's blood?

  SEID.

  So heaven

  And Mahomet decree.

  PALMIRA.

  Love ne'er was meant

  To make us cruel, barbarous, and inhuman.

  SEID.

  To Zopir's murderer, and to him alone,

  Palmira must be given.

  PALMIRA.

  O hard condition!

  SEID.

  But 'tis the will of Mahomet and heaven.

  PALMIRA.

  Alas!

  SEID.

  Thou knowest the dreadful curse that waits

  On disobedience-everlasting pain.  PALMIRA.

  If thou must be the instrument of vengeance,

  If at thy hands the blood which thou hast promised

  Shall be required-

  SEID.

  What's to be done?

  PALMIRA.

  I tremble

  To think of it-yet-

  SEID.

  It must be so then: thou

  Hast fixed his doom; Palmira has consented.

  PALMIRA.

  Did I consent?

  SEID.

  Thou didst.

  PALMIRA.

  Detested thought!

  What have I said?

  SEID.

  By thee the voice of heaven

  Speaks its last dread command, and I obey:

  Yon fatal altar is the chosen seat

  Of Zopir's worship, there he bends the knee

  To his false gods; retire, my sweet Palmira.

  PALMIRA.

  I cannot leave thee.  SEID.

  Thou must not be witness

  To such as a deed of horror: these, Palmira

  Are dreadful moments: fly to yonder grove,

  Thou wilt be near the prophet there: away.

  PALMIRA.

  Zopir must die then?

  SEID.

  Yes: this fatal hand

  Must drag him to the earth, there murder him,

  And bathe yon ruined altar in his blood.

  PALMIRA.

  Die by thy hand! I shudder at the thought:

  But see! He comes; just heaven!

  (the farther part of the stage opens, and discovers an altar.)


  SCENE IV

  Seid, Palmira, on the side; Zopir, standing near the altar.


  ZOPIR.

  Ye guardian god's

  Of Mecca, threatened by an impious sect

  Of vile imposters, now assert your power,

  And let your Zopir's prayers, perhaps the last

  He e'er shall make, be heard! The feeble bonds

  Of our short peace are broken, and fierce war

  Vindictive rages; O if ye support  The cause of this usurper-

  SEID.

  Aside to Palmira.

  Hear, Palmira,

  How he blasphemes!

  ZOPIR.

  May death be Zopir's lot!

  I wish for naught on earth but to behold,

  In my last hour, and to embrace my children,

  To die in their loved arms, if yet they live,

  If they are here, for something whispers me

  That I shall see them still.

  PALMIRA.

  Aside to Seid.

  His children, said he?

  ZOPIR.

  Or I should die with pleasure at the sight:

  Watch over and protect them, ye kind gods,

  O let them think like me, but not like me

  Be wretched!

  SEID.

  See! He prays to his false gods:

  This is the time to end him.

  (draws his sword.

  PALMIRA.

  Do not, Seid.

  SEID.  To serve my God, to please and merit thee,

  This sword, devoted to the cause of heaven,

  Is drawn, and shall destroy its deadliest foe;

  Yon dreary walk invites me to the deed,

  Methinks the path is bloody, wandering ghosts

  Glide through the shade, and beckon me away.

  PALMIRA.

  What sayest thou, Seid?

  SEID.

  Ministers of death,

  I follow you; conduct me to the altar,

  And guide my trembling hand!

  PALMIRA.

  It must not be;

  'tis horrible: O stop, my Seid.

  SEID.

  No:

  The hour is come, and see! The altar shakes.

  PALMIRA.

  'Tis heaven's assent, and we must doubt no more.

  SEID.

  Means it to urge no me on, or to restrain?

  Our prophet will reproach me for this weakness:

  Palmira!

  PALMIRA.

  Well!

  SEID.  Address thyself to heaven;

  I go to do the deed.

  (he goes behind the altar where Zopir is retired.

  PALMIRA. (alone.

  O dreadful moment!

  What do I feel within! My blood runs cold:

  And yet if heaven demands the sacrifice,

  Am I to judge, to ask, or to complain?

  Where is the heart that knows itself, that knows

  Its innocence or guilt? We must obey:

  But hark! Methought I heard the plaintive voice

  Of death; the deed is done-alas! My Seid.

  SEID.

  (returns looking wildly around.

  What voice was that? Where am I? Where is Palmira?

  I cannot see Palmira; O she's gone,

  She's lost forever.

  PALMIRA.

  Art thou blind to her

  Who only lives for thee?

  SEID.

  Where are we?

  PALMIRA.

  Speak,

  My Seid, is the dreadful sacrifice

  Performed, and thy sad promise fulfilled?

  SEID.  What sayest thou?

  PALMIRA.

  Zopir? Is he dead?

  SEID.

  Who? Zopir?

  PALMIRA.

  Good heaven, preserve his sense!-Come, my Seid,

  Let us be gone.

  SEID.

  How will these tottering limbs

  Support me!-I recover-it is you,

  Palmira?

  PALMIRA.

  Yes: what has thou done?

  SEID.

  Obeyed

  The voice of heaven, seized with this desperate hand

  His silver hairs, and dragged him to the earth:

  'twas thy command: O God! Thou couldst not bid me

  Commit a crime! Trembling and pale a while

  I stood aghast, then drew this sacred sword,

  And plunged it in his bosom: what a look

  Of tenderness and love the poor old man

  Cast on his murderer! A scene so mournful

  Ne'er did these eyes behold: my heart retains

  And will forever keep the sad idea:

  Would I were dead like him!  PALMIRA.

  Let us repair

  To Mahomet, the prophet will protect us;

  Here you're in danger; follow me.

  SEID.

  I cannot:

  Palmira, pity me.

  PALMIRA.

  What mournful thought

  Can thus depress thee?

  SEID.

  O if thou hadst seen

  His tender looks, when from his bleeding side

  He drew the fatal weapon forth, and cried:

  “Dear Seid, poor unhappy Seid!” Oh,

  That voice, those looks, and Zopir at my feet

  Weltering in blood, are still before my eyes:

  What have we done?

  PALMIRA.

  I tremble for thy life:

  O in the name of all the sacred ties

  That bind us, fly, and save thyself.

  SEID.

  Away,

  And leave me: why did thy ill-fated love

  Command thy cruel order heaven itself

  Had never been obeyed  PALMIRA.

  Unkind reproach!

  Couldst thou but know what thy Palmira suffers

  How wouldst thou pity her!

  SEID.

  What dreadful object

  Is that before us?

  (Zopir rises up slowly from behind the altar, and leans upon it.

  PALMIRA.

  'Tis the murdered Zopir;

  Bloody and pale he drags his mangled limbs

  Towards us.

  SEID.

  Wilt thou go to him?

  PALMIRA.

  I must;

  For pity and remorse distract my soul,

  And draw me to him.

  ZOPIR.

  (comes forward leaning on Palmira.)

  Gentle maid, support me!

  (he sits down).

  Ungrateful Seid, thou has slain me; now

  Thou weepest; alas! Too late.


  SCENE V

  Zopir, Seid, Palmira, Phanor.  PHANOR.

  O dreadful sight!

  What's here?

  ZOPIR.

  I wish I could have seen my friend

  Hercides-Phanor, art thou there?-behold

  My murderer.

  (points to Seid.)

  PHANOR.

  O guilt! Accursed deed!

  Unhappy Seid, look upon-thy father.

  SEID.

  Who?

  PALMIRA.

  He?

  SEID.

  My father?

  ZOPIR.

  Gracious heaven!

  PHANOR.

  Hercides

  In his last moments took me to his arms,

  And weeping cried: “It there be time, O haste

  Prevent a parricide and stop the arm

  Of Seid;” in my breast the tyrant lodged

  The dreadful secret; now I suffer for it,  And die by Mahomet's detested hand:

  Haste, Phanor, fly, inform the hapless Zopir,

  That Seid and Palmira are-his children.

  SEID.

  Palmira!

  PALMIRA.

  Thou my brother?

  ZOPIR.

  O ye gods!

  O nature, thou hast not deceived me then,

  When thou didst please for them! Unhappy Seid,

  What could have urged thee to so foul a deed?

  SEID.

  (kneeling.

  My gratitude, my duty, my religion,

  All that mankind hold sacred, urged me on

  To do the worst of actions:give me back

  That fatal weapon.

  PALMIRA.

  (laying hold of Seid's arm).

  Plunge it in my breast;

  I was the cause of my dear father's murder;

  And incest is the price of parricide:

  SEID.

  Strike both: heaven hath not punishment enough

  For crimes like ours.

  ZOPIR.  (embracing them).

  Let me embrace my children:

  The gods have poured into my cup of sorrow

  A draught of sweetest happiness: I die,

  Contented, and resign me to my fate:

  But you must live, my children; you, my Seid,

  And you, Palmira, by the sacred name

  Of nature, by the dying father's blood,

  Fast flowing from the wound which thou hast made,

  Let me entreat you, live; revenge yourselves

  Avenge the injured Zopir; but preserve

  Your gracious lives; the great, the important hour

  Approaches , that must change the mournful scene:

  The offended people ere tomorrow's dawn,

  Will rise in arms and punish the usurper;

  My blood will add fresh fuel to their rage;

  Let us await the issue.

  SEID.

  O I fly

  To sacrifice the monster, to take vengeance

  For a dear father's life, or lose my own.


  SCENE VI

  Zopir, Seid, Palmira, Omar, Attendants.


  OMAR.

  Guards, seize the murderer; Mahomet is come  To punish guilt, and execute the laws.

  ZOPIR.

  What do I hear?

  SEID.

  Did Mahomet command thee

  To punish Seid?

  PALMIRA.

  Execrable tyrant!

  Was not the murder done by thy command?

  OMAR.

  'Twas not commanded.

  SEID.

  Well have I deserved

  This just reward of my credulity.

  OMAR.

  Soldiers, obey.

  PALMIRA.

  O stop, ye shall not-

  OMAR.

  Madam,

  If Seid's life is dear to you, submit

  With patience, lest the prophet's anger fall

  Like thunder on your head; if you obey,

  Great Mahomet is able to protect you:

  Guards, lead her to the king.

  PALMIRA.

  O take me death,  From this sad scene of never ending woe!

  (Seid and Palmira are carried off.)

  ZOPIR.

  (To Phanor).

  They're gone, they're lost: O most unhappy father,

  The wound which Seid gave is not so deep,

  So painful as this parting.

  PHANOR.

  See, my lord,

  The day appears, and the armed multitudes

  Press onward to defend the cause of Zopir.

  ZOPIR.

  Support me, Phanor: yet thy friend may live

  To punish this vile hypocrite; at least

  In death may serve my dear-my cruel-children.


  End of the Fourth Act.


  ACT V. 


  SCENE I

  Mahomet, Omar, Guards at a distance.


  OMAR.

  Zopir's approaching death alarms the people,

  We have endeavored to appease their clamors,

  And disavowed all knowledge of the deed;

  To some, we called it the avenging hand  Of heaven that favors thus its prophet's cause:

  With others, we lament his fall, and boast

  Thy awful justice that will soon avenge it.

  The crowd attentive listen to thy praise,

  And all the danger of the storm is o'er;

  If aught remains of busy faction's rage

  It is but as the tossing of the waves

  After the tempest, when the vault of heaven

  Is placid and serene.

  MAHOMET.

  Be it our care

  To keep it so: where are my valiant bands?

  OMAR/

  All ready; Osman in the dead of night

  By secret paths conducted them to Mecca.

  MAHOMET.

  'Tis strange that men either deceived

  or forced into obedience: Seid knows not

  it is a father's blood that he has shed?

  OMAR.

  Who could inform him of it? He alone

  Who knew the secret is no more; Hercides

  Is gone, and Seid soon shall follow him;

  For know, he has already drunk the poison;

  His crime was punished ere it was committed:

  Even whilst he dragged his father to the altar

  Death lurked within his veins; he cannot live:  Palmira too, is safe, she may be useful:

  I've given her hopes of Seid's pardon: that

  May win her to our cause; she dare not murmur,

  Besides, her heart is flexible and soft,

  Formed to obey, to worship Mahomet,

  And make him soon the happiest of mankind:

  Trembling and pale, behold! They bring her to thee.

  MAHOMET.

  Collect my forced, Omar and return.


  SCENE II

  Mahomet, Palmira, Guards.


  PALMIRA.

  O heaven! Where am I? Gracious God?

  MAHOMET.

  Palmira,

  Be not alarmed; already I have fixed

  Thy fate and Mecca's: know, the great event

  That fills thy soul with horror is a mystery

  'twixt heaven and me that's not to be revealed:

  But thou art free, and happy: think no more

  Of Seid, nor lament him; leave to me

  The fate of men; be thankful for thy own:

  Thou knowest that Mahomet hath loved thee long,

  That I have ever been a father to thee;

  Perhaps a nobler fate and fairer title  May grace thee still, if thou deserve it; therefore

  Blot from thy memory the name of Seid,

  And let thy soul aspire to greater blessings

  That it could dare to hope for; let thy heart

  Be my last noblest victory, and join

  The conquered world to own me for its master.

  PALMIRA.

  What joys, what blessings, or what happiness

  Can I expect from thee, thou vile impostor?

  Thou bloody savage! This alone was wanting

  This cruel insult to complete my woes:

  Eternal father, look upon this king,

  This holy prophet, this all-powerful god

  Whom I adored: thou monster, to betray

  Two guiltless hearts into the crying sin

  Of parricide; thou infamous seducer

  Of my unguarded youth, how darest thou think,

  Stained as thou art with my dear father's blood,

  To gain Palmira's heart? But know, proud tyrant,

  Thou are not yet invincible: the veil

  Is off that hid thee, and the hand of vengeance

  Upraised to scourge thy guilt: dost thou not hear

  The maddening multitude already armed

  In the defense of injured innocence?

  From the death's dark shades my murdered father comes

  To lead them on: O that these feeble hands

  Could tear thee piece-meal, thee and all thy train!  Would I cold see them weltering in their blood;

  See Mecca, and Medina, Asia, all

  Combined against thee! That the credulous world

  Would shake off thy vile chains and thy religion

  Become the jest and scorn of all mankind

  To after ages! May that hell, whose threats

  Thou hast so often denounced 'gainst all who dared

  To doubt thy false divinity, now open

  Her fiery gates, and be thy just reward!

  These are the thanks I owe thee for thy bounties,

  And these the prayers I made for Mahomet.

  MAHOMET.

  I see I am betrayed; but be it so:

  Whe'er thou art, learn henceforth to obey you;

  For know, my heart-


  SCENE III

  Mahomet, Palmira, Omar, Ali, Attendants.


  OMAR.

  The secret is revealed;

  Hercides told it in his dying moments:

  The people all enraged have forced the prison:

  They're up in arms, and bearing on their shoulders

  The bloody corpse of their unhappy chief,

  Lament his fate, and cry aloud for vengeance:

  All is confusion: Seid at their head  Excited them to rebellion, and cries out,

  “I am a parricide;” with rage and grief

  He seems distracted; with one voice the crowd

  United to curse the prophet and his God:

  Even those who promised to admit our forces

  Within the walls of Mecca, have conspired

  With them to raise their desperate arms against thee;

  And naught is heard but cries of death and vengeance.

  PALMIRA.

  Just heaven pursue him, and defend the cause

  Of innocence!

  MAHOMET. (to Omar.)

  Well, what have we to fear?

  OMAR.

  Omar, my lord, with your few faithful friends,

  Despising danger, are prepared to brave

  The furious storm, and perish at your feet.

  MAHOMET.

  Alone I will defend you all; come near:

  Behold and say I act like Mahomet.


  SCENE IV

  Mahomet, Omar, Ali, and his party one side, Seid and the People on the

other. Palmira in the middle.


  SEID.

  Avenge my father, seize the traitor.

  MAHOMET.  People,

  Born to obey me, listen to your master.

  SEID.

  Hear not the monster; follow me:

  (he comes forward a little, and then staggers.)

  O heaven!

  What sudden darkness spread o'er my dim eyes?

  Now strike, my friends-O I am dying.

  MAHOMET.

  Ha!

  Then all is well.

  PALMIRA.

  My brother, canst thou shed

  No blood but Zopir's?

  SEID.

  Yes: come on-I cannot;

  Some god unnerves me.

  (he faints).

  MAHOMET.

  Hence let every foe

  Of Mahomet be taught to fear and tremble:

  Know, ye proud infidels, this hand alone

  Hath power to crush you all, to me the God

  Of nature delegates his sovereign power:

  Acknowledge then his prophet, and his laws,

  'Twixt Mahomet and Seid let that God

  decide the contest, which of us forever  is guilty, now, this moment let him perish!

  PALMIRA.

  My brother-Seid-can this monster boast

  Such power? The people stand astonished at him,

  And tremble at his voice; and wilt thou yield

  To Mahomet?

  SEID.

  (supported by his attendant.).

  Alas! The hand of heaven

  Is on me, and the involuntary crime

  Is too severely punished: O Palmira,

  In vain was Seid virtuous: O if heaven

  Chastises this our errors, what must crimes

  Like think expect, detested Mahomet?

  What cause hast thou to tremble-O I die;

  Receive me, gracious heaven, and spare Palmira.

  (dies).

  PALMIRA.

  'Tis not, ye people, 'tis not angry heaven

  Pursues my Seid. No: he's poisoned-

  MAHOMET.

  (interrupting her, and addressing himself to the people.)

  Learn

  From Seid's fate, ye unbelievers, how

  To reverence Mahomet whom heaven defends;

  And this pale corpse hath witnessed their obedience;

  The sword of fate hangs o'er your heads, beware  It fall not on you: thus will I reward

  All impious rebels, all vile infidels,

  And punish every word and thought against me.

  If I withhold my rage, and let you live,

  Remember, traitors, that you owe your beings

  To my indulgence; hasten to the temple,

  Prostrate yourselves before the throne of grace,

  And deprecate the wrath of Mahomet.

  (the people retire.)

  PALMIRA.

  O stay, and hear me, people-the barbarian

  Poisoned my brother-monster, raised by crimes

  To empire thus, and deified by guilt,

  Thou murderer of Palmira's hapless race,

  Complete thy work, and take my wretched life:

  O my dear brother, let me follow thee!

  (she seizes her brother's sword and stabs herself.)

  MAHOMET.

  Seize, and prevent her-

  PALMIRA.

  'Tis too late; I die:

  and dying hope a God more just than thine

  has yet in store a state of happiness

  for injured innocence: let Mahomet

  reign here in peace: this world was made for tyrants.

  (dies).

  MAHOMET.  She's gone; she's lost; the only dear reward

  I wished to keep of all my crimes: in vain

  I fought and conquered; Mahomet is wretched

  Without Palmira: Conscience, now I feel thee,

  And feel that thou canst rive the guilty heart.

  O thou eternal God, whom I have wronged

  Braved and blasphemed; O thou whom yet I fear,

  Behold me self-condemned, behold me wretched,

  Even whilst the world adores me: vain was all

  My boasted power: I have deceived mankind;

  But how shall I impose on my own heart?

  A murdered father, and two guiltless children

  Must be avenged: come, ye unhappy victims,

  And end me quickly!-Omar, we must strive

  To hide this shameful weakness, save my glory,

  And let me reign o'er a deluded world:

  For Mahomet depends on fraud alone,

  And to be worshipped never must be know.


  End of the Fifth and Last Act.Micromegas

 

  Voltaire

  Micromegas

  Published in 1829


  IN PARIS,LEFÈVRE, BOOKSELLER,

  RUE DE L'ÉPERON, Ko 6. WERDET

  ET LEQUIEN FILS, RUE DU BATTOIR, No 20.

    MDCCCXXIX.


  TABLE

  PUBLISHER'S PREFACE.

  CHAPTER I.

  Voyage of an inhabitant of the Sirius star to the planet Saturn.

  CHAPTER II.

  Conversation between the inhabitant of Sirius and that of Saturn.

  CHAPTER III.

  Voyage of the two inhabitants of Sirius and Saturn.

  CHAPTER IV.

  What happened on planet Earth.

  CHAPTER V.

  Experiments and reasonings of the two voyagers.

  CHAPTER VI.

  What happened to them among men.

  CHAPTER VII.

  Conversation with the men.   PUBLISHER'S PREFACE. 


  Voltaire's  lengthy  correspondences  do  not  contain  anything  that  might

indicate the period in which Micromegas was published. The engraved title

of the edition that I believe to be the original displays no date. Abbot Trublet,

in his Biography of Fontenelle, does not hesitate to say that Micromegas is

directed against Fontenelle; but does not speak of the date of publication. I

have therefore retained that given by the Kehl editions: 1752. However there

is an edition carrying the date of 1700. Is this date authentic? I would not

make this claim; far from it. I have therefore followed the Kehl editions, in

which Micromegas is preceded by this warning:

  This novel can be seen as an imitation of Gulliver's Travels. It contains

many  allusions.  The  dwarf  of  Saturn  is  Mr.  Fontenelle.  Despite  his

gentleness, his carefulness, his philosophy, all of which should endear him to

Mr. Voltaire, he is linked with the enemies of this great man, and appears to

share, if not in their hate, at least in their preemptive censures. He was deeply

hurt by the role he played in this novel, and perhaps even more so due to the

justness, though severe, of the critique; the strong praise given elsewhere in

the novel only lends more weight to the rebukes. The words that end this

work do not soften the wounds, and the good that is said of the secretary of

the academy of Paris does not console Mr. Fontenelle for the ridicule that is

permitted to befall the one at the academy of Saturn.

  The notes without signature, and those indicated by letters, are written by

Voltaire.

  The notes signed with a K have been written by the Kehl publishers, Mr.

Condorcet  and  Mr.  Decroix.  It  is  impossible  to  rigorously  distinguish

between the additions made by these two.

  The additions that I have given to the notes of Voltaire or to the notes of

the Kehl publishers, are separated from the others by a -, and are, as they are

mine, signed by the initial of my name.

  BEUCHOT

  October 4, 1829.   CHAPTER I.

  Voyage of an inhabitant of the Sirius star to the planet Saturn. 


  On one of the planets that orbits the star named Sirius there lived a spirited

young man, who I had the honor of meeting on the last voyage he made to

our little ant hill. He was called Micromegas[1], a fitting name for anyone so

great. He was eight leagues tall, or 24,000 geometric paces of five feet each. 


    FOOTNOTE


  [1] From micros, small, and from megas, large. B.

  Certain geometers[2], always of use to the public, will immediately take

up their pens, and will find that since Mr. Micromegas, inhabitant of the

country of Sirius, is 24,000 paces tall, which is equivalent to 20,000 feet, and

since we citizens of the earth are hardly five feet tall, and our sphere 9,000

leagues around; they will find, I say, that it is absolutely necessary that the

sphere that produced him was 21,600,000 times greater in circumference than

our little Earth. Nothing in nature is simpler or more orderly. The sovereign

states of Germany or Italy, which one can traverse in a half hour, compared

to the empires of Turkey, Moscow, or China, are only feeble reflections of

the prodigious differences that nature has placed in all beings. 


    FOOTNOTE


  [2] This is how the text reads in the first editions. Others, in place of

"geometers," put "algebraists." B.

  His excellency's size being as great as I have said, all our sculptors and all

our painters will agree without protest that his belt would have been 50,000

feet around, which gives him very good proportions.[3] His nose taking up

one third of his attractive face, and his attractive face taking up one seventh

of his attractive body, it must be admitted that the nose of the Sirian is 6,333

feet plus a fraction; which is manifest.     FOOTNOTE


  [3] I restore this sentence in accordance with the first editions. B.

  As for his mind, it is one of the most cultivated that we have. He knows

many things. He invented some of them. He was not even 250 years old when

he studied, as is customary, at the most celebrated[4] colleges of his planet,

where he managed to figure out by pure willpower more than 50 of Euclid's

propositions.  That  makes  18  more  than  Blaise  Pascal,  who,  after  having

figured out 32 while screwing around, according to his sister's reports, later

became  a  fairly  mediocre  geometer[5]  and  a  very  bad  metaphysician.

Towards his 450th year, near the end of his infancy, he dissected many small

insects  no  more  than  100  feet  in  diameter,  which  would  evade  ordinary

microscopes. He wrote a very curious book about this, and it gave him some

income. The mufti of his country, an extremely ignorant worrywart, found

some suspicious, rash[6], disagreeable, and heretical propositions in the book,

smelled heresy, and  pursued it vigorously; it was a matter of finding out

whether the substantial form of the fleas of Sirius were of the same nature as

those of the snails. Micromegas gave a spirited defense; he brought in some

women to testify in his favor; the trial lasted 220 years. Finally the mufti had

the book condemned by jurisconsults who had not read it, and the author was

ordered not to appear in court for 800 years[7]. 


    FOOTNOTE


  [4] In place of "the most celebrated" that one finds in the first edition,

subsequent editions read "some jesuit." B.

  [5] Pascal became a very great geometer, not in the same class as those

that  contributed  to  the  progress  of  science  with  great  discoveries,  like

Descartes, Newton, but certainly ranked among the geometers, whose works

display a genius of the first order. K.

  [6] The edition that I believe to be original reads: "rash, smelling heresy."

The present text is dated 1756. B.

  [7]  Mr.  Voltaire  had  been  persecuted  by  the  theatin  Boyer  for  havingstated in his Letters on the English that our souls develop at the same time as

our organs, just like the souls of animals. K.

  He was thereby dealt the minor affliction of being banished from a court

that consisted of nothing but harassment and pettiness. He wrote an amusing

song at the expense of the mufti, which the latter hardly noticed; and he took

to voyaging from planet to planet in order to develop his heart and mind[8],

as  the  saying  goes.  Those  that  travel  only  by  stage  coach  or  sedan  will

probably be surprised learn of the carriage of this vessel; for we, on our little

pile of mud, can only conceive of that to which we are accustomed. Our

voyager was very familiar with the laws of gravity and with all the other

attractive and repulsive forces. He utilized them so well that, whether with

the help of a ray of sunlight or some comet, he jumped from globe to globe

like a bird vaulting itself from branch to branch. He quickly spanned the

Milky Way, and I am obliged to report that he never saw, throughout the stars

it is made up of, the beautiful empyrean sky that the vicar Derham[9] boasts

of having seen at the other end of his telescope. I do not claim that Mr.

Derham has poor eyesight, God forbid! But Micromegas was on site, which

makes  him  a  reliable  witness,  and  I  do  not  want  to  contradict  anyone.

Micromegas,  after  having  toured  around,  arrived  at  the  planet  Saturn.  As

accustomed as he was to seeing new things, he could not, upon seeing the

smallness of the planet and its inhabitants, stop himself from smiling with the

superiority that occasionally escapes the wisest of us. For in the end Saturn is

hardly  nine  times  bigger  than  Earth,  and  the  citizens  of  this  country  are

dwarfs, no more than a thousand fathoms tall, or somewhere around there. He

and his men poked fun at them at first, like Italian musicians laughing at the

music of Lully when he comes to France. But, as the Sirian had a good heart,

he understood very quickly that a thinking being is not necessarily ridiculous

just because he is only 6,000 feet tall. He got to know the Saturnians after

their shock wore off. He built a strong friendship with the secretary of the

academy of Saturn, a spirited man who had not invented anything, to tell the

truth, but who understood the inventions of others very well, and who wrote

some passable verses and carried out some complicated calculations. I will

report  here,  for  the  reader's  satisfaction,  a  singular  conversation  that

Micromegas had with the secretary one day.

  [8] See my note, page 110. B. [this note, in Zadig, says: "This line ismostly written at the expense of Rollin, who often employs these expressions

in his Treatise on Studies. Voltaire returns to it often: see, in the present

volume, chapter I of Micromegas, and in volume XXXIV, chapter XI of The

Man of Forty Crowns, chapter IX of The White Bull and volume XI, the

second verse of song VIII of The Young Virgin. B."]

  [9] English savant, author of Astro-Theology, and several other works that

seek to prove the existence of God through detailing the wonders of nature:

unfortunately he and his imitators are often mistaken in their explanation of

these wonders; they rave about the wisdom that is revealed in a phenomenon,

but one soon discovers that the phenomenon is completely different than they

supposed; so it is only their own fabrications that give them this impression

of wisdom. This fault, common to all works of its type, discredited them. One

knows too far in advance that the author will end up admiring whatever he

has chosen to discuss. 


  CHAPTER II.

  Conversation between the inhabitant of Sirius and that of Saturn. 


  After his excellency laid himself down to rest the secretary approached

him.

  "You have to admit," said Micromegas, "that nature is extremely varied."

  "Yes," said the Saturnian, "nature is like a flower bed wherein the flowers-

"

  "Ugh!" said the other, "leave off with flower beds."

  The  secretary  began  again.  "Nature  is  like  an  assembly  of  blonde  and

brown-haired girls whose jewels-"

  "What am I supposed to do with your brown-haired girls?" said the other.

  "Then she is like a gallery of paintings whose features-"

  "Certainly not!" said the voyager. "I say again that nature is like nature.

Why bother looking for comparisons?"

  "To please you," replied the Secretary.  "I do not want to be pleased," answered the voyager. "I want to be taught.

Tell me how many senses the men of your planet have."

  "We only have 72," said the academic, "and we always complain about it.

Our imagination surpasses our needs. We find that with our 72 senses, our

ring, our five moons, we are too restricted; and in spite of all our curiosity

and the fairly large number of passions that result from our 72 senses, we

have plenty of time to get bored."

  "I believe it," said Micromegas, "for on our planet we have almost 1,000

senses; and yet we still have a kind of vague feeling, a sort of worry, that

warns us that there are even more perfect beings. I have traveled a bit; and I

have seen mortals that surpass us, some far superior. But I have not seen any

that desire only what they truly need, and who need only what they indulge

in. Maybe someday I will happen upon a country that lacks nothing; but so

far no one has given me any word of a place like that."

  The  Saturnian  and  the  Sirian  proceeded  to  wear  themselves  out  in

speculating; but after a lot of very ingenious and very dubious reasoning, it

was necessary to return to the facts.

  "How long do you live?" said the Sirian.

  "Oh! For a very short time," replied the small man from Saturn.

  "Same with us," said the Sirian. "we always complain about it. It must be a

universal law of nature."

  "Alas! We only live through 500 revolutions around the sun," said the

Saturnian. (This translates to about 15,000 years, by our standards.) "You can

see yourself that this is to die almost at the moment one is born; our existence

is a point, our lifespan an instant, our planet an atom. Hardly do we begin to

learn a little when death arrives, before we get any experience. As for me, I

do not dare make any plans. I see myself as a drop of water in an immense

ocean. I am ashamed, most of all before you, of how ridiculously I figure in

this world."

  Micromegas  replied,  "If  you  were  not  a  philosopher,  I  would  fear

burdening you by telling you that our lifespan is 700 times longer than yours;

but  you  know  very  well  when  it  is  necessary  to  return  your  body  to  the

elements, and reanimate nature in another form, which we call death. Whenthis moment of metamorphosis comes, to have lived an eternity or to have

lived a day amounts to precisely the same thing. I have been to countries

where they live a thousand times longer than we do, and they also die. But

people everywhere have the good sense to know their role and to thank the

Author  of  nature.  He  has  scattered  across  this  universe  a  profusion  of

varieties with a kind of admirable uniformity. For example, all the thinking

beings are different, and all resemble one another in the gift of thought and

desire. Matter is extended everywhere, but has different properties on each

planet. How many diverse properties do you count in yours?"

  "If you mean those properties," said the Saturnian, "without which we

believe that the planet could not subsist as it is, we count 300 of them, like

extension, impenetrability, mobility, gravity, divisibility, and the rest."

    "Apparently," replied the voyager, "this small number suffices for what

the Creator had in store for your dwelling. I admire his wisdom in everything;

I see differences everywhere, but also proportion. Your planet is small, your

inhabitants  are  as  well.  You  have  few  sensations;  your  matter  has  few

properties; all this is the work of Providence. What color is your sun upon

examination?"

  "A very yellowish white," said the Saturnian. "And when we divide one of

its rays, we find that it contains seven colors."

  "Our sun strains at red," said the Sirian, "and we have 39 primary colors.

There is no one sun, among those that I have gotten close to that resembles it,

just as there is no one face among you that is identical to the others."

  After numerous questions of this nature, he learned how many essentially

different substances are found on Saturn. He learned that there were only

about thirty, like God, space, matter, the beings with extension that sense, the

beings with extension that sense and think, the thinking beings that have no

extension;  those  that  are  penetrable,  those  that  are  not,  and  the  rest.  The

Sirian, whose home contained 300 and who had discovered 3,000 of them in

his voyages, prodigiously surprised the philosopher of Saturn. Finally, after

having told each other a little of what they knew and a lot of what they did

not know, after having reasoned over the course of a revolution around the

sun, they resolved to go on a small philosophical voyage together.   CHAPTER III.

  Voyage of the two inhabitants of Sirius and Saturn. 


  Our two philosophers were just ready to take off into Saturn's atmosphere

with  a  very  nice  provision  of  mathematical  instrument  when  the  ruler  of

Saturn, who had heard news of the departure, came in tears to remonstrate.

She was a pretty, petite brunette who was only 660 fathoms tall, but who

compensated for this small size with many other charms.

  "Cruelty!" she cried, "after resisting you for 1,500 years, just when I was

beginning to come around, when I'd spent hardly a hundred[1] years in your

arms, you leave me to go on a voyage with a giant from another world; go,

you're only curious, you've never been in love: if you were a true Saturnian,

you would be faithful. Where are you running off to? What do you want? Our

five moons are less errant than you, our ring less inconsistent. It's over, I will

never love anyone ever again."

  The philosopher embraced her, cried with her, philosopher that he was;

and the woman, after swooning, went off to console herself with the help of

one of the dandies of the country. 


    FOOTNOTE


  [1] The 1773 edition is the first that reads "a hundred"; all the earlier

editions read: "two hundred." B.

  Our two explorers left all the same; they alighted first on the ring, which

they found to be fairly flat, as conjectured by an illustrious inhabitant of our

little sphere[2]; from there they went easily from moon to moon. A comet

passed by the last; they flew onto it with their servants and their instruments.

When they had traveled about one hundred fifty million leagues, they met

with the satellites of Jupiter. They stopped at Jupiter and stayed for a week,

during which time they learned some very wonderful secrets that would have

been forthcoming in print if not for the inquisition, which found some of the

propositions to be a little harsh. But I have read the manuscript in the library

of the illustrious archbishop of...., who with a generosity and goodness that isimpossible to praise allowed me to see his books. I promised him a long

article in the first edition of Moréri, and I will not forget his children, who

give such a great hope of perpetuating the race of their illustrious father.

  [2] Huygens. See volume XXVI, page 398. B.

  But let us now return to our travelers. Upon leaving Jupiter they traversed

a space of around one hundred million leagues and approached the planet

Mars, which, as we know, is five times smaller than our own; they swung by

two  moons  that  cater  to  this  planet  but  have  escaped  the  notice  of  our

astronomers. I know very well that Father Castel will write, perhaps even

agreeably enough, against the existence of these two moons; but I rely on

those who reason by analogy. These good philosophers know how unlikely it

would be for Mars, so far from the sun, to have gotten by with less than two

moons. Whatever the case may be, our explorers found it so small that they

feared not being able to land on it, and they passed it by like two travelers

disdainful of a bad village cabaret, pressing on towards a neighboring city.

But the Sirian and his companion soon regretted it. They traveled a long time

without finding anything. Finally they perceived a small candle, it was earth;

this was a pitiful sight to those who had just left Jupiter. Nevertheless, from

fear of further regret, they resolved to touch down. Carried by the tail of a

comet, and finding an aurora borealis at the ready, they started towards it, and

arrived at Earth on the northern coast of the Baltic sea, July 5, 1737, new

style. 


  CHAPTER IV.

  What happened on planet Earth. 


  After resting for some time they ate two mountains for lunch, which their

crew  fixed  up  pretty  nicely.  Then  they  decided  to  get  to  know  the  small

country they were in. They went first from north to south. The usual stride of

the Sirian and his crew was around 30,000 feet. The dwarf from Saturn, who

clocked in at no more than a thousand fathoms, trailed behind, breathing

heavily.  He  had  to  make  twelve  steps  each  time  the  other  took  a  stride;

imagine (if it is alright to make such a comparison) a very small lapdog

following a captain of the guards of the Prussian king.  Since our strangers moved fairly rapidly, they circumnavigated the globe

in 36 hours. The sun, in truth, or rather the Earth, makes a similar voyage in a

day; but you have to imagine that the going is much easier when one turns on

one's axis instead of walking on one's feet. So there they were, back where

they  started,  after  having  seen  the  nearly  imperceptible  pond  we  call  the

Mediterranean, and the other little pool that, under the name Ocean, encircles

the molehill. The dwarf never got in over his knees, and the other hardly wet

his heels. On their way they did all they could to see whether the planet was

inhabited or not. They crouched, laid down, felt around everywhere; but their

eyes and their hands were not proportionate to the little beings that crawl

here, they could not feel in the least any sensation that might lead them to

suspect that we and our associates, the other inhabitants of this planet, have

the honor of existing.

  The dwarf, who was a bit hasty sometimes, decided straightaway that the

planet was uninhabited. His first reason was that he had not seen anyone.

Micromegas politely indicated that this logic was rather flawed: "For," said

he, "you do not see with your little eyes certain stars of the 50th magnitude

that I can perceive very distinctly. Do you conclude that these stars do not

exist?"

  "But," said the dwarf, "I felt around a lot."

  "But," answered the other, "you have pretty weak senses."

  "But,"  replied  the  dwarf,  "this  planet  is  poorly  constructed.  It  is  so

irregular and has such a ridiculous shape! Everything here seems to be in

chaos: you see these little rivulets, none of which run in a straight line, these

pools of water that are neither round, nor square, nor oval, nor regular by any

measure; all these little pointy specks scattered across the earth that grate on

my feet? (This was in reference to mountains.) Look at its shape again, how it

is flat at the poles, how it clumsily revolves around the sun in a way that

necessarily eliminates the climates of the poles? To tell the truth, what really

makes me think it is uninhabited is that it seems that no one of good sense

would want to stay."

  "Well," said Micromegas, "maybe the inhabitants of this planet are not of

good sense! But in the end it looks like this may be for a reason. Everything

appears irregular to you here, you say, because everything on Saturn andJupiter is drawn in straight lines. This might be the[1] reason that you are a

bit puzzled here. Have I not told you that I have continually noticed variety in

my travels?" 


    FOOTNOTE


  [1] All the editions that precede those of Kehl read: "It might be for this"

B.

  The Saturnian responded to all these points. The dispute might never have

finished if it were not for Micromegas who, getting worked up, had the good

luck to break the thread of his diamond necklace. The diamonds fell; they

were pretty little carats of fairly irregular size, of which the largest weighed

four hundred pounds and the smallest fifty. The dwarf recaptured some of

them; bending down for a better look, he perceived that these diamonds were

cut  with  the  help  of  an  excellent  microscope.  So  he  took  out  a  small

microscope of 160 feet in diameter and put it up to his eye; and Micromegas

took up one of 2,005 feet in diameter. They were excellent; but neither one of

them  could  see  anything  right  away  and  had  to  adjust  them.  Finally  the

Saturnian saw something elusive that moved in the shallow waters of the

Baltic sea; it was a whale. He carefully picked it up with his little finger and,

resting  it  on  the  nail  of  his  thumb,  showed  it  to  the  Sirian,  who  began

laughing for a second time at the ludicrously small scale of the things on our

planet. The Saturnian, persuaded that our world was inhabited, figured very

quickly that it was inhabited only by whales; and as he was very good at

reasoning, he was determined to infer the origin and evolution of such a small

atom; whether it had ideas, a will, liberty. Micromegas was confused. He

examined the animal very patiently and found no reason to believe that a soul

was lodged in it. The two voyagers were therefore inclined to believe that

there is no spirit in our home, when with the help of the microscope they

perceived something as large as a whale floating on the Baltic Sea. We know

that a flock of philosophers was at this time returning from the Arctic Circle,

where they had made some observations, which no one had dared make up to

then.  The  gazettes  claimed  that  their  vessel  ran  aground  on  the  coast  of

Bothnia, and that they were having a lot of difficulty setting things straight;

but the world never shows its cards. I am going to tell how it really happened,artlessly and without bias; which is no small thing for an historian. 


  CHAPTER V.

  Experiments and reasonings of the two voyagers. 


  Micromegas slowly reached his hand towards the place where the object

had appeared, extended two fingers, and withdrew them for fear of being

mistaken, then opened and closed them, and skillfully seized the vessel that

carried these fellows, putting it on his fingernail without pressing it too hard

for fear of crushing it.

  "Here  is  a  very  different  animal  from  the  first,"  said  the  dwarf  from

Saturn.

  The  Sirian  put  the  so-called  animal  in  the  palm  of  his  hand.  The

passengers and the crew, who believed themselves to have been lifted up by a

hurricane,  and  who  thought  they  were  on  some  sort  of  boulder,  scurried

around;  the  sailors  took  the  barrels  of  wine,  threw  them  overboard  onto

Micromegas hand, and followed after. The geometers took their quadrants,

their sextants, two Lappland girls[1], and descended onto the Sirian's fingers.

They made so much fuss that he finally felt something move, tickling his

fingers. It was a steel-tipped baton being pressed into his index finger. He

judged, by this tickling, that it had been ejected from some small animal that

he was holding; but he did not suspect anything else at first. The microscope,

which  could  barely  distinguish  a  whale  from  a  boat,  could  not  capture

anything as elusive as a man. I do not claim to outrage anyone's vanity, but I

am obliged to ask that important men make an observation here. Taking the

size of a man to be about five feet, the figure we strike on Earth is like that

struck by an animal of about six hundred thousandths[2] the height of a flea

on a ball five feet around. Imagine something that can hold the Earth in its

hands, and which has organs in proportion to ours-and it may very well be

that there are such things-conceive, I beg of you, what these things would

think of the battles that allow a vanquisher to take a village only to lose it

later. 


    FOOTNOTE  [1] See the notes to the speech in verse, "On Moderation" (Volume XII),

and those of "Russia to Paris" (Volume XIV). K.

  [2] The edition that I take to be original reads "sixty thousandths." B.

  I  do  not  doubt  that  if  ever  some  captain  of  some  troop  of  imposing

grenadiers reads this work he will increase the size of the hats of his troops

by at least two imposing feet. But I warn him that it will have been done in

vain; that he and his will never grow any larger than infinitely small.

  What marvelous skill it must have taken for our philosopher from Sirius to

perceive the atoms I have just spoken of. When Leuwenhoek and Hartsoëker

tinkered with the first or thought they saw the grains that make us up, they

did not by any means make such an astonishing discovery. What pleasure

Micromegas felt at seeing these little machines move, at examining all their

scurrying, at following them in their enterprises! how he cried out! with what

joy he placed one of his microscopes in the hands of his traveling companion!

  "I see them," they said at the same time, "look how they are carrying

loads, stooping, getting up again." They spoke like that, hands trembling from

the pleasure of seeing such new objects, and from fear of losing them. The

Saturnian, passing from an excess of incredulity to an excess of credulity,

thought he saw them mating.

  "Ah!" he said. "I have caught nature in the act"[1]. But he was fooled by

appearances,  which  happens  only  too  often,  whether  one  is  using  a

microscope or not.

  [1] j'ai pris la nature sur le fait. A happy, good-natured turn of phrase

expressed by Fontenelle upon making some observations of natural history.

K. 


  CHAPTER VI.

  What happened to them among men. 


  Micromegas, a much better observer than his dwarf, clearly saw that the

atoms were speaking to each other, and pointed this out to his companion,who, ashamed of being mistaken about them reproducing, did not want to

believe that such a species could communicate. He had the gift of language as

well as the Sirian. He could not hear the atoms talk, and he supposed that

they did not speak. Moreover, how could these impossibly small beings have

vocal organs, and what would they have to say? To speak, one must think,

more or less; but if they think, they must therefore have the equivalent of a

soul. But to attribute the equivalent of a soul to this species seemed absurd to

him.

  "But," said the Sirian, "you believed right away that they made love. Do

you believe that one can make love without thinking and without uttering one

word, or at least without making oneself heard? Do you suppose as well that

it is more difficult to produce an argument than an infant? Both appear to be

great mysteries to me."

  "I  do  not  dare  believe  or  deny  it,"  said  the  dwarf.  "I  have  no  more

opinions. We must try to examine these insects and reason after."

  "That is very well said," echoed Micromegas, and he briskly took out a

pair of scissors with which he cut his fingernails, and from the parings of his

thumbnail he improvised a kind of speaking-trumpet, like a vast funnel, and

put the end up to his ear. The circumference of the funnel enveloped the

vessel and the entire crew. The weakest voice entered into the circular fibers

of the nails in such a way that, thanks to his industriousness, the philosopher

above could hear the drone of our insects below perfectly. In a small number

of hours he was able to distinguish words, and finally to understand French.

The  dwarf  managed  to  do  the  same,  though  with  more  difficulty.  The

voyagers' surprise redoubled each second. They heard the mites speak fairly

intelligently. This performance of nature's seemed inexplicable to them. You

may well believe that the Sirian and the dwarf burned with impatience to

converse with the atoms. The dwarf feared that his thunderous voice, and

assuredly  Micromegas,  would  deafen  the  mites  without  being  understood.

They  had  to  diminish  its  force.  They  placed  toothpicks  in  their  mouths,

whose tapered ends fell around the ship. The Sirian put the dwarf on his

knees and the ship with its crew on a fingernail. He lowered his head and

spoke softly. Finally, relying on these precautions and many others, he began

his speech like so:  "Invisible insects, that the hand of the Creator has caused to spring up in

the abyss of the infinitely small, I thank him for allowing me to uncover these

seemingly impenetrable secrets. Perhaps those at my court would not deign to

give you audience, but I mistrust no one, and I offer you my protection."

  If  anyone  has  ever  been  surprised,  it  was  the  people  who  heard  these

words. They could not figure out where they were coming from. The chaplain

of  the  vessel  recited  the  exorcism  prayers,  the  sailors  swore,  and  the

philosophers of the vessel constructed systems; but no matter what systems

they came up with, they could not figure out who was talking. The dwarf

from Saturn, who had a softer voice than Micromegas, told them in a few

words what species they were dealing with. He told them about the voyage

from Saturn, brought them up to speed on what Mr. Micromegas was, and

after lamenting how small they were, asked them if they had always been in

this miserable state so near nothingness, what they were doing on a globe that

appeared to belong to whales, whether they were happy, if they reproduced, if

they had a soul, and a hundred other questions of this nature.

  A reasoner among the troop, more daring than the others, and shocked that

someone  might  doubt  his  soul,  observed  the  interlocutor  with  sight-vanes

pointed at a quarter circle from two different stations, and at the third spoke

thusly: "You believe then, Sir, that because you are a thousand fathoms tall

from head to toe, that you are a-"

  "A thousand fathoms!" cried the dwarf. "Good heavens! How could he

know my height? A thousand fathoms! You cannot mistake him for a flea.

This atom just measured me! He is a surveyor, he knows my size; and I, who

can only see him through a microscope, I still do not know his!"

  "Yes, I measured you," said the physician, "and I will measure your large

companion as well." The proposition was accepted, his excellency laid down

flat; for were he to stay upright his head would have been among the clouds.

Our philosophers planted a great shaft on him, in a place that doctor Swift

would have named, but that I will restrain myself from calling by its name,

out of respect for the ladies. Next, by a series of triangles linked together,

they concluded that what they saw was in effect a young man of 120,000

feet[1].     FOOTNOTE


  [1]The  edition  I  believe  to  be  original  reads,  "a  beautiful  young  ...  of

120,000 feet." B.

  So Micromegas delivered these words: "I see more than ever that one must

not  judge  anything  by  its  apparent  size.  Oh  God!  you  who  have  given

intelligence to substance that appears contemptible. The infinitely small costs

you as little as the infinitely large; and if it is possible that there are such

small beings as these, there may just as well be a spirit bigger than those of

the superb animals that I have seen in the heavens, whose feet alone would

cover this planet."

  One of the philosophers responded that he could certainly imagine that

there are intelligent beings much smaller than man. He recounted, not every

fabulous thing Virgil says about bees, but what Swammerdam discovered,

and  what  Réaumur  has  anatomized.  He  explained  finally  that  there  are

animals that are to bees what bees are to man, what the Sirian himself was for

the vast animals he had spoken of, and what these large animals are to other

substances  before  which  they  looked  like  atoms.  Little  by  little  the

conversation became interesting, and Micromegas spoke thusly: 


  CHAPTER VII.

  Conversation with the men. 


  "Oh  intelligent  atoms,  in  which  the  Eternal  Being  desired  to  make

manifest his skill and his power, you must, no doubt, taste pure joys on your

planet; for having so little matter, and appearing to be entirely spirit, you

must live out your life thinking and loving, the veritable life of the mind.

Nowhere have I seen true bliss, but it is here, without a doubt."

  At this all the philosophers shook their heads, and one of them, more frank

than the others, avowed that if one excepts a small number of inhabitants held

in poor regard, all the rest are an assembly of mad, vicious, and wretched

people. "We have more substance than is necessary," he said, "to do evil, if

evil comes from substance; and too much spirit, if evil comes from spirit. Didyou know, for example, that as I am speaking with you[1], there are 100,000

madmen of our species wearing hats, killing 100,000 other animals wearing

turbans, or being massacred by them, and that we have used almost surface of

the Earth for this purpose since time immemorial?" 


    FOOTNOTE


  [1]  We  saw,  at  the  end  of  chapter  III,  that  the  story  occurs  in  1737.

Voltaire is referring to the war between the Turks and the Russians, from

1736 to 1739. B.

  The Sirian shuddered, and asked the reason for these horrible quarrels

between such puny animals.

  "It is a matter," said the philosopher, "of some piles of mud as big as your

heel[2]. It is not that any of these millions of men that slit each other's throats

care about this pile of mud. It is only a matter of determining if it should

belong to a certain man who we call 'Sultan,' or to another who we call, for

whatever reason, 'Czar.' Neither one has ever seen nor will ever see the little

piece  of  Earth,  and  almost  none  of  these  animals  that  mutually  kill

themselves have ever seen the animal for which they kill."

  [2] Crimea, which all the same was not reunited with Russia until 1783. B.

  "Oh! Cruel fate!" cried the Sirian with indignation, "who could conceive

of this excess of maniacal rage! It makes me want to take three steps and

crush this whole anthill of ridiculous assassins."

  "Do not waste your time," someone responded, "they are working towards

ruin quickly enough. Know that after ten years only one hundredth of these

scoundrels  will  be  here.  Know  that  even  if  they  have  not  drawn  swords,

hunger, fatigue, or intemperance will overtake them. Furthermore, it is not

they that should be punished, it is those sedentary barbarians who from the

depths of their offices order, while they are digesting their last meal, the

massacre  of  a  million  men,  and  who  subsequently  give  solemn  thanks  to

God."

  The voyager was moved with pity for the small human race, where he was

discovering such surprising contrasts.  "Since you are amongst the small number of wise men," he told these sirs,

"and since apparently you do not kill anyone for money, tell me, I beg of you,

what occupies your time."

  "We  dissect  flies,"  said  the  philosopher,  "we  measure  lines,  we  gather

figures;  we  agree  with  each  other  on  two  or  three  points  that  we  do  not

understand."

  It suddenly took the Sirian and the Saturnian's fancy to question these

thinking atoms, to learn what it was they agreed on.

  "What do you measure," said the Saturnian, "from the Dog Star to the

great star of the Gemini?"

  They responded all at once, "thirty-two and a half degrees."

  "What do you measure from here to the moon?"

  "60 radii of the Earth even."

  "How much does your air weigh?"

  He thought he had caught them[3], but they all told him that air weighed

around  900  times  less  than  an  identical  volume  of  the  purest  water,  and

19,000 times less than a gold ducat. The little dwarf from Saturn, surprised at

their responses, was tempted to accuse of witchcraft the same people he had

refused a soul fifteen minutes earlier.

  [3] The edition I believe to be original reads "put them off" in place of

"caught them."

  Finally Micromegas said to them, "Since you know what is exterior to you

so well, you must know what is interior even better. Tell me what your soul

is, and how you form ideas." The philosophers spoke all at once as before,

but  they  were  of  different  views.  The  oldest  cited  Aristotle,  another

pronounced  the  name  of  Descartes;  this  one  here,  Malebranche;  another

Leibnitz; another Locke. An old peripatetic spoke up with confidence: "The

soul is an entelechy, and a reason gives it the power to be what it is." This is

what Aristotle expressly declares, page 633 of the Louvre edition. He cited

the passage[4].

  [4] Here is the passage such as it is transcribed in the edition dated 1750:

"Entele'xeia' tis esi kai' lo'gos toû dy'namin e'xontos toude' ei'nai."  This passage of Aristotle, On the Soul, book II, chapter II, is translated

thusly  by  Casaubon:  Anima  quaedam  perfectio  et  actus  ac  ratio  est  quod

potentiam habet ut ejusmodi sit. B.

  "I do not understand Greek very well," said the giant.

  "Neither do I," said the philosophical mite.

  "Why then," the Sirian retorted, "are you citing some man named Aristotle

in the Greek?"

  "Because," replied the savant, "one should always cite what one does not

understand at all in the language one understands the least."

  The Cartesian took the floor and said: "The soul is a pure spirit that has

received in the belly of its mother all metaphysical ideas, and which, leaving

that place, is obliged to go to school, and to learn all over again what it

already knew, and will not know again."

  "It is not worth the trouble," responded the animal with the height of eight

leagues, "for your soul to be so knowledgeable in its mother's stomach, only

to  be  so  ignorant  when  you  have  hair  on  your  chin.  But  what  do  you

understand by the mind?"

  "You are asking me?" said the reasoner. "I have no idea. We say that it is

not matter-"

  "But do you at least know what matter is?"

  "Certainly," replied the man. "For example this stone is grey, has such and

such a form, has three dimensions, is heavy and divisible."

  "Well!" said the Sirian, "this thing that appears to you to be divisible,

heavy, and grey, will you tell me what it is? You see some attributes, but

behind those, are you familiar with that?

  "No," said the other.

  "-So you do not know what matter is."

  So Micromegas, addressing another sage that he held on a thumb, asked

what his soul was, and what it did.

  "Nothing  at  all,"  said  the  Malebranchist  philosopher[5].  "God  does

everything for me. I see everything in him, I do everything in him; it is hewho does everything that I get mixed up in."

  [5] See the opuscule entitled "All in God" in Miscellaneous (1796).

  "It would be just as well not to exist," retorted the sage of Sirius. "And

you, my friend," he said to a Leibnitzian who was there, "what is your soul?"

  "It is," answered the Leibnitzian, "the hand of a clock that tells the time

while my body rings out. Or, if you like, it is my soul that rings out while my

body tells the time, or my soul is the mirror of the universe, and my body is

the border of the mirror. All that is clear."

  A small partisan of Locke was nearby, and when he was finally given the

floor: "I do not know," said he, "how I think, but I know that I have only ever

thought  through  my  senses.  That  there  are  immaterial  and  intelligent

substances I do not doubt, but that it is impossible for God to communicate

thought to matter I doubt very much. I revere the eternal power. It is not my

place to limit it. I affirm nothing, and content myself with believing that

many more things are possible than one would think."

  The animal from Sirius smiled. He did not find this the least bit sage,

while the dwarf from Saturn would have kissed the sectarian of Locke were it

not  for  the  extreme  disproportion.  But  there  was,  unfortunately,  a  little

animalcule  in  a  square  hat  who  interrupted  all  the  other  animalcule

philosophers. He said that he knew the secret: that everything would be found

in the Summa of Saint Thomas. He looked the two celestial inhabitants up

and down. He argued that their people, their worlds, their suns, their stars,

had all been made uniquely for mankind. At this speech, our two voyagers

nearly  fell  over  with  that  inextinguishable  laughter  which,  according  to

Homer[6], is shared with the gods. Their shoulders and their stomachs heaved

up and down, and in these convulsions the vessel that the Sirian had on his

nail fell into one of the Saturnian's trouser pockets. These two good men

searched for it a long time, found it finally, and tidied it up neatly. The Sirian

resumed his discussion with the little mites. He spoke to them with great

kindness, although in the depths of his heart he was a little angry that the

infinitely small had an almost infinitely great pride. He promised to make

them a beautiful philosophical book[7], written very small for their usage,

and said that in this book they would see the point of everything. Indeed, he

gave them this book before leaving. It was taken to the academy of science inParis, but when the ancient[8] secretary opened it, he saw nothing but blank

pages. "Ah!" he said, "I suspected as much."

  [6] Illiad, I, 599. B.

  [7] The edition that I believe to be original, and the one dated 1750, reads,

"philosophical book, that would teach them of admirable things, and show

them the goodness of things."

  [8] Although this scene occurs in 1737, as one saw in pages 177 to 188,

one could assign the epithet of "old" to Fontenelle, who was 80 at that point,

and  who  died  20  years  later.  In  1740  he  resigned  from  his  position  as

perpetual secretary. 


  END OF THE HISTORY OF MICROMEGAS.On the Death of Adrienne Lecouvreur

 

  Voltaire

  On the Death of Adrienne Lecouvreur

  Published in 1901

Translated by William F. Fleming 


  WHAT sight of woe thus harrows up my soul!

  Must those love-darting eyes in anguish roll?

  Shall ghastly death such charms divine invade?

  You muses, graces, loves come to her aid.

  Oh! you my gods and hers assist the fair,

  Your image sure must well deserve your care.

  Alas! thou diest, I press thy corpse alone;

  Thou diest, the fatal news too soon is known.

  In such a loss, each tender feeling heart

  Is touched like mine, and takes in grief a part.

  I hear the arts on every side deplore

  Their loss, and cry, "Melpomene's no more:"

  What exclamations will the future race

  Utter, at hearing of those arts' disgrace?

  See cruel men a burying place refuse,

  To her whom Greece had worshipped as a muse;

  When living, they adored her power divine,

  To her they bowed like votaries at a shrine:

  Should she then, breathless, criminal be thought,

  And is it then to charm the world a fault?  Seine's banks should now no more be deemed profane,

  Lecouvreur's sacred ashes there remain:

  At this sad tomb, shrine sacred to thy shade,

  Our vows are still as at a temple paid.

  I don't revere the famed St. Denis more,

  Thy graces, charms, and wit, I there adore:

  I loved them living, incense now I'll burn,

  And pay due honors to thy sacred urn.

  Though error and ingratitude are bent,

  To brand with infamy thy monument.

  Shall Frenchmen never know what they require,

  But damn capriciously what they admire?

  Must laws with manners jar? Must every mind

  In France, be made by superstition blind?

  Wherefore should England be the only clime,

  Where to think freely is not deemed a crime?

  Oh! London, Athens' rival, thou alone,

  Could tyrants, and could prejudice dethrone;

  In that blest region, general freedom reigns,

  Merit is honored, and reward obtains:

    Marlborough the greatest general of his age,

  Harmonious Dryden, Addison the sage,

  Immortal Newton, charming Oldfield there,

  The honors due to real genius share.

  The farce of life had there Lecouvreur closed

  With heroes, statesmen, kings she had reposed;

  Genius at London makes its owner great,  Freedom and wealth have in that happy state,

  Procured the inhabitants immortal fame,

  They rival now the Greek and Roman name.

  Parnassian laurels wither in our fields,

  And France no more a crop of merit yields:

  Wherefore you gods do all our glories fade,

  Why is not honor due to genius paid?The History of Peter the Great, Emperor of Russia

 

  Voltaire

  The History of Peter the Great, Emperor of Russia

  Published in 1845


  MANCHESTER:

  S. JOHNSON & SON,

  No. 3, OLDHAM-STREET;

  AND 48, CHURCH-ST.,

  LIVERPOOL.

    MDCCCXLV. 


  TABLE

  CHAPTER I.

  Description of Russia.

  CHAPTER II.

  Continuation of the description of Russia, population, finances, armies,

customs, religion: state of Russia before Peter the Great.

  CHAPTER III.

  The ancestors of Peter the Great.

  CHAPTER IV.

  John and Peter.-Horrible Sedition among the Strelitzes.

  CHAPTER V.

  Administration  of  the  princess  Sophia.  Extraordinary  quarrel  about

religion. A conspiracy.

  CHAPTER VI.

  The reign of Peter the First.-Beginning of the grand reformation.  CHAPTER VII.

  Congress and Treaty with the Chinese.

  CHAPTER VIII.

  Expedition to the Palus Mæotis; conquest of Azoph.-The czar sends young

gentlemen into foreign countries for improvement.

  CHAPTER IX.

  Travels of Peter the Great.

  CHAPTER X.

  A conspiracy punished.-The corps of strelitzes abolished, alterations in

customs, manners, church, and state.

  CHAPTER XI.

  War with Sweden.-The battle of Narva.

  CHAPTER XII.

  Resources after the battle of Narva. That disaster entirely repaired. Peter

gains a victory near the same place. The person who was afterwards empress

made prisoner at the storming of a town. Peter's successes. His triumph at

Moscow.

  CHAPTER XIII.

  Reformation at Moscow.-Further successes.-Founding of Petersburg.-The

czar takes Narva, &c.

  CHAPTER XIV.

  Peter  the  Great  keeps  possession  of  all  Ingria,  while  Charles  XII.  is

triumphant in other places.-Rise of Menzikoff.-Petersburg secured.-The czar

executes his designs notwithstanding the victories of the king of Sweden.

  CHAPTER XV.

  While Peter is strengthening his conquests, and improving the police of his

dominion, his enemy Charles XII. gains several battles: gives laws to Poland

and  Saxony,  and  to  Augustus,  notwithstanding  a  victory  gained  by  the

Russians.-Augustus  resigns  the  crown,  and  delivers  up  Patkul,  the  czar's

ambassador.-Murder of Patkul, who is sentenced to be broke upon the wheel.  CHAPTER XVI.

  Attempts made to set up a third king of Poland.-Charles XII. sets out from

Saxony with a powerful army, and marches through Poland in a victorious

manner.-Cruelties committed.-Conduct of the czar.-Successes of the king of

Sweden, who at length advances towards Russia.

  CHAPTER XVII.

  Charles  XII.  crosses  the  Boristhenes,  penetrates  into  the  Ukraine,  but

concerts his measures badly.-One of his armies is defeated by Peter the Great:

he loses his supply of provisions and ammunition: advances forward through

a desert country: his adventures in the Ukraine.

  CHAPTER XVIII.

  Battle of Pultowa.

  CHAPTER XIX.

  Consequences of the battle of Pultowa.-Charles XII. takes refuge among

the  Turks.-Augustus,  whom  he  had  dethroned,  recovers  his  dominions.-

Conquests of Peter the Great.

  CHAPTER XX.

  Campaign of Pruth.

  CHAPTER XXI.

  Conclusion of the Affairs of Pruth.

  CHAPTER XXII.

  Marriage of the czarowitz.-The marriage of Peter and Catherine publicly

solemnized.-Catherine finds her brother.

  CHAPTER XXIII.

  Taking of Stetin.-Descent upon Finland.-Event of the year 1712.

  CHAPTER XXIV.

  Successes  of  Peter  the  Great.-Return  of  Charles  XII.  into  his  own

dominions.

  CHAPTER XXV.  State of Europe at the return of Charles XII. Siege of Stralsund.

  CHAPTER XXVI.

  New travels of the czar.

  CHAPTER XXVII.

  Continuation  of  the  Travels  of  Peter  the  Great.-Conspiracy  of  baron

Gortz.-Reception of the czar in France.

  CHAPTER XXVIII.

  Of the return of the czar to his dominions.-Of his politics and occupations.

  CHAPTER XXIX.

  Proceedings against prince Alexis Petrowitz.

  CHAPTER XXX.

  Works and establishments in 1718, and the following years.

  CHAPTER XXXI.

  Of the trade of Russia.

  CHAPTER XXXII.

  Of the laws.

  CHAPTER XXXIII.

  Of Religion.

  CHAPTER XXXIV.

  The congress of Aland or Oeland. Death of Charles XII., &c. The treaty of

Nystadt.

  CHAPTER XXXV.

  Conquests in Persia.

  CHAPTER XXXVI.

  Of the Coronation of the Empress Catherine I. and the Death of Peter the

Great.

  Original Pieces Relative to this History:

  Sentence pronounced against the Czarowitz Alexis.  The Peace of Nystadt.

  Ordinance  of  the  Emperor  Peter  I.  for  the  crowning  of  the  Empress

Catherine.


  CHAPTER I.

  DESCRIPTION OF RUSSIA.


  The empire of Russia is the largest in the whole globe, extending from

west to east upwards of two thousand common leagues of France,[1] and

about eight hundred in its greatest breadth from north to south. It borders

upon Poland and the Frozen Sea, and joins to Sweden and China. Its length

from  the  island  of  Dago,  in  the  westernmost  part  of  Livonia,  to  its  most

eastern limits, takes in near one hundred and seventy degrees, so that when it

is noon in the western parts of the empire, it is nearly midnight in the eastern.

Its breadth from north to south is three thousand six hundred wersts, which

make eight hundred and fifty of our common French leagues.

  The limits of this country were so little known in the last century, that, in

1689, when it was reported, that the Chinese and the Russians were at war,

and that in order to terminate their differences, the emperor Camhi on the one

hand,  and  the  czars  Ivan  or  John,  and  Peter,  on  the  other,  had  sent  their

ministers to meet an embassy within three hundred leagues of Pekin, on the

frontiers of the two empires, the account was at first treated as a fiction.

  The country now comprehended under the name of Russia, or the Russias,

is of a greater extent than all the rest of Europe, or than ever the Roman

empire was, or that of Darius subdued by Alexander; for it contains upwards

of  one  million  one  hundred  thousand  square  leagues.  Neither  the  Roman

empire, nor that of Alexander, contained more than five hundred and fifty

thousand  each;  and  there  is  not  a  kingdom  in  Europe  the  twelfth  part  so

extensive as the Roman empire; but to make Russia as populous, as plentiful,

and as well stored with towns as our southern countries, would require whole

ages, and a race of monarchs such as Peter the Great.

  The English ambassador, who resided at Petersburg in 1733, and who had

been at Madrid, says, in his manuscript relation, that in Spain, which is theleast populous state in Europe, there may be reckoned forty persons to every

square mile, and in Russia not above five. We shall see in the second chapter,

whether  this  minister  was  mistaken.  Marshal  Vauban,  the  greatest  of

engineers, and the best of citizens, computes, that, in France, every square

mile  contains  two  hundred  inhabitants.  These  calculations  are  never  very

exact, but they serve to shew the amazing disproportion in the population of

two different countries.

  I shall observe here, that from Petersburg to Pekin, there is hardly one

mountain to be met with in the route which the caravans might take through

independent Tartary, and that from Petersburg to the north of France, by the

road of Dantzic, Hamburg, and Amsterdam, there is not even a hill of any

eminence to be seen. This observation leaves room to doubt of the truth of

that theory, which makes the mountains to have been formed by the rolling of

the waves of the sea, and supposes all that is at present dry land, to have been

for a long time covered with water: but how comes it to pass, that the waves,

which,  according  to  the  supposition,  formed  the  Alps,  the  Pyrenees,  and

Mount Taurus, did not likewise form some eminence or hill from Normandy

to  China,  which  is  a  winding  space  of  above  three  thousand  leagues?

Geography, thus considered, may furnish lights to natural philosophy, or at

least give room for rational doubts.

  Formerly we called Russia by the name of Muscovy, from the city of

Moscow, the capital of that empire, and the residence of the grand dukes: but

at present the ancient name of Russia prevails.

  It  is  not  my  business  in  this  place  to  inquire,  why  the  countries  from

Smolensko, to the other side of Moscow, were called White Russia, or why

Hubner gives it the name of Black, nor for what reason the government of

Kiow should be named Red Russia.

  It is very likely that Madies the Scythian, who made an irruption into Asia,

near seven hundred years before our vulgar æra, might have carried his arms

into these regions, as Gengis-Khan and Tamerlane did afterwards, and as

probably others had done long before Madies. Every part of antiquity is not

deserving of our inquiries; that of the Chinese, the Indians, the Persians, and

the Egyptians, is ascertained from illustrious and interesting monuments; but

these monuments suppose others of a far more ancient date, since it requiredmany ages to teach men the art of transmitting their thoughts by permanent

signs, and no less time was required to form a regular language; and yet we

have no such monuments even in this polite part of Europe. The art of writing

was a long time unknown to all the North: the patriarch Constantine, who

wrote the history of Kiow in the Russian language, acknowledges, that the

use of writing was not known in these countries in the fifth century.

  Let others examine whether the Huns, the Slavi, and the Tartars, formerly

led  their  wandering  and  famished  tribes  towards  the  source  of  the

Boristhenes;[2] my design is to shew what czar Peter created, and not to

engage in a useless attempt, to clear up the chaos of antiquity. We should

always keep in mind, that no family upon earth knows its first founder, and

consequently, that no nation knows its first origin.

  I  use  the  name  of  Russians  to  designate  the  inhabitants  of  this  great

empire. That of Roxolanians, which was formerly given them, would indeed

be more sonorous, but we shall conform to the custom of the language in

which we write. News-papers and other memoirs have for some time used the

word Russians; but as this name comes too near to that of Prussians, I shall

abide by that of Russ, which almost all our writers have given them. Besides,

it appeared to me, that the most extensive people on the earth ought to be

known by some appellation that may distinguish them absolutely from all

other nations.[3]

  This empire is at present divided into sixteen large governments, that will

one day be subdivided, when the northern and eastern countries come to be

more inhabited.

  These sixteen governments, which contain several immense provinces are

the following:-


  LIVONIA.


  The nearest province to our part of the world is that of Livonia, one of the

most fruitful in the whole North. In the twelfth century the inhabitants were

pagans; at this time certain merchants of Bremen and Lubeck traded to this

country,  and  a  body  of  religious  crusaders,  called  port-glaives,  or  sword-

bearers,  who  were  afterwards  incorporated  in  the  Teutonic  order,  madethemselves  masters  of  this  province  in  the  thirteenth  century,  at  the  time

when the fury of the crusades armed the Christians against every one who

was not of their religion. Albert, margrave of Brandenburg, grand-master of

these  religious  conquerors,  made  himself  sovereign  of  Livonia  and  of

Brandenburg-Prussia, about the year 1514. From that time, the Russians and

Poles began to dispute for the possession of this province. Soon afterwards it

was invaded by the Swedes, and for a long while continued to be ravaged by

these several powers. Gustavus Adolphus having conquered it, it was then

ceded to the Swedes in 1660, by the famous treaty of Oliva; and, at length,

czar Peter wrested it from these latter, as will be seen in the course of this

history.

  Courland, which joins to Livonia, is still in vassalage to Poland, though it

depends greatly upon Russia. These are the western limits of this empire in

Christendom.

  Of the Governments of REVEL, PETERSBURG, and WYBURG.

  More northward is the government of Revel and Esthonia. Revel was built

by the Danes in the thirteenth century. The Swedes were in possession of this

province, from the time that country put itself under the protection of that

crown in 1561. This is another of the conquests of Peter the Great.

  On the borders of Esthonia lies the gulf of Finland. To the eastward of this

sea,  and  at  the  junction  of  the  Neva  with  the  lake  Ladoga,[4]  is  situated

Petersburg, the most modern and best built city in the whole empire, founded

by  czar  Peter,  in  spite  of  all  the  united  obstacles  which  opposed  its

foundation.

  This city is situated on the bay of Kronstat, in the midst of nine rivers, by

which its different quarters are divided. In the centre of this city is almost an

impregnable fortress, built on an island, formed by the main-stream of the

river Neva: seven canals are cut from the rivers, and wash the walls of one of

the royal palaces of the admiralty, of the dock-yard for the galleys, and of

several buildings of manufactories. Thirty-five large churches contribute to

adorn the city; among which five are allotted for foreigners of the Roman

Catholic,  Calvinist,  and  Lutheran  religions:  these  are  as  so  many  temples

raised to toleration, and examples to other nations. There are five palaces; the

old one, called the summer palace, situated on the river Neva, has a verylarge and beautiful stone balustrade, which runs all along the river side. The

new summer palace near the triumphal gate, is one of the finest pieces of

architecture in Europe. The admiralty buildings, the school for cadets, the

imperial college, the academy of sciences, the exchange, and the merchants'

warehouses,  are  all  magnificent  structures,  and  monuments  of  taste  and

public utility. The town-house, the public dispensary, where all the vessels

are of porcelain, the court magazines, the foundery, the arsenal, the bridges,

the  markets,  the  squares,  the  barracks  for  the  horse  and  foot  guards,

contribute at once to the embellishment and safety of the city, which is said to

contain at present four hundred thousand souls. In the environs of the city are

several  villas  or  country-seats,  which  surprise  all  travellers  by  their

magnificence. There is one in particular which has water-works superior to

those of Versailles. There was nothing of all this in 1702, the whole being

then an impassable morass. Petersburg is considered as the capital of Ingria, a

small province subdued by Peter I. Wyburg, another of his conquests, and

that part of Finland which was lost, and ceded by the Swedes in 1742, make

another government.


    ARCHANGEL.


  Higher up, proceeding towards the north, is the province of Archangel, a

country entirely new to the southern nations of Europe. It took its name from

St. Michael, the Archangel, under whose patronage it was put long after the

Russians had embraced Christianity, which did not happen till the beginning

of the eleventh century; and they were not known to the other nations of

Europe till the middle of the sixteenth. The English, in 1533, endeavouring to

find out a north-east passage to the East Indies, Chancellor, captain of one of

the ships fitted out for this expedition, discovered the port of Archangel in the

White Sea; at that time it was a desert place, having only one convent, and a

little church, dedicated to St. Michael, the Archangel.

  The English sailing up the river Dwina,[5] arrived at the midland part of

the country, and at length at Moscow. Here they easily made themselves

masters  of  the  trade  of  Russia,  which  was  removed  from  the  city  of

Novogorod,  where  it  was  carried  on  by  land  to  this  sea-port,  which  is

inaccessible indeed during seven months in the year; but, nevertheless, thistrade proved more beneficial to the empire than the fairs of Novogorod, that

had fallen to decay in consequence of the wars with Sweden. The English

obtained the privilege of trading thither without paying any duties; a manner

of trading which is apparently the most beneficial to all nations. The Dutch

soon came in for a share of the trade of Archangel, then unknown to other

nations.

  Long before this time, the Genoese and Venetians had established a trade

with the Russians by the mouth of the Tanais or Don,[6] where they had built

a town called Tana. This branch of the Italian commerce was destroyed by

the ravages of Tamerlane, in that part of the world; but that of Archangel

continued, with great advantages both to the English and Dutch, till the time

that Peter the Great opened a passage into his dominions by the Baltic Sea.


  RUSSIAN LAPLAND.


  Of the Government of Archangel.

  To  the  west  of  Archangel,  and  within  its  government,  lies  Russian

Lapland, the third part of this country, the other two belonging to Sweden and

Denmark.  This  is  a  very  large  tract,  occupying  about  eight  degrees  of

longitude,  and  extending  in  latitude  from  one  polar  circle  to  the  North

Cape[7]. The natives of this country were confusedly known to the ancients,

under the name of troglodytes and northern pigmies; appellations suitable

enough to men, who, for the most part, are not above four feet and a half

high, and dwell in caverns; they are just the same people they were at that

time. They are of a tawny complexion, though the other people of the north

are white, and for the most part very low in stature; though their neighbours,

and the people of Iceland, under the polar circle, are tall: they seem made for

their mountainous country, being nimble, squat, and robust; their skins are

hard, the better to resist the cold, their thighs and legs are slender, their feet

small, to enable them to run more nimbly amongst the rocks, with which their

province is covered. They are passionately fond of their own country, which

none but themselves can be pleased with, and are able to live no where else.

Some  have  affirmed,  upon  the  credit  of  Olaus,  that  these  people  were

originally natives of Finland, and that they removed into Lapland, where theydiminished in stature: but why might they not as well have made choice of

lands less northerly, where the conveniences of life were to be had in greater

plenty?  How  comes  it  that  they  differ  so  totally  from  their  pretended

ancestors in features, figure, and complexion? Methinks we might, with as

great reason, suppose that the grass which grows in Lapland is produced from

that of Denmark, and that the fishes, peculiar to their lakes, came from those

of Sweden. It is most likely that the Laplanders are, like their animals, the

produce of their own country, and that nature has made the one for the other.

  Those  who  inhabit  the  frontiers  of  Finland,  have  adopted  some  of  the

expressions of their neighbours, as happens to every people: but when two

nations give to things of common use, to objects which are continually before

their eyes, names absolutely different, it affords a strong presumption, that

one of them is not a colony from the other. The Finlanders call a bear Karu,

the Laplanders Muriet: the sun in the Finnish language is called Auringa, in

the Lapland tongue Beve. Here is not the least analogy. The inhabitants of

Finland,  and  Swedish  Lapland,  formerly  worshipped  an  idol  whom  they

called Iumalac, and since the reign of Gustavus Adolphus, to whom they are

indebted for the appellation of Lutherans, they call Jesus Christ the son of

Iumalac. The Muscovite or Russian Laplanders, are at present thought to be

of the Greek church; but those who wander about the mountains of the North

Cape, are satisfied with adoring one God under certain rude forms, as has

been the ancient custom of all the nations called Nomades, or wandering

nations.

  This race of people, who are inconsiderable in numbers, have but very few

ideas, and are happy in not having more, which would only occasion them to

have new wants which they could not satisfy: at present they live contented,

and  free  from  diseases,  notwithstanding  the  excessive  coldness  of  their

climate; they drink nothing but water, and attain to a great age. The custom

imputed to them of entreating strangers to lie with their wives and daughters,

which they esteem as an honour done to them, probably arose from a notion

of the superiority of strangers, and a desire of amending, by their means, the

defects of their own race. This was a custom established amongst the virtuous

Lacedemonians. A husband would entreat a favour of a comely young man,

to give him handsome children, whom he might adopt. Jealousy, and the

laws, prevent the rest of mankind from giving their wives up to the embracesof another; but the Laplanders have few or no laws, and are in all probability,

strangers to jealousy.


  MOSCOW.


  Ascending the river Dwina from north to south, we travel up the country

till we come to Moscow, the capital of the empire. This city was long the

centre of the Russian dominions, before they were extended on the side of

China and Persia.

  Moscow,  lying  in  55  degrees  and  a  half,  north  latitude,  in  a  warmer

climate, and more fruitful soil than that of Petersburg, is situated in the midst

of a large and delightful plain on the river Moskwa, and two lesser rivers,

which with the former lose themselves in the Occa, and afterwards help to

swell the stream of the Wolga. This city, in the 13th century, was only a

collection of huts inhabited by a set of miserable wretches, oppressed by the

descendants of Gengis Khan.

  The Kremlin, or ancient palace of the great dukes, was not built till the

14th century; of such modern date are cities in this part of the world. This

palace was built by Italian architects, as were several churches in the Gothic

taste which then prevailed throughout all Europe. There are two built by the

famous Aristotle, of Bologna, who flourished in the 15th century; but the

private houses were no better than wooden huts.

  The first writer who brought us acquainted with Moscow, was Olearius;

who, in 1633, went thither as the companion of an embassy from the duke of

Holstein. A native of Holstein must naturally be struck with wonder at the

immense extent of the city of Moscow, with its five quarters, especially the

magnificent one belonging to the czars, and with the Asiatic splendour which

then reigned at that court. There was nothing equal to it in Germany at that

time, nor any city by far so extensive or well peopled.

  On the contrary, the earl of Carlisle, who was ambassador from Charles II.

to the czar Alexis, in 1633, complains in his relation that he could not meet

with  any  one  convenience  of  life  in  Moscow;  no  inns  on  the  road,  nor

refreshments  of  any  kind.  One  judged  as  a  German,  the  other  as  an

Englishman, and both by comparison. The Englishman was shocked to seemost of the Boyards or Muscovite noblemen, sleep upon boards or benches,

with only the skins of animals under them; but this was the ancient practice

of all nations. The houses, which were almost all built of wood, had scarcely

any furniture, few or none of their tables were covered with cloth; there was

no pavement in the streets; nothing agreeable; nothing convenient; very few

artificers, and those few extremely awkward, and employed only in works of

absolute necessity. These people might have passed for Spartans, had they

been sober.

  But,  on  public  days,  the  court  displays  all  the  splendour  of  a  Persian

monarch. The earl says, he could see nothing but gold and precious stones on

the robes of the czar and his courtiers. These dresses were not manufactured

in  the  country;  and  yet,  it  is  evident,  that  the  people  might  be  rendered

industrious long before that time. In the reign of the czar Boris Godonow, the

largest bell was cast at Moscow, in Europe; and in the patriarchal church

there were several ornaments in silver, worked in a very curious manner.

These  pieces  of  workmanship,  which  were  made  under  the  direction  of

Germans and Italians, were only transient efforts. It is daily industry, and the

continual exercise of a great number of arts, that makes a nation flourishing.

Poland, and the neighbouring nations, were at that time very little superior to

the Russians. The handicraft trades were not in greater perfection in the north

of Germany, nor were the polite arts much better known, than in the middle

of the seventeenth century.

  Though the city of Moscow, at that time, had neither the magnificence nor

arts of our great cities in Europe, yet its circumference of twenty miles; the

part called the Chinese town, where all the rarities of China are exhibited; the

spacious quarter of the Kremlin, where stood the palace of the czars; the

gilded domes, the lofty and conspicuous turrets; and, lastly, the prodigious

number  of  its  inhabitants,  amounting  to  near  500,000.  All  this  together,

rendered Moscow one of the most considerable cities in the world.

  Theodore, or Fœdor, eldest brother to Peter the Great, began to improve

Moscow. He ordered several large houses to be built of stone, though without

any regular architecture. He encouraged the principal persons of his court to

build, advancing them sums of money, and furnishing them with materials.

He was the first who collected studs of fine horses, and made several useful

embellishments.  Peter,  who  was  attentive  to  every  thing,  did  not  neglectMoscow at the time he was building Petersburg; for he caused it to be paved,

adorned it with noble edifices, and enriched it with manufactures; and, within

these  few  years,  M.  de  Showalow,  high  chamberlain  to  the  empress

Elizabeth, daughter to Peter the Great, has founded an university in this city.

This is the same person who furnished me with the memorials, from which I

have compiled the present history, and who was himself much more capable

to  have  done  it,  even  in  the  French  language,  had  not  his  great  modesty

determined him to resign the task to me, as will evidently appear from his

own letters on this subject, which I have deposited in the public library of

Geneva.


    SMOLENSKO.


  Westward of the duchy of Moscow, is that of Smolensko, a part of the

ancient Sarmatia Europea. The duchies of Moscow and Smolensko composed

what is properly called White Russia. Smolensko, which at first belonged to

the great dukes of Russia, was conquered by the great duke of Lithuania, in

the beginning of the fifteenth century, and was retaken one hundred years

afterwards by its old masters. Sigismund III. king of Poland, got possession

of it in 1611. The czar Alexis, father of Peter I. recovered it again in 1654,

since which time it has always constituted part of the Russian empire. The

panegyric of Peter the Great, pronounced in the academy of sciences at Paris,

takes notice, that before his time the Russians had made no conquests either

to the west or south; but this is evidently a mistake.

  Of the Governments of NOVOGOROD and KIOW, or the UKRAINE.

  Between Petersburg and Smolensko, lies the province of Novogorod;[8]

and is said to be the country in which the ancient Slavi, or Sclavonians, made

their first settlements. But from whence came these Slavi, whose language

has spread over all the north-east part of Europe? Sla signifies a chief, and

slave one belonging to a chief. All that we know concerning these ancient

Slaves is, that they were a race of conquerors; that they built the city of

Novogorod the Great, at the head of a navigable river; and that this city was

for a long time in possession of a flourishing trade, and was a potent ally to

the Hanse Towns. Czar Iwan Wassiliawitsch (or John Basilowitz) made aconquest of it in 1467, and carried away all its riches, which contributed to

the magnificence of the court of Moscow, till then almost unknown.

  To the south of the province of Smolensko, we meet with the province of

Kiow,  otherwise  called  the  Lesser  Russia,  Red  Russia,  or  the  Ukraine,

through which runs the Dnieper, called by the Greeks the Boristhenes. The

difference of these two names, the one so harsh to pronounce, and the other

so melodious, served to shew us, together with a hundred other like instances,

the rudeness of all the ancient people of the North, in comparison with the

graces of the Greek language. Kiow, the capital city, formerly Kisow, was

built by the emperors of Constantinople, who made it a colony: here are still

to be seen several Greek inscriptions upwards of twelve hundred years old.

This is the only city of any antiquity in these countries, where men lived so

long  together  without  building  walls.  Here  it  was  that  the  great  dukes  of

Russia held their residence in the eleventh century, before the Tartars brought

it under their subjection.

  The  inhabitants  of  the  Ukraine,  called  Cossacks,  are  a  mixture  of  the

ancient Roxolanians, Sarmatians, and Tartars, blended together. Rome and

Constantinople,  though  so  long  the  mistress  of  other  nations,  are  not  to

compare in fertility of country with the Ukraine. Nature has there exerted her

utmost efforts for the service of mankind; but they have not seconded those

efforts  by  industry,  living  only  upon  the  spontaneous  productions  of  an

uncultivated, but fruitful soil, and the exercise of rapine. Though fond, to a

degree of enthusiasm, of that most valuable of all blessings, liberty; yet they

were always in subjection, either to the Poles or to the Turks, till the year

1654, when they threw themselves into the arms of Russia, but with some

limitations. At length they were entirely subdued by Peter the Great.

  Other nations are divided into cities and towns; this into ten regiments. At

the head of which is a chief, who used to be elected by a majority of votes,

and is called by the name of Hetman, or Itman. This captain of the nation was

not invested with supreme power. At present the itman is a person nominated

by the czar, from among the great lords of the court; and is, in fact, no more

that the governor of the province, like governors of the pays d'etats in France,

that have retained some privileges.

  At  first  the  inhabitants  of  this  country  were  all  either  Pagans  orMahometans; but, when they entered into the service of Poland, they were

baptized Christians of the Roman communion; and now, that they are in the

service of Russia, they belong to the Greek church.

  Amongst these are comprehended the Zaporavian Cossacks, who are much

the  same  as  our  Bucaniers,  or  freebooters,  living  upon  rapine.  They  are

distinguished from all other people, by never admitting women to live among

them; as the Amazons are said never to have admitted any man. The women,

whom they make use of for propagation, live upon other islands on the river;

they have no marriages amongst them, nor any domestic economy; they inroll

the  male  children  in  their  militia,  and  leave  the  girls  to  the  care  of  their

mothers. A brother has frequently children by his sister, and a father by his

daughter. They know no other laws than customs, introduced by necessity:

however,  they  make  use  of  some  prayers  from  the  Greek  ritual.  Fort  St.

Elizabeth has been lately built on the Boristhenes, to keep them in awe. They

serve as irregulars in the Russian armies, and hapless is the fate of those who

fall into their hands.

  Of the Governments of BELGOROD, WORONITZ, and NISCHGOROD.

  To the north-east of the province of Kiow, between the Boristhenes and

the Tanais, or Don, is the government of Belgorod, which is as large as that

of Kiow. This is one of the most fruitful provinces of Russia, and furnishes

Poland with a prodigious number of that large cattle known by the name of

Ukraine oxen. These two provinces are secured from the incursions of the

petty Tartar tribes, by lines extending from the Boristhenes to the Tanais, and

well furnished with forts and redoubts.

  Farther northward we cross the Tanais, and come into the government of

Worownitz,  or  Veronise,  which  extends  as  far  as  the  banks  of  the  Palus

Mæotis. In the neighbourhood of the capital of this province, which is called,

by the Russians, Woronestch, at the mouth of the river of the same name,

which falls into the Don, Peter the Great built his first fleet; an undertaking

which  was  at  that  time  entirely  new  to  the  inhabitants  of  these  vast

dominions. From thence we come to the government

  of Nischgorod, abounding with grain, and is watered by the river Wolga.


  ASTRACAN.  From  the  latter  province  we  proceed  southward  to  the  kingdom  of

Astracan.  This  country  reaches  from  forty-three  and  a  half  degrees  north

latitude (in a most delightful climate) to near fifty, including about as many

degrees of longitude as of latitude. It is bounded on one side by the Caspian

Sea, and on the other by the mountains of Circassia, projecting beyond the

Caspian, along mount Caucasus. It is watered by the great river Wolga, the

Jaick,  and  several  other  lesser  streams,  between  which,  according  to  Mr.

Perry,  the  English  engineer,  canals  might  be  cut,  that  would  serve  as

reservoirs to receive the overflowing of the waters; and by that means answer

the same purposes as the canals of the Nile, and make the soil more fruitful:

but  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  Wolga  and  Jaick,  this  fine  country  was

inhabited,  or  rather  infested,  by  Tartars,  who  never  apply  themselves  to

agriculture, but have always lived as strangers and sojourners upon the face

of the earth.

  The above named engineer, Perry, who was employed by Peter the Great

in these parts, found a vast track of land covered with pasture, leguminous

plants, cherry and almond trees, and large flocks of wild sheep, who fed in

these solitary places, and whose flesh was excellent. The inhabitants of these

countries must be conquered and civilized, in order to second the efforts of

nature, who has been forced in the climate of Petersburg.

  The kingdom of Astracan is a part of the ancient Capshak, conquered by

Gengis-Khan, and afterwards by Tamerlane, whose dominion extended as far

as Moscow. The czar, John Basilides, grandson of John Basilowitz, and the

greatest conqueror of all the Russian princes, delivered his country from the

Tartarian yoke, in the sixteenth century, and added the kingdom of Astracan

to his other conquests, in 1554.

  Astracan is the boundary of Asia and Europe, and is so situated as to be

able to carry on a trade with both; as merchandizes may be conveyed from

the Caspian Sea, up to this town, by means of the Wolga. This was one of the

grand schemes of Peter the Great, and has been partly carried into execution.

An entire suburb of Astracan is inhabited by Indians.

    OREMBURG.

  To the south-east of the kingdom of Astracan, is a small country, newlyplanted, called Oremburg. The town of this name was built in the year 1734,

on the banks of the river Jaick. This province is thick covered with hills, that

are parts of Mount Caucasus. The passes in these mountains, and of the rivers

that run down from them, are defended by forts raised at equal distances. In

this region, formerly uninhabited, the Persians come at present, to hide from

the rapacity of robbers, such of their effects as have escaped the fury of the

civil wars. The city of Oremburg is become the asylum of the Persians and

their riches, and is grown considerable by their calamities. The natives of

Great Bukari come hither to trade, so that it is become the mart of Asia.

  Of the Government of CASAN, and of GREAT PERMIA.

  Beyond  the  Wolga  and  Jaick,  towards  the  north,  lies  the  kingdom  of

Casan, which, like that of Astracan, fell by partition to one of the sons of

Gengis  Khan,  and  afterwards  to  a  son  of  Tamerlane,  and  was  at  length

conquered by John Basilides. It is still inhabited by a number of Mahometan

Tartars. This vast country stretches as far as Siberia; it is allowed to have

been formerly very flourishing and rich, and still retains some part of its

pristine opulence. A province of this kingdom, called Great Permia, and since

Solikam,  was  the  staple  for  the  merchandizes  of  Persia,  and  the  furs  of

Tartary. There has been found in Permia a great quantity of the coin of the

first  Caliphs,  and  some  Tartarian  idols,  made  of  gold;[9]  but  these

monuments of ancient opulence were found in the midst of barren deserts and

extreme  poverty,  where  there  were  not  the  least  traces  of  commerce:

revolutions of this nature may easily happen to a barren country, seeing they

are so soon brought about in the most fruitful provinces.

  The  famous  Swedish  prisoner,  Strahlemberg,  who  made  such

advantageous  use  of  his  misfortunes,  and  who  examined  those  extensive

countries with so much attention, was the first who gave an air of probability

to  a  fact,  which  before  had  been  always  thought  incredible;  namely,

concerning the ancient commerce of these provinces. Pliny and Pomponius

Mela relate, that, in the reign of Augustus, a king of the Suevi made a present

to Metellus Celer of some Indians who had been cast by a storm upon the

coasts bordering on the Elbe. But how could inhabitants of India navigate the

Germanic seas? This adventure was deemed fabulous by all our moderns,

especially after the change made in the commerce of our hemisphere by the

discovery  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  But  formerly  it  was  no  moreextraordinary to see an Indian trading to the parts to the north west of his

country,  than  to  see  a  Roman  go  from  India  by  the  way  of  Arabia.  The

Indians  went  to  Persia,  and  thence  embarked  on  the  Hyrcanian  Sea,  and

ascending the Rha, now the Wolga, got to Great Permia through the river

Kama; from whence they might take shipping again on the Black Sea, or the

Baltic. They have, in all times, been enterprising men. The Tyrians undertook

most surprising voyages.

  If after surveying all these vast provinces, we direct our view towards the

east, we shall find the limits of Europe and Asia again confounded. A new

name is wanting for a considerable part of the globe. The ancients divided

their known world into Europe, Asia, and Africa: but they had not seen the

tenth part of it: hence it happens, that when we pass the Palus Mæotis we are

at a loss to know where Europe ends, or Asia begins; all that tract of country

lying beyond mount Taurus was distinguished by the general appellation of

Scythia, and afterwards by that of Tartary. It might not be improper, perhaps,

to  give  the  name  of  Terræ  Arcticæ,  or  Northern  Lands,  to  the  country

extending from the Baltic Sea to the confines of China; as that of Terræ

Australes, or Southern Lands, are to that equally extensive part of the world,

situated under the Antarctic Pole, and which serves to counterpoise the globe.

  Of the Governments of SIBERIA, of the SAMOJEDES, the OSTIAKS

KAMTSHATKA, &c.

  Siberia, with the territories beyond it, extends from the frontiers of the

provinces of Archangel, Casan, and Astracan, eastward as far as the sea of

Japan:  it  joined  the  southern  parts  of  Russia  by  Mount  Caucasus;  from

thence, to the country of Kamtshatka, is about one thousand two hundred

computed French leagues; and from southern Tartary, which serves as its

boundary, to the Frozen Sea, about four hundred, which is the least breadth of

the  Russian  empire.  This  country  produces  the  richest  furs;  and  this

occasioned the discovery of it in the year 1563.

  In the sixteenth century, in the reign of the czar, John Basilides, and not in

that  of  Fœdor  Johannowitz,  a  private  person  in  the  neighbourhood  of

Archangel,  named  Anika,  one  tolerably  rich  for  his  condition  of  life  and

country, took notice that certain men of an extraordinary figure, and dressed

in a manner unknown to that country, and who spoke a language understoodby none but themselves, came every year down a river which falls into the

Dwina,[10]  and  brought  martens  and  black  foxes,  which  they  trucked  for

nails  and  pieces  of  glass;  just  as  the  first  savages  of  America  used  to

exchange their gold with the Spaniards: he caused them to be followed by his

sons and servants, as far as their own country. These were the Samojedes, a

people who seem to resemble the Laplanders, but are of a different race. They

are, like that people, unacquainted with the use of bread; and like them, they

yoke rein-deer to draw their sledges. They live in caverns and huts, amidst

the  snow;[11]  but  in  other  respects,  nature  has  made  a  visible  difference

between this species of men and the Laplanders. Their upper jaw projects

forward, so as to be on a level with their nose, and their ears are placed

higher. Both the men and women have no hair in any other part of their

bodies, but their heads; and their nipple is of a deep black, like ebony. The

Lapland men and women are distinguished by no such marks. By memoirs

sent  from  these  countries  so  little  known,  I  have  been  informed,  that  the

author of the curious natural history of the king's garden, is mistaken, where,

in  speaking  of  the  many  curiosities  of  human  nature,  he  confounds  the

Lapland  race  with  that  of  the  Samojedes.  There  are  many  more  different

species  of  men  than  is  commonly  thought.  The  Samojedes,  and  the

Hottentots, seem to be the two extremes of our continent; and if we observe

the black nipples of the Samojedian women, and the apron with which nature

has furnished the Hottentot females, and which hangs half way down their

thighs, we may have some idea of the great variety of our animal species, a

variety unknown to those inhabiting great cities, who are generally strangers

to almost every thing that is not immediately within their view.

  The  Samojedes  are  as  singular  in  their  moral  as  in  their  physical

distinctions; they pay no worship to the Supreme Being; they border upon

Manicheism, or rather upon the religion of the ancient Magi in this one point,

that they acknowledge a good and an evil principle. The horrible climate they

inhabit may in some measure excuse this belief, which is of such ancient

date, and so natural to those who are ignorant and unhappy.

  Theft,  or  murder,  is  never  heard  of  amongst  them;  being  in  a  manner

devoid of passions, they are strangers to injustice; they have no terms in their

language  to  denote  vice  and  virtue,  their  extreme  simplicity  has  not  yet

permitted them to form abstract ideas, they are wholly guided by pensation,and this is perhaps an incontestable proof that men naturally love justice,

when not blinded by inordinate passions.

  Some of these savages were prevailed on to suffer themselves to be carried

to Moscow, where many things they saw struck them with admiration. They

gazed upon the emperor as their god, and voluntarily engaged for themselves

and countrymen a present of two martens, or sables, every year for each

inhabitant. Colonies were soon settled beyond the Oby,[12] and the Irtis,[13]

and some forts built. In the year 1595, a Cossack officer was sent into this

country, who conquered it for the czar with only a few soldiers and some

artillery,  as  Cortez  did  Mexico;  but  he  only  made  a  conquest  of  barren

deserts.

  In sailing up the Oby to the junction of the river Irtis with the Tobol, they

found a petty settlement, which they converted into the town of Tobol,[14]

now the capital of Siberia, and a considerable place. Who could imagine that

this country was for a long time the residence of those very Huns, who under

Attila carried their depredations as far as the gates of Rome, and that these

Huns  came  from  the  north  of  China?  The  Usbeck  Tartars  succeeded  the

Huns,  and  the  Russians  the  Usbecks.  The  possession  of  these  savage

countries has been disputed with as much murderous fury, as that of the most

fruitful provinces. Siberia was formerly better peopled than it is at present,

especially towards the southern parts; if we may judge from the rivers and

sepulchral monuments.

  All  this  part  of  the  world,  from  the  sixtieth  degree  of  latitude,  or

thereabouts, as far as those mountains of perpetual ice which border the north

seas, is totally different from the regions of the temperate zone, the earth

produces neither the same plants, nor the same animals, nor are there the

same sort of fishes in their lakes and rivers.

  Below the country of the Samojedes lies that of the Ostiaks, along the

river  Oby.  These  people  have  no  resemblance  in  any  respect  with  the

Samojedes, save that like them and all the first race of men, they are hunters,

fishermen, and shepherds; some of them have no religion, not being formed

into any society, and the others who live together in herds or clans, have a

kind of worship, and pray to the principal object of their wants; they adore

the skin of a sheep, because this creature is of all others the most serviceableto  them;  just  as  the  Egyptian  husbandmen  made  choice  of  an  ox,  as  an

emblem of the Deity who created that creature for the use of man.

  The Ostiaks have likewise other idols, whose origin and worship are as

little deserving our notice as their worshippers. There were some converts to

Christianity made amongst them in the year 1712; but these, like the lowest

of our peasants, are Christians without knowing what they profess. Several

writers pretend that these people were natives of Great Permia, but as Great

Permia is in a manner a desert, how comes it that its inhabitants should settle

themselves at such a distance, and so inconveniently? This is a difficulty not

worth  clearing  up.  Every  nation  which  has  not  cultivated  the  polite  arts,

deserves to remain in obscurity.

  In the country of the Ostiaks in particular, and amongst their neighbours

the Burates and Jakutians, they often discover a kind of ivory under ground,

the nature of which is as yet unknown. Some take it to be a sort of fossil, and

others  the  tooth  of  a  species  of  elephants,  the  breed  of  which  have  been

destroyed:  but  where  is  the  country  that  does  not  afford  some  natural

productions, which at once astonish and confound philosophy.

  Several mountains in this country abound with the amianthes or asbestos,

a kind of incombustible flax, of which a sort of cloth and paper is sometimes

made.

  To the south of the Ostiaks are the Burates, another people, who have not

yet  been  made  Christians.  Eastward  there  are  several  hordes,  whom  the

Russians have not as yet entirely subdued.

  None  of  these  people  have  the  least  knowledge  of  the  calendar:  they

reckon their time by snows, and not by the apparent motion of the sun: as it

snows regularly, and for a long time every winter, they say, 'I am so many

snows old,' just as we say, I am so many years.

  And  here  I  must  relate  the  accounts  given  by  the  Swedish  officer

Strahlemberg, who was taken prisoner in the battle of Pultowa, and lived

fifteen years in Siberia, and made the entire tour of that country. He says, that

there are still some remains of an ancient people, whose skin is spotted or

variegated with different colours, and that he himself had seen some of them,

and the fact has been confirmed to me by Russians born at Tobolsky. The

variety of the human species seems to be greatly diminished, as we find veryfew of these extraordinary people, and they have probably been exterminated

by some other race: for instance there are very few Albinos, or White Moors;

one of them was presented to the academy of sciences at Paris, which I saw.

It is the same with respect to several other species of animals which are rare.

  As  to  the  Borandians,  of  whom  mention  is  made  so  frequently  in  the

learned history of the king's garden, my memoirs say, that this race of people

is entirely unknown to the Russians.

  All the southern part of these countries is peopled by numerous hordes of

Tartars. The ancient Turks came from this part of Tartary to conquer these

extensive countries, of which they are at present in possession. The Calmucs

and Monguls are the very Scythians who, under Madies, made themselves

masters of Upper Asia, and conquered Cyaxares, king of the Medes. They are

the men, whom Gengis Khan and his sons led afterwards as far as Germany,

and was termed the Mogul empire under Tamerlane. These people afford a

lively instance of the vicissitudes which have happened to all nations; some

of their hordes, so far from being formidable now, are become vassals to

Russia.

  Among these is a nation of Calmucs, dwelling between Siberia and the

Caspian Sea, where, in the year 1720, there was discovered a subterraneous

house of stone, with urns, lamps, earrings, an equestrian statue of an oriental

prince, with a diadem on his head, two women seated on thrones, and a roll

of  manuscripts,  which  were  sent  by  Peter  the  Great  to  the  academy  of

inscriptions at Paris, and proved to be written in the Thibet language: all

these are striking proofs, that the liberal arts formerly resided in this now

barbarous country, and are lasting evidences of the truth of what Peter the

Great was wont several times to say, viz. that the arts had made the tour of

the globe.

  The last province is Kamtshatka, the most eastern part of the continent.

The  inhabitants  were  absolutely  void  of  all  religion  when  they  were  first

discovered. The north part of this country likewise affords fine furs, with

which the inhabitants clothed themselves in winter, though they went naked

all the summer season. The first discoverers were surprised to find in the

southern parts men with long beards, while in the northern parts, from the

country of the Samojedes, as far as the mouth of the river Amur, they have nomore beards than the Americans. Thus, in the empire of Russia, there is a

greater number of different species, more singularities, and a greater diversity

of manners and customs, than in any country in the known world.

  The first discovery of this country was made by a Cossack officer, who

went by land from Siberia to Kamtshatka, in 1701, by order of Peter the

Great, who, notwithstanding his misfortune at Narva, still continued to extend

his care from one extremity of the continent to the other. Afterwards, in 1725,

some time before death surprised him, in the midst of his great exploits, he

sent Captain Bering, a Dane, with express orders to find out, if possible, a

passage by the sea of Kamtshatka, to the coast of America. Bering did not

succeed in his first attempt; but the empress Anne sent him out again in 1733.

M. Spengenberg, captain of a ship, his associate in this voyage, set out the

first from Kamtshatka, but could not put to sea till the year 1739, so much

time  was  taken  up  in  getting  to  the  port  where  they  were  to  embark,  in

building and fitting out the ships, and providing the necessaries. Spengenberg

sailed as far as the north part of Japan, through a streight, formed by a long

chain of islands, and returned without having discovered the passage.

  In 1741, Bering cruised all over this sea, in company with De Lisle de la

Croyere, the astronomer, of the same family of L'Isle, which has produced

such  excellent  geographers:  another  captain  likewise  went  upon  the  same

discovery.  They  both  made  the  coast  of  America,  to  the  northward  of

California. Thus the north-east passage, so long sought after, was at length

discovered, but there were no refreshments to be met with in those barren

coasts. Their fresh water failed them, and part of the crew perished with the

scurvy. They saw the northern bank of California for above a hundred miles,

and saw some leathern canoes, with just such a sort of people in them as the

Canadians. All their endeavours however proved fruitless: Bering ended his

life in an island, to which he gave his name. The other captain, happening to

be closer in with the Californian coast, sent ten of his people on shore, who

never returned. The captain, after waiting for them in vain, found himself

obliged to return back to Kamtshatka, and De Lisle died as he was going on

shore. Such are the disasters that have generally attended every new attempt

upon  the  northern  seas.  But  what  advantages  may  yet  arise  from  these

powerful and dangerous discoveries, time alone can prove.

  We  have  now  described  all  the  different  provinces  that  compose  theRussian dominions, from Finland to the sea of Japan. The largest parts of this

empire have been all united at different times, as has been the case in all other

kingdoms  in  the  world.  The  Scythians,  Huns,  Massagetes,  Slavians,

Cimbrians,  Getes,  and  Sarmatians,  are  now  subjects  of  the  czar.  The

Russians, properly so called, are the ancient Roxolani or Slavi.

  Upon reflection, we shall find that most states were formed in the same

manner. The French are an assemblage of Goths, of Danes called Normands,

of  northern  Germans,  called  Burgundians;  of  Franks,  Allmans,  and  some

Romans, mixed with the ancient Celtæ. In Rome and Italy there are several

families descended from the people of the North, but none that we know of

from the ancient Romans. The supreme pontiff is frequently the offspring of a

Lombard,  a  Goth,  a  Teuton,  or  a  Cimbrian.  The  Spaniards  are  a  race  of

Arabs, Carthaginians, Jews, Tyrians, Visigoths, and Vandals, incorporated

with the ancient inhabitants of the country. When nations are thus intermixed,

it is a long time before they are civilized, or even before their language is

formed.  Some,  indeed,  receive  these  sooner,  others  later.  Polity  and  the

liberal arts are so difficult to establish, and the new raised structure is so often

destroyed  by  revolutions,  that  we  may  wonder  all  nations  are  not  so

barbarous as Tartars.


  CHAPTER II.

  Continuation of the description of Russia, population, finances, armies,

customs, religion: state of Russia before Peter the Great.


  The more civilized a country is, the better it is peopled. Thus China and

India are more populous than any other empires, because, after a multitude of

revolutions, which changed the face of sublunary affairs, these two nations

made  the  earliest  establishments  in  civil  society:  the  antiquity  of  their

government, which has subsisted upwards of four thousand years, supposes,

as we have already observed, many essays and efforts in preceding ages. The

Russians came very late; but the arts having been introduced amongst them in

their full perfection, it has happened, that they have made more progress in

fifty years, than any other nation had done before them in five hundred. The

country is far from being populous, in proportion to its extent; but, such as itis, it has as great a number of inhabitants as any other state in Christendom.

From the capitation lists, and the register of merchants, artificers, and male

peasants,  I  might  safely  assert,  that  Russia,  at  present,  contains  at  least

twenty-four millions of male inhabitants: of these twenty-four millions, the

greatest  part  are  villains  or  bondmen,  as  in  Poland,  several  provinces  of

Germany, and formerly throughout all Europe. The estate of a gentleman in

Russia and Poland is computed, not by his increase in money, but by the

number of his slaves.

  The  following  is  a  list,  taken  in  1747,  of  all  the  males  who  paid  the

capitation or poll-tax:-


  Merchants or tradesmen


  198000

  Handicrafts


  16500

  Peasants incorporated with the merchants and handicrafts


  1950

  Peasants called Odonoskis, who contribute to maintain the militia


  430220

  Others who do not contribute thereto


  26080

  Workmen of different trades, whose parents are not known


  1000

  Others who are not incorporated with the companies of tradesmen  4700

  Peasants immediately dependent on the crown, about


  555000

  Persons employed in the mines belonging to the crown, partly Christians,

partly Mahometans and Pagans


  64000

  Other peasants belonging to the crown, who work in the mines, and in

private manufactories


  24200

  New converts to the Greek church


  57000

  Tartars and Ostiaks (peasants)


  241000

  Mourses,  Tartars,  Mordauts,  and  others,  whether  Pagans  or  Christians,

employed by the admiralty


  7800

  Tartars subject to contribution, called Tepteris, Bobilitz, &c.


  28900

  Bondmen to several merchants, and other privileged persons, who though

not landholders, are allowed to have slaves


  9100

  Peasants in the lands set apart for the support of the crown  418000

  Peasants on the lands belonging to her majesty, independently of the rights

of the crown


  60500

  Peasants on the lands confiscated to the crown


  13600

  Bondmen belonging to the assembly of the clergy, and who defray other

expenses


  37500

  Bondmen belonging to gentlemen


  3550000

  Bondmen belonging to bishops


  116400

  Bondmen belonging to convents, whose numbers were reduced by Peter

the Great


  721500

  Bondmen belonging to cathedral and parish churches


  23700

  Peasants employed as labourers in the docks of the admiralty, or in other

public works, about


  4000  Labourers in the mines, and in private manufactures


  16000

  Peasants on the lands assigned to the principal manufactures


  14500

  Labourers in the mines belonging to the crown


  3000

  Bastards brought up by the clergy


  40

  Sectaries called Raskolniky


  2200

  Total


  6646390


  Here  we  have  a  round  number  of  six  millions  six  hundred  forty-six

thousand three hundred and ninety male persons, who pay the poll-tax. In this

number  are  included  boys  and  old  men,  but  girls  and  women  are  not

reckoned, nor boys born between the making of one register of the lands and

another. Now, if we only reckon triple the number of heads subject to be

taxed, including women and girls, we shall find near twenty millions of souls.

  To  this  number  we  may  add  the  military  list,  which  amounts  to  three

hundred and fifty thousand men: besides, neither the nobility nor clergy, who

are computed at two hundred thousand, are subject to this capitation.

  Foreigners, of whatever country or profession, are likewise exempt: as

also the inhabitants of the conquered countries, namely, Livonia, Esthonia,

Ingria, Carelia, and a part of Finland, the Ukraine, and the Don Cossacks, theCalmucks, and other Tartars, Samojedes, the Laplanders, the Ostiaks, and all

the idolatrous people of Siberia, a country of greater extent than China.

  By the same calculation, it is impossible that the total of the inhabitants of

Russia should amount to less than twenty-four millions. At this rate, there are

eight persons to every square mile. The English ambassador, whom I have

mentioned before, allows only five; but he certainly was not furnished with

such faithful memoirs as those with which I have been favoured.

  Russia  therefore  is  exactly  five  times  less  populous  than  Spain,  but

contains near four times the number of inhabitants: it is almost as populous as

France or Germany; but, if we consider its vast extent, the number of souls is

thirty times less.

  There is one important remark to be made in regard to this enumeration,

namely, that out of six million six hundred and forty thousand people liable

to  the  poll-tax,  there  are  about  nine  hundred  thousand  that  belong  to  the

Russian clergy, without reckoning either the ecclesiastics of the conquered

countries, of the Ukraine, or of Siberia.

  Therefore, out of seven persons liable to the poll-tax, the clergy have one;

but, nevertheless, they are far from possessing the seventh part of the whole

revenues of the state, as is the case in many other kingdoms, where they have

at least a seventh of all estates; for their peasants pay a capitation to the

sovereign; and the other taxes of the crown of Russia, in which the clergy

have no share, are very considerable.

  This valuation is very different from that of all other writers, on the affairs

of Russia; so that foreign ministers, who have transmitted memoirs of this

state to their courts, have been greatly mistaken. The archives of the empire

are the only things to be consulted.

  It is very probable, that Russia has been better peopled than it is at present;

before the small-pox, that came from the extremities of Arabia, and the great-

pox that came from America, had spread over these climates, where they

have now taken root. The world owes these two dreadful scourges, which

have depopulated it more than all its wars, the one to Mahomet, and the other

to Christopher Columbus. The plague, which is a native of Africa, seldom

approached the countries of the North: besides, the people of those countries,

from  Sarmatia  to  the  Tartars,  who  dwell  beyond  the  great  wall,  havingoverspread the world by their irruptions, this ancient nursery of the human

species must have been surprisingly diminished.

  In  this  vast  extent  of  country,  there  are  said  to  be  about  seventy-four

thousand monks, and five thousand nuns, notwithstanding the care taken by

Peter the Great to reduce their number; a care worthy the legislator of an

empire  where  the  human  race  is  so  remarkably  deficient.  These  thirteen

thousand persons, thus immured and lost to the state, have, as the reader may

have observed, seventy-two thousand bondmen to till their lands, which is

evidently too great a number: there cannot be a stronger proof how difficult it

is to eradicate abuses of a long standing.

  I find, by a list of the revenues of the empire in 1735, that reckoning the

tribute paid by the Tartars, with all taxes and duties in money, the sum total

amounted to thirteen millions of rubles, which makes sixty-five millions of

French livres, exclusive of tributes in kind. This moderate sum was at that

time  sufficient  to  maintain  three  hundred  and  thirty-nine  thousand  five

hundred, as well sea as land forces: but both the revenues and troops are

augmented since that time.

  The  customs,  diets,  and  manners  of  the  Russians,  ever  bore  a  greater

affinity to those of Asia than to those of Europe: such was the old custom of

receiving tributes in kind, of defraying the expenses of ambassadors on their

journeys, and during their residence in the country, and of never appearing at

church, or in the royal presence with a sword; an oriental custom, directly the

reverse  of  that  ridiculous  and  barbarous  one  amongst  us,  of  addressing

ourselves to God, to our king, to our friends, and to our women, with an

offensive weapon, which hangs down to the bottom of the leg. The long robe

worn on public days, had a more noble air than the short habits of the western

nations of Europe. A vest lined and turned up with fur, with a long scimar,

adorned with jewels for festival days; and those high turbans, which add to

the stature, were much more striking to the eye than our perukes and close

coats, and more suitable to cold climates; but this ancient dress of all nations

seems to be not so well contrived for war, nor so convenient for working

people. Most of their other customs were rustic; but we must not imagine,

that their manners were so barbarous as some writers would have us believe.

Albert Krants relates a story of an Italian ambassador, whom the czar ordered

to have his hat nailed to his head, for not pulling it off while he was makinghis speech to him. Others attribute this adventure to a Tartar, and others again

to a French ambassador.

  Olearius  pretends,  that  the  czar  Michael  Theodorowitz,  banished  the

marquis of Exideüil, ambassador from Henry IV. of France, into Siberia; but

it is certain, that this monarch sent no ambassador to Moscow, and that there

never was a marquis of Exideüil in France. In the same manner do travellers

speak about the country of Borandia, and of the trade they have carried on

with the people of Nova Zémbla, which is scarcely inhabited at all, and the

long conversations they have had with some of the Samojedes, as if they

understood their language. Were the enormous compilations of voyages to be

cleared of every thing that is not true nor useful in them, both the works and

the public would be gainers by it.

  The Russian government resembled that of the Turks, in respect to the

standing  forces,  or  guards,  called  Strelitzes,  who,  like  the  janissaries,

sometimes disposed of the crown, and frequently disturbed the state as much

as they defended it. Their number was about forty thousand. Those who were

dispersed in the provinces, subsisted by rapine and plunder; those in Moscow

lived like citizens, followed trades, did no duty, and carried their insolence to

the greatest excess: in short, there was no other way to preserve peace and

good order in the kingdom, but by breaking them; a very necessary, and at

the same time a very dangerous step.

  The  public  revenues  did  not  exceed  five  millions  of  rubles,  or  about

twenty-five millions of French livres. This was sufficient when czar Peter

came to the crown to maintain the ancient mediocrity, but was not a third part

of what was necessary to go certain lengths, and to render himself and people

considerable in Europe: but at the same time many of their taxes were paid in

kind,  according  to  the  Turkish  custom,  which  is  less  burthensome  to  the

people than that of paying their tributes in money.

  OF THE TITLE OF CZAR.

  As to the title of czar, it may possibly come from the tzars or tchars of the

kingdom of Casan. When John, or Ivan Basilides, completed the conquest of

this  kingdom  in  the  sixteenth  century,  which  had  been  begun  by  his

grandfather,  who  afterwards  lost  it,  he  assumed  this  title,  which  his

successors have retained ever since. Before John Basilides, the sovereign ofRussia, took the title of Welike Knez, i. e. great prince, great lord, great chief,

which the Christian nations afterwards rendered by that of great duke. Czar

Michael  Theodorowitz,  when  he  received  the  Holstein  embassy,  took  to

himself the following titles: 'Great knez, and great lord, conservator of all the

Russias, prince of Wolodomer, Moscow, Novogorod, &c. tzar of Casan, tzar

of Astracan, and tzar of Siberia.' Tzar was, therefore, a title belonging to

these eastern princes; and, therefore, it is more probable to have been derived

from the tshas of Persia, than from the Roman Cæsars, whom the Siberian

tzars, on the banks of the Oby, can hardly be supposed to have ever heard.

  No title, however pompous, is of any consequence, if those who bear it are

not  great  and  powerful  themselves.  The  word  emperor,  which  originally

signified no more than general of the army, became the title of the sovereign

of the Roman republic: it is now given to the supreme governor of all the

Russias, more justly than to any other potentate, if we consider the power and

extent of his dominions.

  RELIGION.

  The  established  religion  of  this  country  has,  ever  since  the  eleventh

century, been that of the Greek church, so called in opposition to the Latin;

though  there  were  always  a  greater  number  of  Mahometan  and  Pagan

provinces, than of those inhabited by Christians. Siberia, as far as China, was

in a state of idolatry; and, in some of the provinces, they were utter strangers

to all kind of religion.

  Perry, the engineer, and baron Strahlemberg, who both resided so many

years in Russia, tell us, that they found more sincerity and probity among the

Pagans  than  the  other  inhabitants;  not  that  paganism  made  them  more

virtuous, but their manner of living, which, was that of the primitive ages, as

they  are  called,  freed  them  from  all  the  tumultuous  passions;  and,  in

consequence, they were known for their integrity.

  Christianity did not get footing in Russia and the other countries of the

North, till very late. It is said, that a princess, named Olha, first introduced it,

about the end of the tenth century, as Clotilda, niece to an Arian prince, did

among the Franks; the wife of Miceslaus, duke of Poland, among the Poles;

and the sister of the emperor Henry II. among the Hungarians. Women are

naturally easily persuaded by the ministers of religion, and as easily persuadethe other part of mankind.

  It is further added, that the princess Olha caused herself to be baptized at

Constantinople, by the name of Helena; and that, as soon as she embraced

Christianity, the emperor John Zimisces fell in love with her. It is most likely

that she was a widow; however, she refused the emperor. The example of the

princess Olha, or Olga, as she is called, did not at first make many proselytes.

Her son,[15] who reigned a long time, was not of the same way of thinking as

his mother, but her grandson, Wolodomer, who was born of a concubine,

having murdered his brother and mounted the throne, sued for the alliance of

Basiles, emperor of Constantinople, but could obtain it only on condition of

receiving baptism: and this event, which happened in the year 987, is the

epocha when the Greek church was first established in Russia. Photius, the

patriarch, so famous for his immense erudition, his disputes with the church

of Rome, and for his misfortunes, sent a person to baptize Wolodomer, in

order to add this part of the world to the patriarchal see.[16]

  Wolodimer,  or  Wolodomer,  therefore  completed  the  work  which  his

grandmother  had  begun.  A  Greek  was  made  the  first  metropolitan,  or

patriarch of Russia; and from this time the Russians adopted an alphabet,

taken partly from the Greek. This would have been of advantage to them, had

they  not  still  retained  the  principles  of  their  own  language,  which  is  the

Sclavonian in every thing, but a few terms relating to their liturgy and church

government.  One  of  the  Greek  patriarchs,  named  Jeremiah,  having  a  suit

depending before the divan, came to Moscow to solicit it; where, after some

time, he resigned his authority over the Russian churches, and consecrated

patriarch, the archbishop of Novogorod, named Job. This was in the year

1588,  from  which  time  the  Russian  church  became  as  independent  as  its

empire.  The  patriarch  of  Russia  has  ever  since  been  consecrated  by  the

Russian bishops, and not by the patriarch of Constantinople. He ranked in the

Greek church next to the patriarch of Jerusalem, but he was in fact the only

free and powerful patriarch; and, consequently, the only real one. Those of

Jerusalem, Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, are mercenary chiefs of a

church,  enslaved  by  the  Turks;  and  even  the  patriarchs  of  Jerusalem  and

Antioch are no longer considered as such, having no more credit or influence

in Turkey, than the rabbins of the Jewish synagogues settled there.

  It was from a person who was a patriarch of all the Russias, that Peter theGreat was descended in a right line. These new prelates soon wanted to share

the sovereign authority with the czars. They thought it not enough that their

prince walked bare-headed, once a year before the patriarch, leading his horse

by the bridle. These external marks of respect only served to increase their

thirst for rule; a passion which proved the source of great troubles in Russia,

as well as in other countries.

  Nicon, a person whom the monks look upon as a saint, and who was

patriarch in the reign of Alexis, the father of Peter the Great, wanted to raise

his dignity above that of the throne; for he not only assumed the privilege of

sitting by the side of the czar in the senate, but pretended that neither war nor

peace could be made without his consent. His authority was so great, that,

being supported by his immense wealth, and by his intrigues with the clergy

and  the  people,  he  kept  his  master  in  a  kind  of  subjection.  He  had  the

boldness  to  excommunicate  some  senators  who  opposed  his  excessive

insolence; till at last, Alexis, finding himself not powerful enough to depose

him by his own authority, was obliged to convene a synod of all the bishops.

There the patriarch was accused of having received money from the Poles;

and being convicted, was deposed, and confined for the remainder of his days

in a monastery, after which the prelates chose another patriarch in his stead.

  From the first infancy of Christianity in Russia, there have been several

sects there, as well as in other countries; for sects are as frequently the fruits

of ignorance, as of pretended knowledge: but Russia is the only Christian

state of any considerable extent, in which religion has not excited civil wars,

though it has felt some occasional tumults.

  The Raskolnikys, who consist at present of about two thousand males, and

who are mentioned in the foregoing list,[17] are the most ancient sect of any

in this country. It was established in the twelfth century, by some enthusiasts,

who had a superficial knowledge of the New Testament: they made use then,

and still do, of the old pretence of all sectaries, that of following the letter,

and  accused  all  other  Christians  of  remissness.  They  would  not  permit  a

priest, who had drank brandy, to confer baptism; they affirmed, in the words

of our Saviour, that there is neither a first nor a last, among the faithful; and

held, that one of the elect might kill himself for the love of his Saviour.

According to them it is a great sin to repeat the hallelujah three times; and,

therefore, repeat it only twice. The benediction is to be given only with threefingers.  In  other  respects,  no  society  can  be  more  regular,  or  strict  in  its

morals. They live like the quakers, and, like them, do not admit any other

Christians into their assemblies, which is the reason that these have accused

them of all the abominations of which the heathens accused the primitive

Galileans: these latter, the gnostics, and with which the Roman catholics have

charged the protestants. They have been frequently accused of cutting the

throat of an infant, and drinking its blood; and of mixing together in their

private ceremonies, without distinction of kindred, age, or even of sex. They

have been persecuted at times, and then they shut themselves up in their

hamlets, set fire to their houses, and thrown themselves into the flames. Peter

took the only method of reclaiming them, which was by letting them live in

peace.

  But  to  conclude,  in  all  this  vast  empire,  there  are  but  twenty-eight

episcopal sees; and in Peter's time there were but twenty-two. This small

number was, perhaps, one of the causes to which the Russian church owes its

tranquillity. So very circumscribed was the knowledge of the clergy, that czar

Theodore, brother to Peter the Great, was the first who introduced the custom

of singing Psalms in churches.

  Theodore and Peter, especially the latter, admitted indifferently, into their

councils and their armies, those of the Greek, the Latin, the Lutheran, and the

Calvinist communion, leaving every one at liberty to serve God after his own

conscience, provided he did his duty to the state. At that time there was not

one  Latin  church  in  this  great  empire  of  two  thousand  leagues,  till  Peter

established some new manufactures at Astracan, when there were about sixty

Roman catholic families, under the direction of the capuchins; but the jesuits

endeavouring to establish themselves in his dominions, he drove them out by

an edict, published in the month of April, 1718. He tolerated the capuchins as

an  insignificant  set  of  monks,  but  considered  the  jesuits  as  dangerous

politicians.

  The  Greek  church  has  at  once  the  honour  and  satisfaction  to  see  its

communion  extended  throughout  an  empire  of  two  thousand  leagues  in

length, while that of Rome is not in possession of half that tract in Europe.

Those of the Greek communion have, at all times, been particularly attentive

to maintain an equality between theirs and the Latin church; and always upon

their guard against the zeal of the see of Rome, which they look upon asambition;  because,  in  fact,  that  church,  whose  power  is  very  much

circumscribed in our hemisphere, and yet assumes the title of universal, has

always endeavoured to act up to that title.

  The Jews never made any settlements in Russia, as they have done in most

of the other states of Europe, from Constantinople to Rome. The Russians

have carried on their trade by themselves, or by the help of the nations settled

amongst them. Theirs is the only country of the Greek communion, where

synagogues are not seen by the side of Christian temples.

  Conclusion of the State of RUSSIA before PETER the GREAT.

  Russia is indebted solely to czar Peter for its great influence in the affairs

of Europe; being of no consideration in any other reign, since it embraced

Christianity. Before this period, the Russians made the same figure on the

Black Sea, that the Normans did afterwards on the coasts of the ocean. In the

reign of the emperor Heraclius, they fitted out an armament of forty thousand

small  barks;  appeared  before  Constantinople,  which  they  besieged,  and

imposed a tribute on the Greek emperors; but the grand knez Wolodimar,

being  wholly  taken  up  with  the  care  of  establishing  Christianity  in  his

dominions, and wearied out with intestine broils in his own family, weakened

his dominions by dividing them between his children. They almost all fell a

prey to the Tartars, who held Russia in subjection near two hundred years. At

length John Basilides freed it from slavery, and enlarged its boundaries: but,

after his time, it was ruined again by civil wars.

  Before the time of Peter the Great, Russia was neither so powerful, so well

cultivated, so populous, nor so rich as at present. It had no possessions in

Finland, nor in Livonia; and this latter alone had long been worth more than

all  Siberia.  The  Cossacks  were  still  unsubjected,  nor  were  the  people  of

Astracan reduced to obedience; what little trade was carried on, was rather to

their disadvantage. The White Sea, the Baltic, the Pontus Euxinus, the sea of

Azoph, and the Caspian Sea, were entirely useless to a nation that had not a

single ship, nor even a term in their language to express a fleet. If nothing

more had been wanting but to be superior to the Tartars, and the other nations

of the north, as far as China, the Russians undoubtedly had that advantage,

but they were to be brought upon an equality with civilized nations, and to be

in  a  condition,  one  day,  of  even  surpassing  several  of  them.  Such  anundertaking appeared altogether impracticable, inasmuch as they had not a

single ship at sea, and were absolutely ignorant of military discipline by land:

nay, the most common manufactures were hardly encouraged, and agriculture

itself, that primum mobile of trade, was neglected. This requires the utmost

attention and encouragement on the part of a government; and it is to this that

the English are indebted, for finding in their corn a treasure far superior to

their woollen manufacture.

  This gross neglect of the necessary arts, sufficiently shews that the people

of Russia had no idea of the polite arts, which become necessary, in their

turn, when we have cultivated the others. They might indeed, have sent some

of  the  natives  to  gain  instruction  among  foreigners,  but  the  difference  of

languages, manners, and religion, opposed it. Besides, there was a law of

state  and  religion,  equally  sacred  and  pernicious,  which  prohibited  any

Russian from going out of his country, and thus seemed to devote this people

to  eternal  ignorance.  They  were  in  possession  of  the  most  extensive

dominions in the universe, and yet every thing was wanted amongst them. At

length Peter was born, and Russia became a civilized state.

  Happily, of all the great lawgivers who have lived in the world, Peter is

the only one whose history is well known. Those of Theseus and Romulus,

who did far less than him, and of the founders of all well-governed states, are

blended with the most absurd fictions: whereas here, we have the advantage

of  written  truths,  which  would  pass  for  fictions,  were  they  not  so  well

attested.


  CHAPTER III.

  The ancestors of Peter the Great.

  The family of Peter the Great have been in possession of the throne ever

since  the  year  1613.  Before  that  time,  Russia  had  undergone  revolutions,

which had retarded the reformation of her police, and the introduction of the

liberal arts. This has been the fate of all human societies. No kingdom ever

experienced more cruel troubles. In the year 1597, the tyrant Boris Godonow

assassinated Demetrius (or Demetri, as he was called), the lawful heir, and

usurped the empire. A young monk took the name of Demetrius, pretending

to be that prince who had escaped from his murderers; and with the assistanceof the Poles, and a considerable party (which every tyrant has against him),

he drove out the usurper, and seized the crown himself. The imposture was

discovered as soon as he came to the sovereignty, because the people were

not pleased with him; and he was murdered. Three other false Demetrius's

started up, one after another. Such a succession of impostors, supposes a

country in the utmost distraction. The less men are civilized, the more easily

they are imposed on. It may readily be conceived, how much these frauds

augmented the public confusion and misfortunes. The Poles, who had begun

the revolutions, by setting up the first false Demetrius, were on the point of

being masters of Russia. The Swedes shared in the spoils on the coast of

Finland, and laid claim to the crown. The state seemed on the verge of utter

destruction.

  In the midst of these calamities, an assembly, composed of the principal

boyards, chose for their sovereign a young man of fifteen years of age: this

happened in 1613, and did not seem a very likely method of putting an end to

these troubles. This young man was Michael Romanow,[18] grandfather to

czar Peter, and son to the archbishop of Rotow, surnamed Philaretes, and of a

nun, and related by the mother's side to the ancient czars.

  It must be observed, that this archbishop was a powerful nobleman, whom

the tyrant Boris had obliged to become priest. His wife, Scheremetow, was

likewise  compelled  to  take  the  veil;  this  was  the  ancient  custom  of  the

western tyrants of the Latin church, as that of putting out the eyes was with

the Greek Christians. The tyrant Demetrius made Philaretes archbishop of

Rostow, and sent him ambassador to Poland, where he was detained prisoner

by the Poles, who were then at war with the Russians; so little was the law of

nations  known  to  the  different  people  of  these  times.  During  his  father's

confinement,  young  Romanow  was  elected  czar.  The  archbishop  was

exchanged against some Polish prisoners; and, at his return, his son created

him patriarch, and the old man was in fact king, under his son's name.

  If such a government appears extraordinary to strangers, the marriages of

czar Michael Romanow, will seem still more so. The Russian princes had

never  intermarried  with  foreign  states  since  the  year  1490,  or  after  they

became  masters  of  Casan  and  Astracan;  they  seem  to  have  followed  the

Asiatic customs in almost every thing, and especially in that of marrying only

among their own subjects.  This  conformity  to  the  ancient  customs  of  Asia,  was  still  more

conspicuous at the ceremonies observed at the marriage of a czar. A number

of the most beautiful women in the provinces were sent for to court, where

they  were  received  by  the  grand  gouvernante  of  the  court,  who  provided

apartments for them in her own house, where they all eat together. The czar

paid them visits, sometimes incognito, and sometimes in his real character.

The wedding-day was fixed, without its being declared on whom the choice

had fallen. At the appointed time, the happy she was presented with a rich

wedding-suit, and other dresses were given to the rest of the fair candidates,

who then returned home. There have been four instances of these marriages.

  In this manner was Michael Romanow espoused to Eudocia, the daughter

of a poor gentleman, named Streschneu. He was employed in ploughing his

grounds with his servants, when the lords of the bed-chamber came to him

with presents from the czar, and to acquaint him that his daughter was placed

on the throne. The name of the princess is still held in the highest veneration

by the Russians. This custom is greatly different from ours, but not the less

respectable on that account.

  It is necessary to observe, that before Romanow was elected czar, a strong

party had made choice of prince Ladislaus, son to Sigismund III. king of

Poland. At the same time, the provinces bordering on Sweden had offered the

crown to a brother of Gustavus Adolphus: so that Russia was in the same

situation then in which we have so frequently seen Poland, where the right of

electing a king has been the source of civil wars. But the Russians did not

follow the example of the Poles, who entered into a compact with the prince

whom they elected; notwithstanding they had smarted from the oppression of

tyrants, yet they voluntarily submitted to a young man, without making any

conditions with him.

  Russia never was an elective kingdom; but the male issue of the ancient

sovereigns failing, and six czars, or pretenders, having perished miserably in

the late troubles, there was, as we have observed, a necessity for electing a

monarch; and this election occasioned fresh wars with Poland and Sweden,

who maintained, with force of arms, their pretended rights to the crown of

Russia. The right of governing a nation against its own will, can never be

long  supported.  The  Poles,  on  their  side,  after  having  advanced  as  far  asMoscow, and exercised all the ravages in which the military expeditions of

those times chiefly consisted, concluded a truce for fourteen years. By this

truce, Poland remained in possession of the duchy of Smolensko, in which

the Boristhenes has its source. The Swedes also made peace, in virtue of

which they remained in possession of Ingria, and deprived the Russians of all

communication with the Baltic Sea, so that this empire was separated more

than ever from the rest of Europe.

  Michael Romanow, after this peace, reigned quietly, without making any

alteration  in  the  state,  either  to  the  improvement  or  corruption  of  the

administration.  After  his  death,  which  happened  in  1645,  his  son,  Alexis

Michaelowitz (or son of Michael), ascended the throne by hereditary right. It

may be observed, that the czars were crowned by the patriarch of Russia,

according  to  the  ceremonies  in  use  at  Constantinople,  except  that  the

patriarch of Russia, was seated on the same ascent with the sovereign, and

constantly affected an equality highly insulting to the supreme power.

  ALEXIS MICHAELOWITZ.

  Alexis was married in the same manner as his father, and from among the

young women presented, he chose the one who appeared the most amiable in

his  eyes.  He  married  a  daughter  of  the  boyard  Meloslauski,  in  1647;  his

second wife, whom he married in 1671, was of the family of Nariskin, and

his  favourite  Morosow  was  married  to  another.  There  cannot  be  a  more

suitable title found for this favourite than that of vizier, for he governed the

empire  in  a  despotic  manner;  and,  by  his  great  power,  excited  several

commotions among the strelitzes and the populace, as frequently happens at

Constantinople.

  The  reign  of  Alexis  was  disturbed  by  bloody  insurrections,  and  by

domestic and foreign wars. A chief of the Don Cossacks, named Stenko-

Rasin, endeavoured to make himself king of Astracan, and was for a long

time very formidable; but, being at length defeated and taken prisoner, he

ended his life by the hands of the executioner; like all those of this stamp,

who have nothing to expect but a throne or a scaffold. About twelve thousand

of his adherents are said to have been hanged on the high road to Astracan. In

this  part  of  the  world,  men  being  uninfluenced  by  morality,  were  to  be

governed only by rigour; and from this severity, frequently carried on to adegree of cruelty, arose slavery, and a secret thirst of revenge.

  Alexis had a war with the Poles that proved successful, and terminated in a

peace, which secured to him the possession of Smolensko, Kiow, and the

Ukraine: but he was unfortunate against the Swedes, and the boundaries of

the Russian empire were contracted within a very narrow compass on that

side of the kingdom.

  The Turks were at that time his most formidable enemies: they invaded

Poland, and threatened the dominions of the czar that bordered upon Crim

Tartary, the ancient Taurica Chersonesus. In 1671, they took the important

city  of  Kaminiek,  and  all  that  belonged  to  Poland  in  the  Ukraine.  The

Cossacks of that country, ever averse to subjection, knew not whether they

belonged  to  the  Turks,  Poland,  or  Russia.  Sultan  Mahomet  IV.  who  had

conquered the Poles, and had just imposed a tribute upon them, demanded,

with all the haughtiness of an Ottoman victor, that the czar should evacuate

his possessions in the Ukraine, but received as haughty a denial from that

prince. Men did not know at that time how to disguise their pride, by an

outside of civility. The sultan, in his letter, styled the sovereign of the Russias

only Christian Hospodar, and entitled himself 'most gracious majesty, king of

the universe.' The czar replied in these terms, 'that he scorned to submit to a

Mahometan dog, and that his scimetar was as good as the grand seignior's

sabre.'

  Alexis at that time formed a design which seemed to presage the influence

which the Russian empire would one day obtain in the Christian world. He

sent  ambassadors  to  the  pope,  and  to  almost  all  the  great  sovereigns  in

Europe, excepting France (which was in alliance with the Turks), in order to

establish a league against the Ottoman Porte. His ambassadors at the court of

Rome succeeded only in not being obliged to kiss the pope's toe; and in other

courts  they  met  with  only  unprofitable  good  wishes;  the  quarrels  of  the

Christian princes between themselves, and the jarring interests arising from

those quarrels, having constantly prevented them from uniting against the

common enemy of Christianity.

  In the mean time, the Turks threatened to chastise the Poles, who refused

to pay their tribute: czar Alexis assisted on the side of Crim Tartary, and John

Sobieski, general of the crown, wiped off his country's stain in the blood ofthe Turks, at the famous battle of Choczim,[19] in 1674, which paved his

way to the throne. Alexis disputed this very throne with him, and proposed to

unite his extensive dominions to Poland, as the Jagellons had done; but in

regard  to  Lithuania,  the  greatness  of  his  offer  was  the  cause  of  its  being

rejected. He is said to have been very deserving of the new kingdom, by the

manner in which he governed his own. He was the first who caused a body of

laws to be digested in Russia, though imperfect; and introduced both linen

and silk manufactures, which indeed were not long kept up; nevertheless, he

had the merit of their first establishment. He peopled the deserts about the

Wolga and the Kama, with Lithuanian, Polish, and Tartarian families, whom

he had taken prisoners in his wars: before his reign, all prisoners of war were

the  slaves  of  those  to  whose  lot  they  fell.  Alexis  employed  them  in

agriculture: he did his utmost endeavours to introduce discipline among his

troops. In a word, he was worthy of being the father of Peter the Great; but he

had no time to perfect what he had begun, being snatched away by a sudden

death, at the age of forty-six, in the beginning of the year 1677, according to

our style, which is eleven days forwarder than that of Russia.

  FŒDOR, or THEODORE ALEXIOWITZ.

  Upon the death of Alexis, son of Michael, all fell again into confusion. He

left,  by  his  first  marriage,  two  princes,  and  six  princesses.  Theodore,  the

eldest, ascended the throne at fifteen years of age. He was a prince of a weak

and sickly constitution, but of merit superior to his bodily infirmities. His

father Alexis had caused him to be acknowledged his successor, a year before

his death: a conduct observed by the kings of France from Hugh Capet down

to Lewis the Young, and by many other crowned heads.

  The second son of Alexis was Iwan, or John, who was still worse treated

by  nature  than  his  brother  Theodore,  being  almost  blind  and  dumb,  very

infirm, and frequently attacked with convulsions. Of six daughters, born of

this first marriage, the only one who made any figure in Europe was the

princess Sophia, who was remarkable for her great talents; but unhappily still

more so for the mischief she intended against Peter the Great.

  Alexis, by his second marriage with another of his subjects, daughter of

the boyard Nariskin, had Peter and the princess Nathalia. Peter was born the

30th of May (or the 10th of June new stile), in the year 1672, and was butfour years old when he lost his father. As the children of a second marriage

were not much regarded in Russia, it was little expected that he would one

day mount the throne.

  It had ever been the character of the family of Romanow to civilize their

state. It was also that of Theodore. We have already remarked, in speaking of

Moscow, that this prince encouraged the inhabitants of that city to build a

great number of stone houses. He likewise enlarged that capital, and made

several useful regulations in the general police; but, by attempting to reform

the boyards, he made them all his enemies: besides, he was not possessed of

sufficient knowledge, vigour, or resolution, to venture upon making a general

reformation.  The  war  with  the  Turks,  or  rather  with  the  Crim  Tartars,  in

which he was constantly engaged with alternate success, would not permit a

prince of his weak state of health to attempt so great a work. Theodore, like

the rest of his predecessors, married one of his own subjects, a native of the

frontiers of Poland; but having lost her in less than a year after their nuptials,

he took for his second wife, in 1682, Martha Matweowna, daughter of the

secretary Nariskin.[20] Some months after this marriage, he was seized with

the disorder which ended his days, and died without leaving any children. As

the czars married without regard to birth, they might likewise (at least at that

time) appoint a successor without respect to primogeniture. The dignity of

consort and heir to the sovereign seemed to be entirely the reward of merit;

and, in that respect, the custom of this empire was much preferable to the

customs of more civilized states.

  Theodore,  before  he  expired,  seeing  that  his  brother  Iwan  was  by  his

natural  infirmities  incapable  of  governing,  nominated  his  younger  brother

Peter, heir to the empire of Russia. Peter, who was then only in his tenth year,

had already given the most promising hopes.

  If, on the one hand, the custom of raising a subject to the rank of czarina,

was favourable to the females, there was another which was no less hard

upon them; namely, that the daughters of the czars were very seldom married,

but were most of them obliged to pass their lives in a monastery.

  The princess Sophia, third daughter of czar Alexis, by his first marriage,

was possessed of abilities, equally great and dangerous. Perceiving that her

brother Theodore had not long to live, she did not retire to a convent; butfinding herself situated between two brothers, one of whom was incapable of

governing,  through  his  natural  inability;  and  the  other,  on  account  of  his

youth, she conceived the design of placing herself at the head of the empire.

Hence, in the last hours of czar Theodore, she attempted to act the part that

Pulcheria had formerly played with her brother, the emperor Theodosius.


  CHAPTER IV.

  JOHN AND PETER.

  Horrible Sedition among the Strelitzes.[21]

  1682.


Czar Theodore's eyes were scarcely closed, when the nomination of a prince

of only ten years old to the throne, the exclusion of the elder brother, and the

intrigues of the princess Sophia, their sister, excited a most bloody revolt

among  the  strelitzes.  Never  did  the  janissaries,  nor  the  prætorian  guards,

exercise more horrible barbarities. The insurrection began two days after the

interment of Theodore, when they all ran to arms in the Kremlin, which is the

imperial palace at Moscow. There they began with accusing nine of their

colonels, for keeping back part of their pay. The ministry was obliged to

break the colonels, and to pay the strelitzes the money they demanded: but

this  did  not  satisfy  them,  they  insisted  upon  having  these  nine  officers

delivered up to them, and condemned them, by a majority of votes, to suffer

the Battogs, or Knout; the manner of which punishment is as follows:-

  The delinquent is stripped naked, and laid flat on his belly, while two

executioners beat him over the back with switches, or small canes, till the

judge, who stands by to see the sentence put in execution, says, 'It is enough.'

The colonels, after being thus treated by their men, were obliged to return

them thanks, according to the custom of the eastern nations; where criminals,

after  undergoing  their  punishment,  must  kiss  the  judge's  hand.  Besides

complying with this custom, the officers gave them a sum of money, which

was something more than the custom.

  While  the  strelitzes  thus  began  to  make  themselves  formidable,  the

princess Sophia, who secretly encouraged them, in order to lead them bydegrees from crime to crime, held a meeting at her house, consisting of the

princesses of the blood, the generals of the army, the boyards, the patriarch,

the bishops, and even some of the principal merchants; where she represented

to them, that prince John, by right of birth and merit, was entitled to the

empire, the reins of which she intended to keep in her own hands. At the

breaking  up  of  the  assembly,  she  caused  a  promise  to  be  made  to  the

strelitzes,  of  an  augmentation  of  pay,  besides  considerable  presents.  Her

emissaries were in particular employed to stir up the soldiery against the

Nariskin family, especially the two brothers of the young dowager czarina,

the mother of Peter the First. These persuaded the strelitzes, that one of the

brothers, named John, had put on the imperial robes, had seated himself on

the throne, and had attempted to strangle prince John; adding, moreover, that

the late czar Theodore had been poisoned by a villain, named Daniel Vongad,

a  Dutch  physician.  At  last  Sophia  put  into  their  hands  a  list  of  forty

noblemen, whom she stiled enemies to their corps, and to the state, and as

such worthy of death. These proceedings exactly resembled the proscriptions

of Sylla, and the Roman triumvirate, which had been revived by Christian II.

in Denmark and Sweden. This may serve to shew, that such cruelties prevail

in all countries in times of anarchy and confusion. The mutineers began the

tragedy with throwing the two knez, or princes, Dolgorouki and Matheof, out

of the palace-windows; whom the strelitzes received upon the points of their

spears,  then  stripped  them,  and  dragged  their  dead  bodies  into  the  great

square; after this they rushed into the palace, where meeting with Athanasius

Nariskin, a brother of the young czarina, and one of the uncles of czar Peter,

they  murdered  him  in  like  manner;  then  breaking  open  the  door  of  a

neighbouring church, where three of the proscribed persons had taken refuge,

they drag them from the altar, strip them naked, and stab them to death with

knives.

  They were so blinded with their fury, that seeing a young nobleman of the

family of Soltikoff, a great favourite of theirs, and who was not included in

the list of the proscribed, and some of them mistaking him for John Nariskin,

whom they were in search of, they murdered him upon the spot; and what

plainly shews the manners of those times, after having discovered their error,

they carried the body of young Soltikoff, to his father to bury it; and the

wretched  parent,  far  from  daring  to  complain,  gave  them  a  considerablereward for bringing him the mangled body of his son. Being reproached by

his wife, his daughters, and the widow of the deceased, for his weakness, 'Let

us wait for an opportunity of being revenged,' said the old man. These words

being overheard by some of the soldiers, they returned furiously back into the

room, dragged the aged parent by the hair, and cut his throat at his own door.

  Another party of the strelitzes, who were scouring the city in search of the

Dutch physician, Vongad, met with his son, of whom they inquired for his

father; the youth trembling, replied, he did not know where he was, upon

which  they  immediately  dispatched  him.  Soon  after,  a  German  physician

falling in their way, 'You are a doctor,' said they, 'and if you did not poison

our master, Theodore, you have poisoned others, and therefore merit death;'

and thereupon killed him.

  At  length  they  found  the  Dutchman,  of  whom  they  were  in  quest,

disguised in the garb of a beggar; they instantly drag him before the palace.

The princesses who loved this worthy man, and placed great confidence in

his skill, begged the strelitzes to spare him, assuring them that he was a very

good physician, and had taken all possible care of their brother Theodore.

The strelitzes made answer, that he not only deserved to die as a physician,

but also as a sorcerer; and that they had found in his house, a great dried toad,

and the skin of a serpent. They furthermore required to have young Nariskin

delivered up to them, whom they had searched for in vain for two days:

alleging, that he was certainly in the palace, and that they would set fire to it,

unless he was put into their hands. The sister of John Nariskin, and the other

princesses, terrified by their menaces, went to acquaint their unhappy brother

in  the  place  of  his  concealment,  with  what  had  passed;  upon  which  the

patriarch heard his confession, administers the viaticum, and extreme unction

to him, and then, taking an image of the blessed Virgin, which was said to

perform miracles, he leads the young man forth by the hand, and presents him

to the strelitzes, shewing them, at the same time, the image of the Virgin. The

princesses, who in tears surrounded Nariskin, falling upon their knees before

the soldiers, besought them, in the name of the blessed Virgin, to spare their

relation's  life;  but  the  inhuman  wretches  tore  him  from  their  arms,  and

dragged him to the foot of the stairs, together with the physician Vongad,

where they held a kind of tribunal among themselves, and condemned them

both to be put to the torture. One of the soldiers, who could write, drew up aform of accusation, and sentenced the two unfortunate princes to be cut in

pieces; a punishment inflicted in China and Tartary on parricides, and called

the punishment of ten thousand slices. After having thus used Nariskin and

Vongad, they exposed their heads, feet, and hands, on the iron points of a

balustrade.

  While this party of the strelitzes were thus glutting their fury in the sight

of the princesses, the rest massacred every one who was obnoxious to them,

or suspected by the princess Sophia.

  This horrid tragedy concluded with proclaiming the two princes, John and

Peter, in June, 1682, joint sovereigns, and associating their sister Sophia with

them, in the quality of co-regent; who then publicly approved of all their

outrages, gave them rewards, confiscated the estates of the proscribed, and

bestowed them upon their murderers. She even permitted them to erect a

monument,  with  the  names  of  the  persons  they  had  murdered,  as  being

traitors  to  their  country:  and  to  crown  all,  she  published  letters-patent,

thanking them for their zeal and fidelity.


  CHAPTER V.

  Administration  of  the  princess  Sophia.  Extraordinary  quarrel  about

religion. A conspiracy.


  Such were the steps by which the princess Sophia did in effect ascend the

throne  of  Russia,  though  without  being  declared  czarina;  and  such  the

examples  that  Peter  the  First  had  before  his  eyes.  Sophia  enjoyed  all  the

honours  of  a  sovereign;  her  bust  was  on  the  public  coin;  she  signed  all

dispatches,  held  the  first  place  in  council,  and  enjoyed  a  power  without

control. She was possessed of a great share of understanding, and some wit;

made verses in the Russian language, and both spoke and wrote extremely

well. These talents were set off by the addition of an agreeable person, and

sullied only by her ambition.

  She procured a wife for her brother John, in the manner already described

in several examples. A young lady named Soltikoff, of the family with the

nobleman of that name who had been assassinated by the seditious strelitzes,

was  sent  for  from  the  heart  of  Siberia,  where  her  father  commanded  afortress, to be presented to czar John at Moscow. Her beauty triumphed over

all the intrigues of her rivals, and John was married to her in 1684. At every

marriage  of  a  czar  we  seem  to  read  the  history  of  Ahasuerus,  or  that  of

Theodosius the Younger.

  In the midst of the rejoicings on account of this marriage, the strelitzes

raised a new insurrection, and (who would believe it?) on account of religion!

of a particular tenet! Had they been mere soldiers, they would never have

become controvertists, but they were also citizens of Moscow. Whosoever

has,  or  assumes  a  right  of  speaking  in  an  authoritative  manner  to  the

populace, may found a sect. This has been seen in all ages, and all parts of the

world, especially since the passion of dogmatizing has become the instrument

of ambition, and the terror of weak minds.

  Russia  had  experienced  some  previous  disturbances  on  occasion  of  a

dispute, whether the sign of the cross was to be made with three fingers, or

with two! One Abakum, who was also a priest, had set up some new tenets at

Moscow, in regard to the Holy Spirit; which according to the Scriptures,

enlightened all the faithful; as likewise with respect to the equality of the

primitive Christians, and these words of Christ:-'There shall be amongst you

neither first nor last.' Several citizens and many of the strelitzes, embraced

the opinions of Abakum. One Raspop[22] was the chief of this party, which

became considerable. The sectaries, at length, entered (July 16, 1682, new

stile) the cathedral, where the patriarch and his clergy were officiating; drove

them out of the church with stones, and seated themselves very devoutly in

their places, to receive the Holy Spirit. They called the patriarch the 'ravenous

wolf in the sheepfold;' a title which all sects have liberally bestowed on each

other.  The  princess  Sophia,  and  the  two  czars,  were  immediately  made

acquainted with these disturbances: and the other strelitzes, who were staunch

to the good old cause, were given to understand, that the czars and the church

were in danger. Upon this the strelitzes and burghers of the patriarchal party

attacked the Abakumists: but a stop was put to the carnage, by publishing a

convocation of a council, which was immediately assembled in a hall of the

palace. This took up very little time, for they obliged every priest they met to

attend.  The  patriarch,  and  a  bishop,  disputed  against  Raspop;  but  at  the

second syllogism, they began to throw stones at one another. The council

ended with ordering Raspop, and some of his faithful disciples to have theirheads struck off; and the sentence was executed by the sole order of the three

sovereigns, Sophia, John, and Peter.

  During these troubles, there was a knez, named Chowanskoi, who having

been instrumental in raising the princess Sophia to the dignity she then held,

wanted, as a reward for his services, to have a share in the administration.

  It may be supposed, that he found Sophia not so grateful as he could wish;

upon  which  he  espoused  the  cause  of  religion,  and  the  persecuted

Raspopians, and stirred up a party among the strelitzes and the people, in

defence of God's name.

  This conspiracy proved a more serious affair than the enthusiastic riot of

Raspop. An ambitious hypocrite always carries things farther than a simple

fanatic. Chowanskoi aimed at no less than the imperial dignity; and to rid

himself of all cause of fear, he resolved to murder the two czars, Sophia, the

other princesses, and every one who was attached to the imperial family. The

czars and the princesses were obliged to retire to the monastery of the Holy

Trinity, within twelve leagues of Petersburg.[23] This was, at the same time,

a convent, a palace, and a fortress, like Mount Cassino,[24] Corhy,[25] Fulda,

[26] Kempten,[27] and several others belonging to the Latin church. This

monastery of the Trinity belongs to the monks of St. Basil. It is surrounded

by  deep  ditches,  and  ramparts  of  brick,  on  which  is  planted  a  numerous

artillery. The monks are possessed of all the country round for four leagues.

The imperial family were in full safety there, but more on account of the

strength, than the sanctity of the place. Here Sophia treated with the rebel

knez; and having decoyed him half way, caused his head to be struck off,

together  with  those  of  one  of  his  sons,  and  thirty-seven  strelitzes  who

accompanied him.

  1682.

  The body of strelitzes upon this news, fly to arms, and march to attack the

convent of Trinity, threatening to destroy every thing that came in their way.

The imperial family stood upon their defence; the boyards arm their vassals,

all the gentlemen flocked in, and a bloody civil war seemed on the point of

beginning. The patriarch somewhat pacified the strelitzes, who began to be

intimidated with the number of troops that were marching towards them on

all sides: in short, their fury was changed into fear, and their fear into themost abject submission; a change common to the multitude. Three thousand

seven hundred of this corps, followed by their wives and children, with ropes

tied about their necks, went in procession to the convent of the Trinity, which

three days before they had threatened to burn to the ground. In this condition,

these unhappy wretches present themselves before the gate of the convent,

two  by  two,  one  carrying  a  block  and  another  an  axe;  and  prostrating

themselves on the ground, waited for their sentence. They were pardoned

upon  their  submission,  and  returned  back  to  Moscow,  blessing  their

sovereigns; and still disposed, though unknown to themselves, to commit the

same crime upon the very first opportunity.

  These  commotions  being  subsided,  the  state  resumed  an  exterior  of

tranquillity;  but  Sophia  still  remained  possessed  of  the  chief  authority,

leaving John to his incapacity, and keeping Peter in the subjection of a ward.

In order to strengthen her power, she shared it with Prince Basil Galitzin,

whom she created generalissimo, minister of state, and lord keeper. Galitzin

was in every respect superior to any person in that distracted court: he was

polite,  magnificent,  full  of  great  designs,  more  learned  than  any  of  his

countrymen,  as  having  received  a  much  better  education,  and  was  even

master of the Latin tongue, which was, at that time, almost entirely unknown

in Russia. He was of an active and indefatigable spirit, had a genius superior

to the times he lived in, and capable, had he had leisure and power, as he had

inclination, to have changed the face of things in Russia. This is the eulogium

given of him by La Neuville, at that time the Polish envoy in Russia; and the

encomiums of foreigners are seldom to be suspected.

  This minister bridled the insolence of the strelitzes, by distributing the

most mutinous of that body among the several regiments in the Ukraine, in

Casan, and Siberia. It was under his administration that the Poles, long the

rivals of Russia, gave up, in 1686, all pretensions to the large provinces of

Smolensko and the Ukraine. He was the first who sent an embassy to France,

in 1687; a country which had, for upwards of twenty years, been in the zenith

of its glory, by the conquests, new establishments, and the magnificence of

Lewis XIV. and especially by the improvement of the arts, there can be not

only external grandeur, but solid glory. France had not then entered into any

correspondence with Russia, or rather was unacquainted with that empire;

and  the  academy  of  inscriptions  ordered  a  medal  to  be  struck  tocommemorate this embassy, as if it had come from the most distant part of

the  Indies;  but  notwithstanding  all  this,  the  ambassador  Dolgorouski

miscarried  in  his  negotiation,  and  even  suffered  some  gross  affronts  on

account of the behaviour of his domestics, whose mistakes it would have

been better to have overlooked; but the court of Lewis XIV. could not then

foresee, that France and Russia would one day reckon among the number of

their advantages, that of being cemented by the closest union.

  Russia was now quiet at home, but she was still pent up on the side of

Sweden, though enlarged towards Poland, her new ally, in continual alarms

on the side of Crim Tartary, and at variance with China in regard to the

frontiers.

  The  most  intolerable  circumstance  for  their  empire,  and  which  plainly

shewed, that it had not yet attained to a vigorous and regular administration,

was, that the khan of the Crim Tartars exacted an annual tribute of 6000

rubles, in the nature of that which the Turk had imposed on the Poles.

  Crim Tartary is the ancient Taurica Chersonesus, formerly so famous by

the commerce of the Greeks, and still more by their fables, a fruitful but

barbarous country. It took its name of Crimea, or Crim, from the title of its

first khans, who took this name before the conquests of the sons of Gengis

Khan. To free his country from this yoke, and wipe off the disgrace of such

tribute, the prime minister, Galitzin, marched in person (1687, 1688,) into

Crim Tartary, at the head of a numerous army. These armies were not to be

compared to the present troops; they had no discipline; there was hardly one

regiment completely armed; they had no uniform clothing, no regularity: their

men indeed were inured to hard labour and a scarcity of provisions, but then

they carried with them such a prodigious quantity of baggage, as far exceeded

any thing of the kind in our camps, where the greatest luxury prevails. Their

vast  numbers  of  waggons  for  carrying  ammunition  and  provisions,  in  an

uninhabitable and desert country, greatly retarded the expedition against Crim

Tartary. The army found itself in the midst of the vast deserts, on the river

Samara, unprovided with magazines. Here Galitzin did what in my opinion,

was never done any where else: he employed thirty thousand men in building

a town on the banks of the Samara, to serve as a place for magazines in the

ensuing campaign: it was begun in one year, and finished in the third month

of the following; the houses indeed were all wood except two, which werebrick; the ramparts were of turf, but well lined with artillery; and the whole

place was in a tolerable state of defence.

  This was all that was done of any consequence in this ruinous expedition.

In the mean while Sophia continued to govern in Moscow, while John had

only the name of czar; and Peter, now at the age of seventeen, had already the

courage  to  aim  at  real  sovereignty.  La  Neuville,  the  Polish  envoy,  then

resident at Moscow, and who was eye-witness to all that passed, pretends that

Sophia and Galitzin had engaged the new chief of the strelitzes, to sacrifice to

them their young czar: it appears, at least, that six hundred of these strelitzes

were to have made themselves masters of his person. The private memoirs

which have been entrusted to my perusal by the court of Russia, affirm, that a

scheme had actually been laid to murder Peter the First: the blow was on the

point of being struck, and Russia for ever deprived of the new existence she

has since received. The czar was once more obliged to take refuge in the

convent of the Trinity, the usual asylum of the court when threatened by the

soldiers. There he assembled the boyards of his party, raised a body of forces,

treats with the captains of the strelitzes, and called in the assistance of certain

Germans, who had been long settled in Moscow, and were all attached to his

person from his having already shewn himself the encourager of strangers.

Sophia and John, who continued at Moscow, used every means to engage the

strelitzes to remain firm to their interests; but the cause of young Peter, who

loudly complained of an attempt meditated against himself and his mother,

prevailed over that of the princess, and of a czar, whose very aspect alienated

all hearts. All the acomplices were punished with a severity to which that

country was as much accustomed as to the crimes which occasioned it. Some

were beheaded after undergoing the punishment of the knout or battocks. The

chief of the strelitzes was put to death in the same manner, and several other

suspected persons had their tongues cut out. Prince Galitzin escaped with his

life, through the intercession of one of his relations, who was a favourite of

czar Peter; but he was stripped of all his riches, which were immense, and

banished to a place in the neighbourhood of Archangel. La Neuville, who

was  present  at  the  whole  of  this  catastrophe,  relates,  that  the  sentence

pronounced upon Galitzin was in these terms: 'Thou art commanded, by the

most clement czar, to repair to Karga, a town under the pole, and there to

continue the remainder of thy days. His majesty, out of his extreme goodness,allows thee three pence per day for thy subsistence.'

  There is no town under the pole. Karga is in the 62nd degree of latitude,

and  only  six  degrees  and  a  half  further  north  than  Moscow.  Whoever

pronounced this sentence must have been a very bad geographer. La Neuville

was probably imposed upon by a false account.

  1689.]  At  length  the  princess  Sophia  was  once  more  sent  back  to  her

monastery at Moscow,[28] after having so long held the reins of government;

and  this  revolution  proved,  to  a  woman  of  her  disposition,  a  sufficient

punishment.

  From this instant Peter began to reign in reality; his brother John having

no other share in the government, but that of seeing his name to all public

acts. He led a retired life, and died in 1696.


  CHAPTER VI.

  The reign of Peter the First.-Beginning of the grand reformation.


  Peter the Great was tall, genteel, well made, with a noble aspect, piercing

eyes and a robust constitution, fitted for all kinds of hardship and bodily

exercise.  He  had  a  sound  understanding,  which  is  the  basis  of  all  real

abilities; and to this was joined an active disposition, which prompted him to

undertake and execute the greatest things. His education was far from being

worthy  of  his  genius.  The  princess  Sophia  was,  in  a  peculiar  manner,

interested to let him remain in ignorance, and to indulge himself in those

excesses which youth, idleness, custom, and the high rank he held, made but

too allowable. Nevertheless, he had been lately married, (June 1689) like

others of his predecessors, to one of his own subjects, the daughter of colonel

Lapuchin; but, as he was young, and for some time enjoyed none of the

prerogatives  of  the  crown,  but  that  of  indulging  his  pleasures  without

restraint, the ties of wedlock were not always sufficient to keep him within

just bounds. The pleasures of the table, in which he indulged himself rather

too  freely,  with  foreigners,  who  had  been  invited  to  Moscow  by  prince

Galitzin, seemed not to presage that he would one day become the reformer

of his country; however, in spite of bad examples, and even the allurements

of pleasure, he applied himself to the arts of war and government, and which,even then, shewed that he had the seeds of greatness in him.

  It  was  still  less  expected,  that  a  prince,  who  was  subject  to  such  a

constitutional  dread  of  water,  as  to  subject  him  to  cold  sweats,  and  even

convulsions, when he was obliged to cross a small river or brook, should

become one of the best seamen in all the north. In order to get the better of

nature, he began by jumping into the water, notwithstanding the horror he felt

at it, till at length this aversion was changed into a fondness for that element.

[29]

  He often blushed at the ignorance in which he had been brought up. He

learned, almost of himself, without the help of a master, enough of German

and high Dutch, to be able to write and explain himself tolerably well in both

those  languages.  The  Germans  and  Dutch  appeared  to  him  as  the  most

civilized nations, because the former had already erected, in Moscow, some

of those arts and manufactures which he was desirous of seeing established in

his empire, and the latter excelled in the art of navigation, which he already

began to look upon as the most necessary of all others.

  Such  were  the  dispositions  which  Peter  cherished,  notwithstanding  the

follies of his youth. At the same time, he found himself disturbed by factions

at home, had the turbulent spirit of the strelitzes to keep under, and an almost

uninterrupted war to manage against the Crim Tartars. For though hostilities

had been suspended in 1689, by a truce, it had no long continuance.

  During this interval, Peter became confirmed in his design of introducing

the arts into his country.

  His father Alexis had, in his lifetime, entertained the same views, but he

wanted leisure, and a favourable opportunity to carry them into execution; he

transmitted his genius to his son, who was more clear-sighted, more vigorous,

and more unshaken by difficulties and obstacles.

  Alexis  had  been  at  a  great  expense  in  sending  for  Bothler,[30]  a  ship

builder and sea captain, from Holland, together with a number of shipwrights

and sailors. These built a large frigate and a yacht upon the Wolga, which

they navigated down that river to Astracan, where they were to be employed

in building more vessels, for carrying on an advantageous trade with Persia,

by the Caspian Sea. Just at this time the revolt of Stenko-Rasin broke out, and

this rebel destroyed these two vessels, which he ought to have preserved forhis own sake, and murdered the captain; the rest of the crew fled into Persia,

from whence they got to some settlements belonging to the Dutch East India

company.  A  master-builder,  who  was  a  good  shipwright,  staid  behind  in

Russia, where he lived a long time in obscurity.

  One day, Peter taking a walk at Ishmaelof, a summer-palace built by his

grandfather,  he  perceived,  among  several  other  rarities,  an  old  English

shallop, which had lain entirely neglected: upon which he asked Timmerman,

a German, and his mathematical teacher, how came that little boat to be of so

different a construction from any he had seen on the Moska? Timmerman

replied, that it was made to go with sails and oars. The young prince wanted

instantly to make a trial of it; but it was first to be repaired and rigged. Brant,

the  ship-builder  abovementioned,  was  by  accident  found  out  at  Moscow,

where he lived retired; he soon put the boat in order, and worked her upon the

river Yauza, which washes the suburbs of the town.

  Peter caused his boat to be removed to a great lake, in the neighbourhood

of the convent of the Trinity; he likewise made Brant build two more frigates,

and three yachts, and piloted them himself. A considerable time afterwards,

viz. in 1694, he made a journey to Archangel, and having ordered a small

vessel to be built in that port, by the same Brant, he embarked therein on the

Frozen  Sea,  which  no  sovereign  beside  himself  had  ever  beheld.  On  this

occasion, he was escorted by a Dutch man of war, under the command of

captain Jolson, and attended by all the merchant-vessels then in the port of

Archangel.  He  had  already  learned  the  manner  of  working  a  ship;  and,

notwithstanding the pains his courtiers took to imitate their master, he was

the only one who made a proficiency in it.

  He found it no less difficult to raise a well disciplined body of land forces,

on  whom  he  could  depend,  than  to  establish  a  navy.  His  first  essay  in

navigation, on a lake, previous to his journey to Archangel, was looked upon

only as the amusements of a young prince of genius; and his first attempt to

form a body of disciplined troops, likewise appeared as nothing more than

that of diversion. This happened during the regency of the princess Sophia;

and, had he been suspected of meaning any thing serious by this amusement,

it might have been attended with fatal consequences to him.

  He placed his confidence in a foreigner, the celebrated Le Fort, of a nobleand  ancient  family  in  Piedmont,  transplanted  near  two  centuries  ago  to

Geneva, where they have filled the most considerable posts in the state. He

was intended to have been brought up to the trade, to which the town is

indebted for the figure it now makes; having formerly been known only as

the seat of religious controversies.

  But his genius, which prompted him to the greatest undertakings, engaged

him  to  quit  his  father's  house  at  the  age  of  fourteen;  and  he  served  four

months[31] in quality of a cadet in the citadel of Marseilles; from thence he

went  to  Holland,  where  he  served  some  time  as  a  volunteer,  and  was

wounded at the siege of Grave, a strong fortified town on the Meuse, which

the prince of Orange, afterwards king of England, retook from Lewis XIV. in

1674. After this, led by hopes of preferment, wherever he could find it, he

embarked  with  a  German  colonel,  named  Verstin,  who  had  obtained  a

commission  from  Peter's  father,  the  czar  Alexis,  to  raise  soldiers  in  the

Netherlands, and bring them to Archangel. But, when he arrived at that port,

after  a  most  fatiguing  and  dangerous  navigation,  the  czar  Alexis  was  no

more; the government was changed, and Russia in confusion. The governor

of Archangel suffered Verstin, Le Fort, and his whole troop, to remain a long

time, in the utmost poverty and distress, and even threatened to send them

into the extremity of Siberia; upon which every man shifted for himself. Le

Fort, in want of every thing, repaired to Moscow, where he waited upon the

Danish  resident,  named  De  Horn,  who  made  him  his  secretary:  there  he

learned the Russian language, and some time afterwards found means to be

introduced to the czar Peter; the elder brother, Iwan, not being a person for

his purpose. Peter was taken with him, and immediately gave him a company

of foot. Le Fort had seen very little service, he knew but little of letters, not

having studied any particular art or science; but he had seen a great deal, and

had a talent of making the most of what he saw. Like the czar, he owed every

thing to his own genius; he understood the German and Dutch languages,

which Peter was learning, as those of two nations that might be of service in

his designs. Every thing conspired to make him agreeable to Peter, to whom

he strictly attached himself. From being the companion of his pleasures, he

became his favourite, and confirmed himself in that station by his abilities.

The czar made him his confidant in the most dangerous design that a prince

of  that  country  could  possibly  form,  namely,  that  of  putting  himself  in  acondition to be able one day to break the seditious and barbarous body of

forces called the strelitzes. It had cost the great sultan or basha Osman his

life, for attempting to disband the janissaries. Peter, young as he was, went to

work in a much abler manner than Osman.

  He began with forming, at his country-seat at Preobrazinski, a company of

fifty  of  his  youngest  domestics;  and  some  young  gentlemen,  the  sons  of

boyards, were chosen for their officers: but, in order to teach these young

noblemen  a  subordination,  to  which  they  were  wholly  unaccustomed,  he

made them pass through all the different military degrees, and himself set

them the example, by serving first as a drum, then as a private soldier, a

serjeant,  and  a  lieutenant  of  the  company.  Nothing  was  ever  more

extraordinary, nor more useful, than this conduct. The Russians had hitherto

made war in the same manner as our ancestors at the time of the feudal

tenures, when the unexperienced nobles took the field at the head of their

vassals, undisciplined, and ill armed: a barbarous method, sufficient indeed to

act against the like armies, but of no use against regular troops.

  This company, which was formed wholly by Peter himself, soon increased

in numbers, and became afterwards the regiment of Preobrazinski guards.

Another regiment, formed on the same plan, became in time the regiment of

Semeniousky guards.

  The  czar  had  already  a  regiment  of  five  thousand  men  that  could  be

depended  upon,  trained  by  general  Gordon,  a  Scotchman,  and  composed

almost entirely of foreigners. Le Fort, who had borne arms but a short time,

but whose capacity was equal to every thing, undertook to raise a regiment of

twelve thousand men, which he effected: five colonels were appointed to

serve under him, and he saw himself on a sudden general of this little army,

which had been raised, as much to oppose the strelitzes, as the enemies of the

state.

  One thing worthy of being remarked,[32] and which fully confutes the

hasty error of those who pretend that France lost very few of its inhabitants

by the revocation of the edict of Nantz, is, that one-third of his army, which

was only called a regiment, consisted of French refugees. Le Fort disciplined

his new troops, as if he had been all his lifetime a soldier.

  Peter was desirous of seeing one of those images of war, the mock fights,which had lately been introduced in times of peace: a fort was erected, which

was to be attacked by one part of his new troops, and defended by the other.

The difference between this fight, and others of the like nature, was, that

instead of a sham engagement, there was a real one, in which some of his

men were slain, and a great many wounded.[33] Le Fort, who commanded

the attack, received a considerable wound. These bloody sports were intended

to initiate the young troops into the service of the field; but it required much

labour, and even some degree of sufferings to compass this end.

  These warlike amusements did not take off the czar's attention to his naval

project.  As  he  had  made  Le  Fort  a  general  by  land,  notwithstanding  his

having never borne a command; he now made him admiral, though he had

never had the direction of a ship, but he knew him deserving both of the one

and the other. It is true, that he was an admiral without a fleet, and a general

with only his regiment for an army.

  By  degrees  the  czar  reformed  that  great  abuse  in  the  army,  viz.  the

independence of the boyards, who, in time of war, used to bring into the field

a  multitude  of  their  vassals  and  peasants:  this  was  exactly  the  ancient

government of the Franks, Huns, Goths, and Vandals, who indeed subdued

the  Roman  empire  in  its  state  of  decline,  but  would  have  been  totally

destroyed, had they had the warlike disciplined legions of ancient Rome to

encounter, or such armies as are now brought into the field.

  Admiral Le Fort was not long, however, before he had something more

than an empty title. He employed some Dutchmen and Venetians in building

a number of barcolongos, or kind of long barks, and also two ships of about

thirty guns each, at the mouth of the Woronitz, which falls into the Tanais, or

Don: these vessels were to fall down the river, and keep in awe the Crim

Tartars, with whom hostilities had been renewed.

  The czar was now to determine (in 1689) against which of the following

powers he would declare war, whether against the Turks, the Swedes, or the

Chinese. But here it will be proper to premise on what terms he then stood

with China, and which was the first treaty of peace concluded by that nation.


  CHAPTER VII.

  Congress and Treaty with the Chinese.[34]  We must set out by forming a proper idea of the limits of the Chinese and

Russian empires at this period. When we leave Siberia, properly so called,

and also far behind us to the south, a hundred hordes of Tartars, with white

and black Calmucks, and Mahometan and Pagan Monguls, we come to the

130th degree of longitude, and the 52d of latitude upon the river Amur.[35]

To the northward is a great chain of mountains, that stretches as far as the

Frozen Sea, beyond the polar circle. This river, which runs upwards of five

hundred leagues,[36] through Siberia and Chinese Tartary, falls, after many

windings, into the sea of Kamtshatka. It is affirmed for a truth, that at its

mouth, which opens with this sea, there is sometimes caught a monstrous

fish,  much  larger  than  the  hippopotamus  of  the  Nile,  and  that  the  tooth

thereof is the finest ivory. It is furthermore said, that this ivory was formerly

an object of trade; that they used to convey it through Siberia, which is the

reason  why  several  pieces  of  it  are  still  found  under  the  ground  in  that

country. This is the most probable account of the fossil ivory, of which we

have elsewhere spoken; for it appears highly chimerical to pretend, that there

were formerly elephants in Siberia.

  This Amur is likewise called the Black River by the Mantechoux Tartars,

and the Dragon's River by the Chinese.

  It was in these countries, so long unknown, that the Russians and Chinese

contested the limits of their empires.[37] The Russians had some forts on the

river Amur, about three hundred leagues from the great wall. Many hostilities

had arisen between these two nations on account of these forts: at length both

began to understand their interests better; the emperor Camhi preferred peace

and  commerce  to  an  unprofitable  war,  and  sent  several  ambassadors  to

Niptchou, one of those settlements. The ambassadors had ten thousand men

in their retinue, including their escort: this was Asiatic pomp; but what is

very  remarkable,  is,  that  there  was  not  an  example  in  the  annals  of  the

empire, of an embassy being sent to another potentate; and what is still more

singular, that the Chinese had never concluded a treaty of peace since the

foundation of their monarchy. Though twice conquered by the Tartars, who

attacked  and  subjected  them,  they  never  made  war  upon  any  people,

excepting  a  few  hordes  that  were  quickly  subdued,  or  as  quickly  left  to

themselves, without any treaty. So that this nation, so renowned for morality,knew nothing of what we call the 'Law of nations;' that is to say, of those

vague rules of war and peace, of the privileges of foreign ministers, of the

formalities of treaties, nor of the obligations resulting from thence, nor of the

disputes concerning precedency and point of honour.

  But in what language were the Chinese to negotiate with the Russians, in

the midst of deserts? This difficulty was removed by two jesuits, the one a

Portuguese,  named  Pereira,  the  other  a  Frenchman,  whose  name  was

Gerbillon; they set out from Pekin with the Chinese ambassadors, and were

themselves  the  real  negotiators.  They  conferred  in  Latin  with  a  German

belonging to the Russian embassy, who understood this language. The chief

of that embassy was Golowin, governor of Siberia, who displayed a greater

magnificence than the Chinese themselves, and thereby gave a high idea of

the Russian empire, to a people who thought themselves the only powerful

nation under the sun.

  The two jesuits settled the limits of both empires at the river Kerbechi,

near  the  spot  where  the  treaty  was  concluded.  All  the  country,  to  the

southward of this line of partition, was adjudged to the Chinese, and the north

to the Russians, who only lost a small fort which was found to have been

built  beyond  the  limits:  a  peace  was  agreed  to,  and  after  some  few

altercations, both parties swore to observe it, in the name of the same God;

[38]  and  in  these  terms,  'If  any  of  us  shall  entertain  the  least  thought  of

kindling anew the flames of war, we beseech the supreme Lord of all things,

and who knows all hearts, to punish the traitor with sudden death.'

  From this form of treaty, used alike by Chinese and Christians, we may

infer two important truths: the first, that the Chinese government is neither

atheistical nor idolatrous, as has been so frequently and falsely charged upon

it, by contradictory imputations. Secondly, that all nations, who cultivate the

gift of reason and understanding, do, in effect, acknowledge the same God,

notwithstanding the particular deviations of that reason, through the want of

being properly instructed.

  The treaty was drawn up in Latin, and two copies were made of it. The

Russian ambassadors set their names the first to the copy that remained in

their possession, and the Chinese also signed theirs the first, agreeable to the

custom observed by European nations, when two equal powers conclude atreaty  with  each  other.  On  this  occasion  was  observed  another  custom

belonging to the Asiatic nations, and which was indeed, that of the earliest

ages. The treaty was engraven on two large marble pillars, erected on the

spot, to determine the boundaries of the two empires.

  Three years after this, the czar sent Isbrand Ides, a Dane, his ambassador

to China; and the commerce he then established between the two nations,

continued with advantage to each, till the rupture between them in the year

1722; but since this short interruption, it has been revived with redoubled

vigour.


  CHAPTER VIII.

  Expedition to the Palus Mæotis; conquest of Azoph.-The czar sends young

gentlemen into foreign countries for improvement.


It was not so easy to have peace with the Turks, and indeed, the time seemed

come for the Russians to rise upon their ruins. The republic of Venice, that

had long groaned under their yoke, began now to rouse itself. The Doge

Morosini, the same who had surrendered Candy to the Turks, afterwards took

from  them  the  Peloponnesus,  which  conquest  got  him  the  title  of

Peloponnesian, an honour which revived the memory of the Roman republic.

Leopold, emperor of Germany, had proved successful against the Ottoman

power in Hungary; and the Poles made shift to check the incursions of the

Crim Tartars.

  Peter took advantage of these circumstances, to discipline his troops, and

to procure himself the empire of the Black Sea. General Gordon marched

along  the  Tanais,  towards  Azoph,  with  his  numerous  regiment  of  five

thousand  men,  followed  by  general  Le  Fort,  with  his  regiment  of  twelve

thousand;  by  a  body  of  Strelitzes,  under  the  command  of  Sheremeto  and

Schein, natives of Prussia; by a body of Cossacks, and by a large train of

artillery: in a word, every thing was ready for this expedition.

  1694.] This grand army began its march under the command of marshal

Sheremeto,  or  Scheremetoff,  in  the  beginning  of  the  summer  of  1695,  to

attack the town of Azoph, at the mouth of the Tanais, and at the extremity of

the Palus Mæotis, now called the Zaback Sea. The czar himself was with thearmy, but only in quality of a volunteer, being determined to learn, some time

before he took upon him to command. During their march, they stormed two

forts which the Turks had built on the banks of the river.

  This  expedition  was  attended  with  some  considerable  difficulties.  The

place was well fortified, and defended by a numerous garrison. A number of

barcolongos, resembling the Turkish saicks, and built by Venetians, with two

small Dutch ships of war, that were to sail out of the Woronitz, could not be

got ready soon enough to enter the sea of Azoph. All beginnings meet with

obstacles. The Russians had never yet made a regular siege; and the first

attempt did not meet with all the success that could be desired.

  One Jacob, a native of Dantzic, had the direction of the artillery, under the

command of general Schein; for as yet they had none but foreign officers

belonging to the train, and none but foreign engineers and pilots. This Jacob

had  been  condemned  to  the  bastinade,  or  knout,  by  Schein,  the  Russian

general. At that time rigorous discipline was thought to be the only method of

strengthening  command;  and  the  Russians  quietly  submitted  to  it,

notwithstanding their natural bent to sedition; and after the punishment, did

their duty as usual. But the Dane thought in a different manner, and resolved

to be revenged for the treatment he had received, and thereupon nailed up the

cannon, deserted to the Turks, turned Mahometan, and defended Azoph, with

great success, against his former masters. This instance shews, that the lenity

which is now practised in Russia, is much preferable to the former severities;

and is better calculated to retain those in their duty, who by a good education,

have a proper sense of honour. It was absolutely necessary at that time, to use

the utmost rigour towards the common people; but since their manners have

been changed, the empress Elizabeth[39] has completed, by clemency, the

work her father begun, by the authority of the laws. This lenity has even been

carried, by this princess, to a degree unexampled, in the history of any nation.

She has promised, that, during her reign, no person shall be punished with

death, and she has kept her word. She is the first sovereign who ever shewed

so much regard for the lives of men. By an institution, equally prudent and

humane, malefactors are now condemned to serve in the mines, and other

public works: by which means their very punishments prove of service to the

state. In other countries, they know only how to put a criminal to death, with

all the apparatus of execution, without being able to prevent the perpetrationof crimes. The apprehension of death makes, perhaps, less impression on

those miscreants, who are, for the most part, bred up in idleness, than the fear

of punishment and hard labour, renewed every day.

  To return to the siege of Azoph, which place was now defended by the

same person who had before directed the attacks against it; the Russians, in

vain, attempted to take it by storm; and after losing a great number of men,

were obliged to raise the siege.

    Perseverance in his undertakings, was the distinguishing character of Peter

the Great. In the spring of 1696, he brought a still more considerable army

before Azoph. About this time died czar John, his brother, who though he had

not, while living, been the least curb to Peter's authority, having enjoyed only

the bare title of czar, yet he had been some restraint upon him in regard to

appearances.  The  money  which  had  been  appropriated  to  the  support  of

John's dignity and household, were now applied to the maintenance of the

army. This proved no small help to a government, whose revenues were not

near so great as they are at present. Peter wrote to the emperor Leopold, to

the states-general, and to the elector of Brandenburg, to obtain engineers,

gunners, and seamen. He likewise took some Calmucks into his pay, whose

light horse are very useful against the Crim Tartars.

  The most agreeable of the czar's successes, was that of his little fleet,

which was at length completed, and well commanded. It defeated the Turkish

saicks,  sent  from  Constantinople,  and  took  some  of  them.  The  siege  was

carried  on  regularly  by  trenches,  but  not  altogether  in  our  method;  the

trenches  being  three  times  deeper  than  ours,  with  parapets  as  high  as

ramparts. At length the garrison surrendered, the 28th of July, 1696. N. S.

without being allowed the honours of war, or to carry out with them either

arms or ammunition: they were likewise obliged to deliver up the renegade,

Jacob, to the conquerors.

  The  czar  immediately  set  about  fortifying  Azoph,  built  strong  forts  to

protect it, and made a harbour capable of holding large vessels, with a design

to  make  himself  master  of  the  Streights  of  Caffa,  or  the  Cimmerian

Bosphorus, which commands the entrance into the Pontus Euxinus, or Black

Sea; places famous in ancient times, by the naval armaments of Mithridates.

He left thirty-two armed saicks before Azoph,[40] and made all the necessarypreparations for fitting out a fleet against the Turks, to consist of nine ships of

sixty guns, and of forty-one, from thirty to fifty. He obliged his principal

nobles, and the richer merchants, to contribute towards this armament; and

thinking that the estates of the clergy ought to help towards the common

cause, he obliged the patriarch, the bishops, and principal clergy, to pay down

a sum of ready money to forward this expedition, in honour of their country,

and the advantage of the Christian faith. The Cossacks were employed in

building a number of those light boats in use amongst them, and which were

excellent  for  the  purpose  of  cruising  on  the  coast  of  Crim  Tartary.  The

Ottoman empire was alarmed at this powerful armament; the first that had

ever been attempted on the Palus Mæotis. The czar's scheme was to drive the

Turks and the Tartars for ever out of the Taurica Chersonesus, and afterwards

to establish a free and easy commerce with Persia through Georgia. This is

the very trade which the Greeks formerly carried on to Colchos, and to this

peninsula  of  Crim  Tartary,  which  Peter  now  seemed  on  the  point  of

conquering.

  Having subdued the Turks and the Tartars, he was willing to accustom his

people to splendid shows as well as to military labour. He made his army to

enter into Moscow, under triumphal arches, in the midst of superb fire-works,

and every thing that could add to the lustre of the festival. The soldiers who

had fought on board the Venetian saicks against the Turks, and who were a

distinct corps of themselves, marched first. Marshal Sheremeto, the generals

Gordon and Schein, admiral Le Fort, and the other general officers, all took

the precedence of their monarch in this procession, who declared he had no

rank in the army, being desirous to convince the nobility, by his example, that

the only way to acquire military preferment, was to deserve it.[41]

  This  triumphal  entry  seemed  somewhat  a-kin  to  those  of  the  ancient

Romans, in which the conquerors were wont to expose the prisoners they had

taken, to public view, and sometimes put them to death: in like manner, the

slaves, taken in this expedition, follow the army; and the deserter Jacob, who

had betrayed them, was drawn in an open cart, in which was a gibbet, to

which his body was fastened after he had been broke upon the wheel.

  On this occasion was struck the first medal in Russia, with this remarkable

legend, in the language of the country. 'Peter the First, august emperor of

Muscovy.'  On  the  reverse  was  the  city  of  Azoph,  with  these  words;'Victorious by Fire and Water.'

  Peter felt a sensible concern in the midst of all these successes, that his

ships and gallies in the sea of Azoph, had been built entirely by the hands of

foreigners; and wished as earnestly to have a harbour in the Baltic Sea, as

upon the Pontus Euxinus.

  Accordingly,  in  the  month  of  March  1697,  he  sent  threescore  young

Russians of Le Fort's regiment, into Italy, most of them to Venice, and the

rest to Leghorn, to instruct themselves in the naval art, and the manner of

constructing gallies. He likewise sent forty others into Holland,[42] to learn

the method of building and working large ships: and others likewise into

Germany, to serve in the land forces, and instruct themselves in the military

discipline of that nation. At length he took a resolution to absent himself for a

few years from his own dominions, in order to learn how to govern them the

better.  He  had  an  irresistible  inclination  to  improve  himself  by  his  own

observation and practice in the knowledge of naval affairs, and of the several

arts which he was so desirous to establish in his own country. He proposed to

travel incognito through Denmark, Brandenburg, Holland, Vienna, Venice,

and Rome. France and Spain were the only countries he did not take into his

plan; Spain, because the arts he was in quest of, were too much neglected

there;  and  France,  because  in  that  kingdom  they  reigned  with  too  much

ostentation, and that the parade and state of Lewis XIV. which had disgusted

so  many  crowned  heads,  ill  agreed  with  the  private  manner  in  which  he

proposed to travel. Moreover, he was in alliance with most of the powers,

whose dominions he intended to visit, except those of France and Rome. He

likewise  remembered,  with  some  degree  of  resentment,  the  little  respect

shewn  by  Lewis  XIV.  to  his  embassy  in  1687,  which  had  proved  more

famous than successful; and lastly he already began to espouse the cause of

Augustus,  elector  of  Saxony,  with  whom  the  prince  of  Conti  had  lately

entered into a competition for the crown of Poland.


  CHAPTER IX.

  Travels of Peter the Great.

  1697.  Having thus determined to visit the several countries and courts above-

mentioned  in  a  private  character,  he  put  himself  into  the  retinue  of  three

ambassadors, in the same manner as he had before mingled in the train of his

generals at his triumphant entry into Moscow.

  [43]  The  three  ambassadors  were,  general  Le  Fort,  the  boyard  Alexis

Gollowin, commissary-general of war, and governor of Siberia, the same who

signed the perpetual treaty of peace with the plenipotentiaries of China, on

the frontiers of that empire; and Wonitzin, diak, or secretary of state, who had

been  long  employed  in  foreign  courts.  Four  principal  secretaries,  twelve

gentlemen, two pages for each ambassador, a company of fifty guards, with

their officers, all of the regiment of Preobrazinski, composed the chief retinue

of this embassy, which consisted in the whole of two hundred persons; and

the czar, reserving to himself only one valet de chambre, a servant in livery,

and a dwarf, mingled with the crowd. It was a thing unparalleled in history,

for a king of five-and-twenty years of age, to quit his dominions, in order to

learn  the  art  of  governing.  His  victory  over  the  Turks  and  Tartars,  the

splendour of his triumphant entry into Moscow, the number of foreign troops

attached to his service, the death of his brother John, his co-partner in the

empire, and the confinement of the princess Sophia to a cloister, and above

all  the  universal  respect  shewn  to  his  person,  seemed  to  assure  him  the

tranquillity of his kingdom during his absence. He intrusted the regency in

the hands of the boyard Strechnef, and the knez or prince Romadonowski,

who were to deliberate with the rest of the boyards in cases of importance.

  Two  troops  raised  by  general  Gordon  remained  behind  in  Moscow,  to

keep every thing quiet in that capital. Those strelitzes, who were thought

likely  to  create  a  disturbance,  were  distributed  in  the  frontiers  of  Crim

Tartary, to preserve the conquest of Azoph, and to check the incursions of the

Tartars. Having provided against every incident, he gave a free scope to his

passion and desire of improvement.

  As this journey proved the cause, or at least the pretext, of the bloody war,

which so long traversed, but in the end promoted, all the designs of the czar;

which drove Augustus, king of Poland, from the throne; placed that crown on

the head of Stanislaus, and then stript him of it; which made Charles XII.

king  of  Sweden,  the  first  of  conquerors  for  nine  years,  and  the  most

unfortunate of kings for nine more; it is necessary, in order to enter into adetail of these events, to take a view of the state of Europe at that time.

  Sultan Mustapha II. sat at that time on the Ottoman throne; the weakness

of whose administration would not permit him to make any great efforts,

either against Leopold, emperor of Germany, whose arms were successful in

Hungary, nor against the czar, who had lately taken Azoph from him, and

threatened to make himself master of the Pontus Euxinus; nor even against

the Venetians, who had made themselves masters of all the Peloponnesus.

  John  Sobieski,  king  of  Poland,  for  ever  famous  by  the  victory  of

Chocksim, and the deliverance of Vienna, died the 17th of June, 1696, and

the possession of that crown was in dispute between Augustus, elector of

Saxony, who obtained it, and Armond, prince of Conti, who had only the

honour of being elected.

  1697.]  Sweden  had  lately  lost,  but  without  regret,  Charles  XI.  her

sovereign, who was the first king who had ever been really absolute in that

country, and who was the father of a prince still more so, and with whom all

despotic power ceased. He left the crown to his son Charles XII. a youth of

only fifteen years of age. This was in all appearance a conjuncture the most

favourable  for  the  czar's  design;  he  had  it  in  his  power  to  extend  his

dominions on the Gulf of Finland, and on the side of Livonia. But he did not

think it enough to harass the Turks on the Black Sea; the settlements on the

Palus Mæotis, and the borders of the Caspian Sea, were not sufficient to

answer  his  schemes  of  navigation,  commerce,  and  power.  Besides,  glory,

which is the darling object of every reformer, was to be found neither in

Persia, nor in Turkey, but in our parts of Europe, where great talents are

rendered immortal. In a word, Peter did not aim at introducing either the

Persian or Turkish manners among his subjects.

  Germany, then at war both with the Turks and with the French, and united

with Spain, England, and Holland, against the single power of Lewis XIV.

was on the point of concluding peace, and the plenipotentiaries were already

met at the castle of Ryswick, in the neighbourhood of the Hague.

  It was during this situation of affairs, that Peter and his ambassador began

their journey in the month of April, 1697, by the way of Great Novogorod:

from thence they travelled through Esthonia and Livonia, provinces formerly

disputed by the Russians, Swedes, and Poles, and which the Swedes at lastacquired by superiority of arms.

  The  fertility  of  Livonia,  and  the  situation  of  its  capital,  Riga,  were

temptations to the czar, to possess himself of that country. He expressed a

curiosity to see the fortifications of the citadel. But count D'Alberg, governor

of  Riga,  taking  umbrage  at  this  request,  refused  him  the  satisfaction  he

desired, and affected to treat the embassy with contempt. This behaviour did

not at all contribute to cool the inclination the czar might have, to make

himself one day master of those provinces.

  From Livonia they proceeded to Brandenburg-Prussia, part of which had

been inhabited by the ancient Vandals; Polish Prussia had been included in

European  Sarmatia.  Brandenburg-Prussia  was  a  poor  country  and  badly

peopled; but its elector, who afterwards took the name of king, displayed a

magnificence on this occasion, equally new and destructive to his dominions.

He piqued himself upon receiving this embassy in his city of Konigsberg,

with all the pomp of royalty. The most sumptuous presents were made on

both sides. The contrast between the French dress which the court of Berlin

affected, and the long Asiatic robes of the Russians, with their caps buttoned

up  with  pearls  and  diamonds,  and  their  scimitars  hanging  at  their  belts,

produced a singular effect. The czar was dressed after the German fashion.

The prince of Georgia, who accompanied him, was clad in a Persian habit,

which displayed a different magnificence. This is the same who was taken

prisoner afterwards at the battle of Narva, and died in Sweden.

  Peter despised all this ostentation; it was to have been wished that he had

shewn  an  equal  contempt  for  the  pleasures  of  the  table,  in  which  the

Germans,  at  that  time,  placed  their  chiefest  glory.  It  was  at  one  of  those

entertainments,[44] then too much in fashion, and which are alike fatal to

health and morality, that he drew his sword upon his favourite, Le Fort; but

he  expressed  as  much  contrition  for  this  sudden  sally  of  passion,  as

Alexander did for the murder of Clytus; he asked pardon of Le Fort, saying,

that  he  wanted  to  reform  his  subjects,  and  could  not  yet  reform  himself.

General Le Fort, in his manuscript praises the czar more for this goodness of

heart, than he blames him for his excess of passion.

  The  ambassadors  then  went  through  Pomerania  and  Berlin;  and,  from

thence, one part took its way through Magdeburg, and the other by Hamburg,a city which already began to be considerable by its extensive commerce, but

not so rich and populous as it has become since. From thence they directed

their route towards Minden, crossed Westphalia, and at length, by the way of

Cleves, arrived at Amsterdam.

  The czar reached this city fifteen days before the ambassadors. At his first

coming, he lodged in a house belonging to the East India company; but soon

afterwards  he  took  a  small  apartment  in  the  dock-yard,  belonging  to  the

admiralty. He then put on the habit of a Dutch skipper, and in that dress went

to the village of Saardam, a place where a great many more ships were built

at that times, than at present. This village is as large, as populous, and as rich,

and much neater, than many opulent towns. The czar greatly admired the

multitude  of  people  who  were  constantly  employed  there,  the  order  and

regularity of their times of working, the prodigious dispatch with which they

built  and  fitted  out  ships,  the  incredible  number  of  warehouses,  and

machines, for the greater ease and security of labour. The czar began with

purchasing a bark, to which he made a mast with his own hands; after that, he

worked upon all the different parts in the construction of a vessel, living in

the same manner as the workmen at Saardam, dressing and eating the same as

them, and working in the forges, the rope-walks, and in the several mills,

which are in prodigious numbers in that village, for sawing timber, extracting

oil, making paper, and wire-drawing. He caused himself to be enrolled in the

list  of  carpenters,  by  the  name  of  Peter  Michaelhoff,  and  was  commonly

called Peter Bas, or Master Peter: the workmen were at first confounded at

having a crowned head for a fellow-labourer, but soon became familiarized to

the sight.

  While  he  was  thus  handling  the  compass  and  the  axe  at  Saardam,  a

confirmation was brought him of the division in Poland, and of the double

nomination of the elector Augustus, and the prince of Conti. The carpenter of

Saardam  immediately  promised  king  Augustus  to  assist  him  with  thirty

thousand men; and, from his work-loft, issued out orders to his army that was

assembled in the Ukraine against the Turks.

  11th Aug. 1697.] His troops gained a victory over the Tartars near Azoph,

and a few months afterwards took from them the city of Or, or Orkapi, which

we call Precop.[45] As to himself, he still continued improving in different

arts: he went frequently from Saardam to Amsterdam, to hear the lectures ofthe  celebrated  anatomist,  Ruysch;  and  made  himself  master  of  several

operations in surgery, which, in case of necessity, might be of use both to

himself and his officers. He went through a course of natural philosophy, in

the house of the burgomaster Witzen, a person for ever estimable for his

patriotic virtue, and the noble use he made of his immense riches, which he

distributed like a citizen of the world, sending men of abilities, at a great

expense, to all parts of the globe, in search of whatever was most rare and

valuable, and fitting out vessels at his own charge to make new discoveries.

  Peter Bas gave a truce to his labours for a short time, but it was only to

pay a private visit at Utrecht, and at the Hague, to William, king of England,

and stadtholder of the United Provinces. General Le Fort was the only one

admitted  to  the  private  conference  of  the  two  monarchs.  Peter  assisted

afterwards at the public entry of his ambassadors, and at their audience: they

presented, in his name, to the deputy of the states, six hundred of the most

beautiful sables that could be procured; and the states, over and above the

customary presents on these occasions, of a gold chain and a medal, gave

them  three  magnificent  coaches.  They  received  the  first  visits  of  all  the

plenipotentiaries who were at the congress of Ryswick, excepting those of

France, to whom they had not notified their arrival, not only because the czar

espoused the cause of Augustus against the prince of Conti, but also because

king William, whose friendship he was desirous of cultivating, was averse to

a peace with France.

  At  his  return  to  Amsterdam  he  resumed  his  former  occupations,  and

completed  with  his  own  hands,  a  ship  of  sixty  guns,  that  he  had  begun

himself, and sent her to Archangel; which was the only port he had at that

time on the ocean.

  He not only engaged in his service several French refugees, Swiss, and

Germans;  but  he  also  sent  all  sorts  of  artists  over  to  Moscow,  and  he

previously  made  a  trial  of  their  several  abilities  himself.  There  were  few

trades or arts which he did not perfectly well understand, in their minutest

branches: he took a particular pleasure in correcting with his own hands, the

geographical maps, which at that time laid down at hazard the positions of

the towns and rivers in his vast dominions, then very little known. There is

still  preserved,  a  map,  on  which  he  marked  out,  with  his  own  hand,  his

projected communication of the Caspian and Black Seas, the execution ofwhich he had given in charge to Mr. Brekel, a German engineer. The junction

of these two seas was indeed a less difficult enterprise than that of the Ocean

and Mediterranean, which was effected in France; but the very idea of joining

the sea of Azoph with the Caspian, astonished the imagination at that time:

but new establishments in that country became the object of his attention, in

proportion as his successes begat new hopes.

  His troops, commanded by general Schein and prince Dolgorowski, had

lately gained a victory over the Tartars near Azoph, and likewise over a body

of janissaries sent by sultan Mustapha to their assistance. (July 1696.) This

success served to make him more respected, even by those who blamed him,

as  a  sovereign,  for  having  quitted  his  dominions,  to  turn  workman  at

Amsterdam. They now saw, that the affairs of the monarch did not suffer by

the labours of the philosopher, the traveller, and the artificer.

  He remained at Amsterdam, constantly employed in his usual occupations

of  shipbuilding,  engineering,  geography,  and  the  practice  of  natural

philosophy, till the middle of January 1698, and then he set out for England,

but still as one of the retinue of his ambassadors.

  King William sent his own yacht to meet him, and two ships of war as

convoy. In England he observed the same manner of living as at Amsterdam

and Saardam; he took an apartment near the king's dockyard, at Deptford,

where he applied himself wholly to gain instruction. The Dutch builders had

only  taught  him  their  method,  and  the  practical  part  of  shipbuilding.  In

England he found the art better explained; for there they work according to

mathematical proportion. He soon made himself so perfect in this science,

that he was able to give lessons to others. He began to build a ship according

to the English method of construction, and it proved a prime sailor. The art of

watchmaking,  which  was  already  brought  to  perfection  in  London,  next

attracted his attention, and he made himself complete master of the whole

theory.  Captain  Perry,  the  engineer,  who  followed  him  from  London  to

Russia, says, that from the casting of cannon, to the spinning of ropes, there

was not any one branch of trade belonging to a ship that he did not minutely

observe, and even put his hand to, as often as he came into the places where

those trades were carried on.

  In  order  to  cultivate  his  friendship,  he  was  allowed  to  engage  severalEnglish artificers into his service, as he had done in Holland; but, over and

above artificers, he engaged likewise some mathematicians, which he would

not so easily have found in Amsterdam. Ferguson, a Scotchman, an excellent

geometrician, entered into his service, and was the first person who brought

arithmetic into use in the exchequer in Russia, where before that time, they

made use only of the Tartarian method of reckoning, with balls strung upon a

wire; a method which supplied the place of writing, but was very perplexing

and imperfect, because, after the calculation, there was no method of proving

it, in order to discover any error. The Indian ciphers, which are now in use,

were not introduced among us till the ninth century, by Arabs; and they did

not  make  their  way  into  the  Russian  empire  till  one  thousand  years

afterwards. Such has been the fate of the arts, to make their progress slowly

round the globe. He took with him two young students from a mathematical

school,[46]  and  this  was  the  beginning  of  the  marine  academy,  founded

afterwards  by  Peter  the  Great.  He  observed  and  calculated  eclipses  with

Ferguson.  Perry,  the  engineer,  though  greatly  discontented  at  not  being

sufficiently rewarded, acknowledges, that Peter made himself a proficient in

astronomy; that he perfectly well understood the motions of the heavenly

bodies, as well as the laws of gravitation, by which they are directed. This

force,  now  so  evidently  demonstrated,  and  before  the  time  of  the  great

Newton so little known, by which all the planets gravitate towards each other,

and  which  retain  them  in  their  orbits,  was  already  become  familiar  to  a

sovereign of Russia, while other countries amused themselves with imaginary

vertices, and, in Galileo's nation, one set of ignorant persons ordered others,

as ignorant, to believe the earth to be immoveable.

  Perry set out in order to effect a communication between rivers, to build

bridges, and construct sluices. The czar's plan was to open a communication

by means of canals between the Ocean, the Caspian, and the Black Seas.

  We must not forget to observe, that a set of English merchants, with the

marquis of Caermarthen[47] at their head, gave Peter fifteen thousand pounds

sterling, for the permission of vending tobacco in Russia. The patriarch, by a

mistaken severity, had interdicted this branch of trade; for the Russian church

forbid  smoking,  as  an  unclean  and  sinful  action.  Peter,  who  knew  better

things,  and  who,  amongst  his  many  projected  changes,  meditated  a

reformation  of  the  church,  introduced  this  commodity  of  trade  into  hisdominions.

  Before  Peter  left  England,  he  was  entertained  by  king  William  with  a

spectacle worthy such a guest: this was a mock sea-fight. Little was it then

imagined, that the czar would one day fight a real battle on this element

against the Swedes, and gain naval victories in the Baltic. In fine, William

made him a present of the vessel in which he used to go over to Holland,

called the Royal Transport, a beautiful yacht, and magnificently adorned. In

this vessel Peter returned to Holland the latter end of 1698, taking with him

three captains of ships of war, five and twenty captains of merchant ships,

forty  lieutenants,  thirty  pilots,  as  many  surgeons,  two  hundred  and  fifty

gunners, and upwards of three hundred artificers. This little colony of persons

skilful in all branches, sailed from Holland to Archangel, on board the Royal

Transport,  and  from  thence  were  distributed  into  all  the  different  places

where  their  services  were  necessary.  Those  who  had  been  engaged  at

Amsterdam went by the way of Narva, which then belonged to the Swedes.

  While he was thus transplanting the arts and manufacture of England and

Holland into his own country, the officers, whom he had sent to Rome, and

other places in Italy, had likewise engaged some artists in his service. General

Sheremeto, who was at the head of his embassy to Italy, took the tour of

Rome, Naples, Venice, and Malta, while the czar proceeded to Vienna with

his other ambassadors. He had now only to view the military discipline of the

Germans, after having seen the English fleets, and the dock-yards of Holland.

Politics  had  likewise  as  great  a  share  in  this  journey  as  the  desire  of

instruction. The emperor was his natural ally against the Turks. Peter had a

private audience of Leopold, and the two monarchs conferred standing, to

avoid the trouble of ceremony.

  There happened nothing worthy remark during his stay at Vienna, except

the celebration of the ancient feast of the landlord and landlady, which had

been disused for a considerable time, and which Leopold thought proper to

revive  on  the  czar's  account.  This  feast,  which  by  the  Germans  is  called

Wurtchafft, is celebrated in the following manner:-

  The  emperor  is  landlord  and  the  empress  landlady,  the  king  of  the

Romans, the archdukes and the archduchesses are generally their assistants:

they entertain people of all nations as their guests, who come dressed afterthe most ancient fashion of their respective countries: those who are invited

to the feast, draw lots for tickets, on each of which is written the name of the

nation, and the character or person they are to represent. One perhaps draws a

ticket for a Chinese mandarin; another for a Tartarian mirza; a third a Persian

satrap; and a fourth for a Roman senator; a princess may, by her ticket, be a

gardener's wife, or a milk-maid; a prince a peasant, or a common soldier.

Dances are composed suitable to all those characters, and the landlord and

landlady with their family wait at table. Such was the ancient institution; but

on this occasion[48] Joseph, king of the Romans, and the countess of Traun,

represented the ancient Egyptians. The archduke Charles, and the countess of

Walstein, were dressed like Flemings in the time of Charles the Fifth. The

archduchess Mary Elizabeth and count Traun were in the habits of Tartars;

the  archduchess  Josephina  and  the  count  of  Workslaw  were  habited  like

Persians, and the archduchess Mariamne and prince Maximilian of Hanover

in the character of North Holland peasants. Peter appeared in the dress of a

Friesland boor, and all who spoke to him addressed him in that character, at

the same time talking to him of the great czar of Muscovy. These are trifling

particulars; but whatever revives the remembrance of ancient manners and

customs, is in some degree worthy of being recorded.

  Peter was ready to set out from Vienna, in order to proceed to Venice, to

complete his tour of instruction, when he received the news of a rebellion,

which had lately broke out in his dominions.


  CHAPTER X.

  A conspiracy punished.-The corps of strelitzes abolished, alterations in

customs, manners, church, and state.


  Czar  Peter,  when  he  left  his  dominions  to  set  out  on  his  travels,  had

provided against every incident, even that of rebellion. But the great and

serviceable things he had done for his country, proved the very cause of this

rebellion.

  Certain old boyards, to whom the ancient customs were still dear, and

some priests, to whom the new ones appeared little better than sacrilege,

began these disturbances, and the old faction of the princess Sophia took thisopportunity to rouse itself anew. It is said, that one of her sisters, who was

confined  to  the  same  monastery,  contributed  not  a  little  to  excite  these

seditions. Care was taken to spread abroad the danger to be feared from the

introduction of foreigners to instruct the nation. In short, who would believe,

that[49] the permission which the czar had given to import tobacco into his

empire, contrary to the inclination of the clergy, was one of the chief motives

of the insurrection? Superstition, the scourge of every country, yet the darling

of the multitude, spread itself from the common people to the strelitzes, who

had been scattered on the frontiers of Lithuania: they assembled in a body,

and marched towards Moscow, with the intent to place the princess Sophia on

the throne, and for ever to prevent the return of a czar who had violated the

established  customs,[50]  by  presuming  to  travel  for  instruction  among

foreigners. The forces commanded by Schein and Gordon, who were much

better disciplined than the strelitzes, met them fifteen leagues from Moscow,

gave them battle, and entirely defeated them: but this advantage, gained by a

foreign general over the ancient militia, among whom were several of the

burghers of Moscow, contributed still more to irritate the people.

  To quell these tumults, the czar sets out privately from Vienna, passes

through Poland, has a private interview with Augustus, concerts measures

with  that  prince  for  extending  the  Russian  dominions  on  the  side  of  the

Baltic, and at length arrived at Moscow, where he surprised every one with

his presence: he then confers rewards on the troops who had defeated the

strelitzes, (Sept. 1698,) of whom the prisons were now full. If the crimes of

these unhappy wretches were great, their punishment was no less so. Their

leaders, with several of their officers and priests, were condemned to death;

some were broken upon the wheel,[51] and two women were buried alive;

upwards of two thousand of the strelitzes were executed, part of whom were

hung round about the walls of the city, and others put to death in different

manners, and their dead bodies remained exposed for two days in the high

roads,[52] particularly about the monastery where the princesses Sophia and

Eudocia  resided.[53]  Monuments  of  stone  were  erected,  on  which  their

crimes and punishments were set forth. A great number of them who had

wives  and  children  at  Moscow,  were  dispersed  with  their  families  into

Siberia, the kingdom of Astracan, and the country of Azoph. This punishment

was at least of service to the state, as they helped to cultivate and people alarge tract of waste land.

  Perhaps, if the czar had not found it absolutely necessary to make such

terrible examples, he might have employed part of those strelitzes whom he

put to death, upon the public works; whereas they were now lost both to him

and the state: the lives of men ought to be held in great estimation, especially

in  a  country  where  the  increase  of  inhabitants  ought  to  have  been  the

principal care of the legislature: but he thought it necessary to terrify and

break the spirit of the nation by executions, and the parade attending them.

The entire corps of the strelitzes, whose number not one of his predecessors

had even dared to think of diminishing, was broke for ever, and their very

name abolished. This change was effected without any resistance, because

matters had been properly prepared beforehand. The Turkish sultan, Osman,

as I have already remarked, was deposed and murdered in the same century,

only for giving the janissaries room to suspect that he intended to lessen their

number. Peter had better success, because he had taken better measures.

  Of this powerful and numerous body of the strelitzes, he left only two

feeble regiments, from whom there could no longer be any danger; and yet

these still retaining their old spirit of mutiny, revolted again in Astracan, in

the year 1705, but were quickly suppressed.

  But while we are relating Peter's severity in this affair of state, let us not

forget to commemorate the more than equal humanity he shewed some time

afterwards, when he lost his favourite Le Fort, who was snatched away by an

untimely fate, March 12, N. S. 1699, at the age of 46. He paid him the same

funeral  honours  as  are  bestowed  on  the  greatest  sovereigns,  and  assisted

himself in the procession, carrying a pike in his hand, and marching after the

captains, in the rank of a lieutenant, which he held in the deceased general's

regiment, hereby setting an example to his nobles, of the respect due to merit

and the military rank.

  After the death of Le Fort, it appeared plainly, that the changes in the state

were not owing to that general, but to the czar himself. Peter had indeed been

confirmed in his design by his several conversations with Le Fort; but he had

formed and executed them all without his assistance.

  As  soon  as  he  had  suppressed  the  strelitzes,  he  established  regular

regiments  on  the  German  model,  who  were  all  clothed  in  a  short  andcommodious  uniform,  in  the  room  of  those  long  and  troublesome  coats,

which they used to wear before; and, at the same time, their exercise was

likewise more regular.

  The regiment of Preobrazinski guards was already formed; it had taken its

name from the first company of fifty men, whom the czar had trained up in

his younger days, in his retreat at Preobrazinski, at the time when his sister

Sophia  governed  the  state,  and  the  other  regiment  of  guards  was  also

established.

  As he had himself passed through the lowest degrees in the army, he was

resolved that the sons of his boyards and great men, should serve as common

soldiers before they were made officers. He sent some of the young nobility

on board of his fleet at Woronitz and Azoph, where he obliged them to serve

their  apprenticeship  as  common  seamen.  No  one  dared  to  dispute  the

commands of a master who had himself set the example. The English and

Dutch he had brought over with him were employed in equipping this fleet

for sea, in constructing sluices, and building docks, for careening the ships,

and to resume the great work of joining the Tanais, or Don, and the Wolga,

which had been dropped by Brekel, the German. And now he began to set

about his projected reformations in the council of state, in the revenue, in the

church, and even in society itself.

  The affairs of the revenue had been hitherto administered much in the

same manner as in Turkey. Each boyard paid a stipulated sum for his lands,

which he raised upon the peasants, his vassals; the czar appointed certain

burghers  and  burgomasters  to  be  his  receivers,  who  were  not  powerful

enough to claim the right of paying only such sums as they thought proper

into the public treasury. This new administration of the finances, was what

cost him the most trouble: he was obliged to try several methods before he

could fix upon a proper one.

  The reformation of the church, which in all other countries is looked upon

as so dangerous and difficult an attempt, was not so to him. The patriarchs

had at times opposed the authority of the crown, as well as the strelitzes;

Nicon with insolence, Joachin, one of his successors, in an artful manner.

  The  bishops  had  arrogated  the  power  of  life  and  death,  a  prerogative

directly  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  religion,  and  the  subordination  ofgovernment. This assumed power, which had been of long standing, was now

taken from them. The patriarch Adrian, dying at the close of this century,

Peter declared that there should for the future be no other.

  This dignity then was entirely suppressed, and the great income belonging

thereto was united to the public revenue, which stood in need of this addition.

Although the czar did not set himself up as the head of the Russian church, as

the kings of Great Britain have done in regard to the church of England; yet

he was, in fact, absolute master over it, because the synods did not dare either

to disobey the commands of a despotic sovereign, or to dispute with a prince

who had more knowledge than themselves.

  We need only to cast an eye on the preamble to the edict, concerning his

ecclesiastical regulations, issued in 1721, to be convinced that he acted at

once  as  master  and  legislator:  'We  should  deem  ourselves  guilty  of

ingratitude to the Most High, if, after having reformed the military and civil

orders, we neglect the spiritual, &c. For this cause, following the example of

the most ancient kings, who have been famed for piety, we have taken upon

us to make certain wholesome regulations, touching the clergy.' It is true, he

convened a synod for carrying into execution his ecclesiastical decrees, but

the members of this synod, at entering upon their office, were to take an oath,

the form of which had been drawn up and signed by himself. This was an

oath of submission and obedience, and was conceived in the following terms:

'I swear to be a faithful and obedient servant and subject to my true and

natural sovereign, and to the august successors whom it shall please him to

nominate,  in  virtue  of  the  incontestable  right  of  which  he  is  possessed:  I

acknowledge him to be the supreme judge of this spiritual college: I swear by

the all-seeing God, that I understand and mean this oath in the full force and

sense, which the words convey to those who read or hear it.' This oath is

much stronger than that of the supremacy in England. The Russian monarch

was not, indeed, one of the fathers of the synod, but he dictated their laws;

and, though he did not touch the holy censer, he directed the hands that held

it.

  Previous to this great work, he thought, that in a state like his, which stood

in need of being peopled, the celibacy of the monks was contrary to nature,

and to the public good. It was the ancient custom of the Russian church, for

secular priests to marry at least once in their lives: they were even obliged soto do: and formerly they ceased to be priests as soon as they lost their wives.

But that a multitude of young people of both sexes should make a vow of

living useless in a cloister, and at the expense of others, appeared to him a

dangerous institution. He, therefore, ordered that no one should be admitted

to a monastic life, till they were fifty years old, a time of life very rarely

subject to a temptation of this kind; and he forbid any person to be admitted,

at any age soever, who was actually in possession of any public employ.

  This regulation has been repealed since his death, because the government

has thought proper to shew more complaisance to the monasteries: but the

patriarchal dignity has never been revived, and its great revenues are now

appropriated to the payment of the troops.

  These alterations at first excited some murmurings. A certain priest wrote,

to prove that Peter was antichrist, because he would not admit of a patriarch;

and the art of printing, which the czar encouraged in his kingdom, was made

use of to publish libels against him: but, on the other hand, there was another

priest who started up to prove that Peter could not be antichrist, because the

number 666 was not to be found in his name, and that he had not the sign of

the Beast. All complaints, however, were soon quieted. Peter, in fact, gave

much more to the church than he took from it; for he made the clergy, by

degrees,  more  regular  and  more  learned.  He  founded  three  colleges  at

Moscow, where they teach the languages, and where those who are designed

for the priesthood are obliged to study.

  One of the most necessary reforms was the suppression, or at least the

mitigation of the Three Lents, an ancient superstition of the Greek church,

and as prejudicial with respect to those who are employed in public works,

and especially to soldiers, as was the old Jewish superstition of not fighting

on the sabbath-day. Accordingly the czar dispensed with his workmen and

soldiers  at  least,  observing  these  lents,  in  which,  though  they  were  not

permitted to eat, they were accustomed to get drunk. He likewise dispensed

with their observance of meagre days; the chaplains of the fleet and army

were obliged to set the example, which they did without much reluctance.

  The calendar, another important object. Formerly, in all the countries of

the world, the chiefs of religion had the care of regulating the year, not only

on account of the feasts to be observed, but because, in ancient times, thepriests were the only persons who understood astronomy.

  The year began with the Russians on the 1st of September. Peter ordered,

that it should for the future commence the first day of January, as among the

other nations of Europe. This alteration was to take place in the year 1700, at

the beginning of the century, which he celebrated by a jubilee, and other

grand solemnities. It was a matter of surprise, to the common people, how the

czar should be able to change the course of the sun. Some obstinate persons,

persuaded that God had created the world in September, continued their old

style: but the alteration took place in all the public offices, in the whole court

of chancery, and in a little time throughout the whole empire. Peter did not

adopt the Gregorian calendar, because it had been rejected by the English

mathematicians;  but  which  must,  nevertheless,  be  one  day  received  in  all

countries.

  Ever  since  the  5th  century,  the  time  when  letters  first  came  into  use

amongst them, they had been accustomed to write upon long rolls, made

either of the bark of trees, or of parchment, and afterwards of paper; and the

czar was obliged to publish an edict, ordering every one, for the future, to

write after our manner.

  The  reformation  now  became  general.  Their  marriages  were  made

formerly  after  the  same  manner  as  in  Turkey  and  Persia,  where  the

bridegroom does not see his bride till the contract is signed, and they can no

longer go from their words. This custom may do well enough among those

people, where polygamy prevails, and where the women are always shut up;

but it is a very bad one in countries where a man is confined to one wife, and

where divorces are seldom allowed.

  The czar was willing to accustom his people to the manners and customs

of the nations which he had visited in his travels, and from whence he had

taken the masters who were now instructing them.

  It appeared necessary that the Russians should not be dressed in a different

manner from those who were teaching them the arts and sciences; because the

aversion to strangers, which is but too natural to mankind, is not a little kept

up by a difference of dress. The full dress, which at that time partook of the

fashions of the Poles, the Tartars, and the ancient Hungarians, was, as we

have  elsewhere  observed,  very  noble;  but  the  dress  of  the  burghers  andcommon people resembled those jackets plaited round the waist, which are

still  given  to  the  poor  children  in  some  of  the  French  hospitals.[54]  In

general, the robe was formerly the dress of all nations, as being a garment

that required the least trouble and art; and, for the same reason, the beard was

suffered to grow. The czar met with but little difficulty in introducing our

mode of dress, and the custom of shaving among his courtiers; but the people

were more obstinate, he found himself obliged to lay a tax on long coats and

beards. Patterns of close-bodied coats were hung up in public places; and

whoever refused to pay the tax were obliged to suffer their robes and their

beards to be curtailed: all this was done in a jocular manner, and this air of

pleasantry prevented seditions.

  It has ever been the aim of all legislators to render mankind more sociable;

but it is not sufficient to effect this end, that they live together in towns, there

must be a mutual intercourse of civility. This intercourse sweetens all the

bitterness of life. The czar, therefore, introduced those assemblies which the

Italians call ridotti. To these assemblies he invited all the ladies of his court,

with their daughters; and they were to appear dressed after the fashions of the

southern nations of Europe. He was even himself at the pains of drawing up

rules for all the little decorums to be observed at these social entertainments.

Thus, even to good breeding among his subjects, all was his own work, and

that of time.

  To make his people relish these innovations the better, he abolished the

word golut, slave, always made use of by the Russians when they addressed

their czar, or presented any petition to him; and ordered, that, for the future,

they  should  make  use  of  the  word  raab,  which  signifies  subject.  This

alteration in no wise diminished the obedience due to the sovereign, and yet

was  the  most  ready  means  of  conciliating  their  affections.  Every  month

produced some new change or institution. He carried his attention even to the

ordering  painted  posts  to  be  set  up  in  the  road  between  Moscow  and

Woronitz, to serve as mile stones at the distance of every verst; that is to say,

every seven hundred paces, and had a kind of caravanseras, or public inns,

built at the end of every twentieth verst.

  While  he  was  thus  extending  his  cares  to  the  common  people,  to  the

merchants, and to the traveller, he thought proper to make an addition to the

pomp and splendour of his own court; for though he hated pomp or show inhis  own  person,  he  thought  it  necessary  in  those  about  him;  he  therefore

instituted the order of St. Andrew,[55] in imitation of the several orders with

which all the courts of Europe abound. Golowin, who succeeded Le Fort in

the dignity of high admiral, was the first knight of this order. It was esteemed

a high reward to have the honour of being admitted a member. It was a kind

of badge that entitled the person who bore it to the respect of the people. This

mark of honour costs nothing to the sovereign, and flatters the self-love of a

subject, without rendering him too powerful.

  These many useful innovations were received with applause by the wiser

part of the nation; and the murmurings and complaints of those who adhered

to the ancient customs were drowned in the acclamations of men of sound

judgment.

  While Peter was thus beginning a new creation in the interior part of his

state, he concluded an advantageous truce with the Turks, which gave him

the liberty to extend his territories on another side. Mustapha the Second,

who had been defeated by prince Eugene, at the battle of Zeuta, in 1697,

stripped of the Morea by the Venetians, and unable to defend Azoph, was

obliged  to  make  peace  with  his  victorious  enemies,  which  peace  was

concluded  at  Carlowitz,  (Jan.  26,  1699,)  between  Peterwaradin  and

Salankamon, places made famous by his defeats. Temeswaer was made the

boundary  of  the  German  possessions,  and  of  the  Ottoman  dominions.

Kaminieck  was  restored  to  the  Poles;  the  Morea,  and  some  towns  in

Dalmatia, which had been taken by the Venetians, remained in their hands for

some time; and Peter the First continued in possession of Casaph, and of a

few forts built in its neighbourhood.

  It was not possible for the czar to extend his dominions on the side of

Turkey, without drawing upon him the forces of that empire, before divided,

but now united. His naval projects were too vast for the Palus Mæotis, and

the settlements on the Caspian Sea would not admit of a fleet of men of war:

he  therefore  turned  his  views  towards  the  Baltic  Sea,  but  without

relinquishing those in regard to the Tanais and Wolga.


  CHAPTER XI.

  War with Sweden.-The battle of Narva.  1700.


  A grand scene was now opened on the frontiers of Sweden. One of the

principal causes of all the revolutions which happened from Ingria, as far as

Dresden, and which laid waste so many countries for the space of eighteen

years, was the abuse of the supreme power, by Charles XI. king of Sweden,

father of Charles XII. This is a fact which cannot be too often repeated, as it

concerns every crowned head, and the subjects of every nation. Almost all

Livonia, with the whole of Esthonia, had been ceded by the Poles to Charles

XI. king of Sweden, who succeeded Charles X. exactly at the time of the

treaty of Oliva. It was ceded in the customary manner, with a reservation of

rights and privileges. Charles XI. shewing little regard to these privileges,

John Reinhold Patkul, a gentleman of Livonia, came to Stockholm in 1692, at

the head of six deputies from the province, and laid their complaints at the

foot of the throne, in respectful, but strong terms.[56] Instead of an answer,

the deputies were ordered to be imprisoned, and Patkul was condemned to

lose his honour and his life. But he lost neither, for he made his escape to the

country of Vaud, in Switzerland, where he remained some time; when he

afterwards was informed, that Augustus, elector of Saxony, had promised, at

his accession to the throne of Poland, to recover the provinces that had been

wrested  from  that  kingdom;  he  hastened  to  Dresden,  to  represent  to  that

prince, how easily he might make himself master of Livonia, and revenge

upon a king, only seventeen years of age, the losses that Poland had sustained

by his ancestors.

  At this very time czar Peter entertained thoughts of seizing upon Ingria

and Carelia. These provinces had formerly belonged to the Russians, but the

Swedes had made themselves masters of them by force of arms, in the time of

the false Demetriuses, and had retained the possession of them by treaties:

another war and new treaties might restore them again to Russia. Patkul went

from Dresden to Moscow, and, by exciting up the two monarchs to avenge

his private causes, he cemented a close union between them, and directed

their preparations for invading all the places situated to the east and south of

Finland.

  Just at this period, the new king of Denmark, Frederick IV. entered into an

alliance with the czar and the king of Poland, against Charles, the young kingof Sweden, who seemed in no condition to withstand their united forces.

Patkul had the satisfaction of besieging the Swedes in Riga, the capital of

Livonia, and directing the attack in quality of major-general.

  The czar marched near eighty thousand men into Ingria. It is true, that, in

this numerous army, he had not more than twelve thousand good soldiers,

being those he had disciplined himself; namely, the two regiments of guards,

and  some  few  others,  the  rest  being  a  badly  armed  militia,  with  some

Cossacks, and Circassian Tartars; but he carried with him a train of a hundred

and forty-five pieces of cannon. He laid siege to Narva, a small town in

Ingria, that had a very commodious harbour, and it was generally thought the

place would prove an easy conquest.

  Sept.] It is known to all Europe, how Charles XII. when not quite eighteen

years of age, made head against all his enemies, and attacked them one after

another; he entered Denmark, put an end to the war in that kingdom in less

than six weeks, sent succours to Riga, obliged the enemy to raise the siege,

and marched against the Russians encamped before Narva, through the midst

of ice and snow, in the month of November.

  The czar, who looked upon Narva as already in his possession, was gone

to Novogorod, (Nov. 18,) and had taken with him his favourite, Menzikoff,

then  a  lieutenant  in  the  company  of  bombardiers,  of  the  Preobrazinski

regiment, and afterwards raised to the rank of field-marshal and prince; a man

whose singular fortunes entitle him to be spoken of more at large in another

place.

  Peter left the command of the army, with his instructions for the siege,

with the prince of Croi; whose family came from Flanders, and who had

lately  entered  into  the  czar's  service.[57]  Prince  Dolgorouki  acted  as

commissary of the army. The jealousy between these two chiefs, and the

absence of the czar, were partly the occasion of the unparalleled defeat at

Narva.

  Charles XII. having landed at Pernau, in Livonia, with his troops, in the

month  of  October  advanced  northward  to  Revel,  where  he  defeated  an

advanced  body  of  Russians.  He  continued  his  march,  and  meeting  with

another body, routed that likewise. The runaways returned to the camp before

Narva, which they filled with consternation. The month of November wasnow far advanced; Narva, though unskilfully besieged, was on the point of

surrendering. The young king of Sweden had not at that time above nine

thousand men with him, and could bring only six pieces of cannon to oppose

to  a  hundred  and  forty-five,  with  which  the  Russian  intrenchments  were

defended. All the relations of that time, and all historians without exception,

concur  in  making  the  Russian  army  then  before  Narva  amount  to  eighty

thousand  men.  The  memoirs  with  which  I  have  been  furnished  say  sixty

thousand; be that as it may, it is certain, that Charles had not quite nine

thousand; and that this battle was one of those which have proved, that the

greatest victories have been frequently gained by inferior numbers, ever since

the famed one of Arbela.[58]

  Nov. 30.] Charles did not hesitate one moment to attack with his small

troop this army, so greatly superior; and, taking advantage of a violent wind,

and a great storm of snow, which blew directly in the faces of the Russians,

he attacked their intrenchments under cover of some pieces of cannon, which

he had posted advantageously for the purpose. The Russians had not time to

form themselves in the midst of that cloud of snow, that beat full in their

faces, and astonished by the discharge of cannon, that they could not see, and

never imagined how small a number they had to oppose.

  The  duke  de  Croi  attempted  to  give  his  orders,  but  prince  Dolgorouki

would not receive them. The Russian officers rose upon the German officers;

the duke's secretary, with Colonel Lyon, and several others, were murdered.

Every one abandoned his post; and tumult, confusion, and a panic of terror,

spread through the whole army. The Swedish troops had nothing more to do,

but to cut in pieces those who were flying. Some threw themselves into the

river Narva, where great numbers were drowned; others threw down their

arms, and fell upon their knees before the conquering Swedes.

  The duke de Croi, general Alland, and the rest of the general officers,

dreading the Russians more than the Swedes, went in a body and surrendered

themselves  prisoners  to  count  Steinbock.  The  king  of  Sweden  now  made

himself master of all the artillery. Thirty thousand of the vanquished enemy

laid  down  their  arms  at  his  feet,  and  filed  off  bare-headed  and  disarmed

before  him.  Prince  Dolgorouki,  and  all  the  Russian  generals,  came  and

surrendered themselves, as well as the Germans, but did not know till after

they had surrendered, that they had been conquered by eight thousand men.Amongst the prisoners, was the son of a king of Georgia, whom Charles sent

to Stockholm: his name was Mittelesky Czarovits, or czar's son, an additional

proof  that  the  title  of  czar,  or  tzar,  had  not  its  original  from  the  Roman

Cæsars.

  Charles XII. did not lose more than one thousand two hundred men in this

battle. The czar's journal, which has been sent me from Petersburg, says, that

including those who died at the siege of Narva, and in the battle, and those

who  were  drowned  in  their  flight,  the  Russians  lost  no  more  than  six

thousand men. Want of discipline, and a panic that seized the army, did all

the work of that fatal day. The number of those made prisoners of war, was

four  times  greater  than  that  of  the  conquerors;  and  if  we  may  believe

Norberg,[59]  count  Piper,  who  was  afterwards  taken  prisoner  by  the

Russians, reproached them, that the number of their people made prisoners in

the battle, exceeded by eight times the number of the whole Swedish army. If

this is truth, the Swedes must have made upwards of seventy-two thousand

prisoners. This shews how seldom writers are well informed of particular

circumstances. One thing, however, equally incontestable and extraordinary,

is, that the king of Sweden permitted one half of the Russian soldiers to retire

back, after having disarmed them, and the other half to repass the river, with

their arms; by this unaccountable presumption, restoring to the czar troops

that, being afterwards well disciplined, became invincible.[60]

  Charles had all the advantages that could result from a complete victory.

Immense magazines, transports loaded with provisions, posts evacuated or

taken,  and  the  whole  country  at  the  mercy  of  the  Swedish  army,  were

consequences  of  the  fortune  of  this  day.  Narva  was  now  relieved,  the

shattered remains of the Russian army did not shew themselves; the whole

country as far as Pleskow lay open; the czar seemed bereft of all resource for

carrying  on  the  war;  and  the  king  of  Sweden,  victor  in  less  than  twelve

months over the monarchs of Denmark, Poland, and Russia, was looked upon

as the first prince in Europe, at an age when other princes hardly presume to

aspire at reputation. But the unshaken constancy that made a part of Peter's

character, prevented him from being discouraged in any of his projects.

  A Russian bishop composed a prayer to St. Nicholas,[61] on account of

this defeat, which was publicly read in all the churches throughout Russia.

This  composition  shews  the  spirit  of  the  times,  and  the  inexpressibleignorance from which Peter delivered his country. Amongst other things, it

says, that the furious and terrible Swedes were sorcerers; and complains that

St.  Nicholas  had  entirely  abandoned  his  Russians.  The  prelates  of  that

country would blush to write such stuff at present; and, without any offence

to the holy St. Nicholas, the people soon perceived that Peter was the most

proper person to be applied to, to retrieve their losses.


  CHAPTER XII.

  Resources after the battle of Narva. That disaster entirely repaired. Peter

gains a victory near the same place. The person who was afterwards empress

made prisoner at the storming of a town. Peter's successes. His triumph at

Moscow.[62]


  The years 1701 and 1703.

  The czar having, as has been already observed, quitted his army before

Narva, in the end of November, 1700, in order to go and concert matters with

the king of Poland, received the news of the victory gained by the Swedes, as

he  was  on  his  way.  His  constancy  in  all  emergencies  was  equal  to  the

intrepidity and valour of Charles. He deferred the conference with Augustus,

and hastened to repair the disordered state of his affairs. The scattered troops

rendezvoused at Great Novogorod, and from thence marched to Pleskow, on

the lake Peipus.

  It was not a little matter to be able to stand upon the defensive, after so

severe a check: 'I know very well,' said Peter, 'that the Swedes will have the

advantage of us for some time, but they will teach us at length to conquer

them.'

  1701.] Having provided for the present emergency, and ordered recruits to

be raised on every side, he sent to Moscow to cast new cannon, his own

having been all taken before Narva. There being a scarcity of metal, he took

all the bells of the churches, and of the religious houses in Moscow. This

action did not savour much of superstition, but at the same time it was no

mark of impiety. With those bells he made one hundred large cannon, one

hundred  and  forty-three  field-pieces,  from  three  to  six  pounders,  besides

mortars and howitzers, which were all sent to Pleskow. In other countries thesovereign orders, and others execute; but here the czar was obliged to see

every  thing  done  himself.  While  he  was  hastening  these  preparations,  he

entered into a negotiation with the king of Denmark, who engaged to furnish

him with three regiments of foot, and three of cavalry; an engagement which

that monarch could not fulfil.

  As soon as this treaty was signed, he hurried to the theatre of war. He had

an interview with king Augustus, at Birzen, (Feb. 27.) on the frontiers of

Courland  and  Lithuania.  His  object  was,  to  confirm  that  prince  in  his

resolution of maintaining the war against Charles XII. and at the same time to

engage the Polish Diet to enter into the quarrel. It is well known, that a king

of Poland is no more than the head person in a republic. The czar had the

advantage of being always obeyed; but the kings of Poland, and England, at

present the king of Sweden, are all obliged to treat with their subjects.[63]

Patkul and a few Poles in the interest of their monarch, assisted at these

conferences.  Peter  promised  to  aid  them  with  subsidies,  and  an  army  of

twenty-five thousand men. Livonia was to be restored to Poland, in case the

diet would concur with their king, and assist in recovering this province: the

diet hearkened more to their fears, than to the czar's proposals. The Poles

were  apprehensive  of  having  their  liberties  restrained  by  the  Saxons  and

Russians, and were still more afraid of Charles XII. It was therefore agreed

by the majority, not to serve their king, and not to fight.

  The partisans of Augustus grew enraged against the contrary faction, and a

civil  war  was  lighted  up  in  the  kingdom;  because  their  monarch  had  an

intention to restore to it a considerable province.

  Feb.] Peter then had only an impotent ally in king Augustus, and feeble

succours in the Saxon troops; and the terror which Charles XII. inspired on

every side, reduced Peter to the necessity of depending entirely upon his own

strength.

  March 1.] After travelling with the greatest expedition from Moscow to

Courland,  to  confer  with  Augustus:  he  posted  back  from  Courland  to

Moscow,  to  forward  the  accomplishment  of  his  promises.  He  actually

dispatched Prince Repnin, with four thousand men, to Riga, on the banks of

the Duna, where the Saxon troops were intrenched.

  July.] The general consternation was now increased; for Charles, passingthe Duna in spite of all the Saxons, who were advantageously posted on the

opposite side, gained a complete victory over them; and then, without waiting

a moment, he made himself master of Courland, advanced into Lithuania, and

by his presence encouraged the Polish faction that opposed Augustus.

  Peter, notwithstanding all this, still pursued his designs. General Patkul,

who had been the soul of the conference at Birzen, and who had engaged in

his service, procured him some German officers, disciplined his troops, and

supplied the place of general Le Fort: the czar ordered relays of horses to be

provided for all the officers, and even for the German, Livonian, and Polish

soldiers, who came to serve in his armies. He likewise inspected in person

into every particular relating to their arms, their clothing, and subsistence.

  On  the  confines  of  Livonia  and  Esthonia,  and  to  the  eastward  of  the

province of Novogorod, lies the great lake Peipus, which receives the waters

of the river Velika, from out of the middle of Livonia, and gives rise in its

northern part to the river Naiova, that washes the walls of the town of Narva,

near which the Swedes gained their famous victory. This lake is upwards of

thirty  leagues  in  length,  and  from  twelve  to  fifteen  in  breadth.  It  was

necessary to keep a fleet there, to prevent the Swedish ships from insulting

the province of Novogorod; to be ready to make a descent upon their coasts,

and above all, to be a nursery for seamen. Peter employed the greatest part of

the year 1701, in building on this lake an hundred half gallies, to carry about

fifty men each; and other armed barks were fitted out on the lake Ladoga. He

directed all these operations in person, and set his new sailors to work: those

who had been employed in 1697, at the Palus Mæotis were then stationed

near the Baltic. He frequently quitted those occupations to go to Moscow,

and the rest of the provinces, in order to enforce the observance of the late

customs he had introduced, or to establish new ones.

  Those princes who have employed the leisure moments of peace in raising

public works, have acquired to themselves a name: but that Peter, just after

his misfortune at Narva, should apply himself to the junction of the Baltic,

Caspian, and the Black seas, by canals, has crowned him with more real glory

than the most signal victory. It was in the year 1702, that he began to dig that

deep canal, intended to join the Tanais and the Wolga. Other communications

were likewise to be made, by means of lakes between the Tanais and the

Duna; whose waters empty themselves into the Baltic, in the neighbourhoodof Riga. But this latter project seemed to be still at a great distance, as Peter

was far from having Riga in his possession.

  While Charles was laying all Poland waste, Peter caused to be brought

from  that  kingdom,  and  from  Saxony,  a  number  of  shepherds,  with  their

flocks, in order to have wool fit for making good cloth; he likewise erected

manufactories of linen and paper: gave orders for collecting a number of

artificers; such as smiths, braziers, armourers, and founders, and the mines of

Siberia were ransacked for ore. Thus was he continually labouring for the

embellishment and defence of his dominions.

  Charles pursued the course of his victories, and left a sufficient body of

troops, as he imagined, on the frontiers of the czar's dominions, to secure all

the  possessions  of  Sweden.  He  had  already  formed  a  design  to  dethrone

Augustus, and afterwards to pursue the czar with his victorious army to the

very gates of Moscow.

  There  happened  several  slight  engagements  in  the  course  of  this  year,

between the Russians and Swedes, in which the latter did not always prove

superior;  and  even  in  those  where  they  had  the  advantage,  the  Russians

improved in the art of war. In short, in little more than twelve months after

the  battle  of  Narva,  the  czar's  troops  were  so  well  disciplined,  that  they

defeated one of the best generals belonging to the king of Sweden.

  Peter was then at Pleskow, from whence he detached numerous bodies of

troops, on all sides, to attack the Swedes; who were now defeated by a native

of  Russia,  and  not  a  foreigner.  His  general,  Sheremeto,  by  a  skilful

manœuvre, beat up the quarters of the Swedish general, Slipenbak, in several

places, near Derpt, on the frontiers of Livonia; and at last obtained a victory

over that officer himself. (Jan. 11, 1702.) And now, for the first time, the

Russians took from the Swedes four of their colours; which was thought a

considerable number.

  May.] The lakes Peipus and Ladoga were for some time afterwards the

theatres of sea-fights between the Russians and Swedes; in which the latter

had  the  same  advantages  as  by  land:  namely,  that  of  discipline  and  long

practice; but the Russians had some few successes with their half gallies, at

the lake Peipus, and the field-marshal Sheremeto took a Swedish frigate.

  By means of this lake, the czar kept Livonia and Esthonia in continualalarms; his gallies frequently landed several regiments in those provinces;

who  reimbarked  whenever  they  failed  of  success,  or  else  pursued  their

advantage: the Swedes were twice beaten in the neighbourhood of Derpt,

(June, July,) while they were victorious every where else.

  In all these actions the Russians were always superior in number; for this

reason, Charles XII. who was so successful in every other place, gave himself

little  concern  about  these  trifling  advantages  gained  by  the  czar:  but  he

should have considered, that these numerous forces of his rival were every

day growing more accustomed to the business of fighting, and might soon

become formidable to himself.

  While both parties were thus engaged, by sea and land, in Livonia, Ingria,

and Esthonia, the czar is informed that a Swedish fleet had set sail, in order to

destroy Archangel; upon which he immediately marched thither, and every

one was astonished to hear of him on the coasts of the Frozen Sea, when he

was thought to be at Moscow. He put the town into a posture of defence,

prevented the intended descent, drew the plan of a citadel, called the New

Dwina, laid the first stone, and then returned to Moscow, and from thence to

the seat of war.

  Charles made some alliances in Poland; but the Russians, on their side,

made a progress in Ingria and Livonia. Marshal Sheremeto marched to meet

the Swedish army, under the command of Slipenbak, gave that general battle

near the little river Embac, and defeated him, taking sixteen colours, and

twenty pieces of cannon. Norberg places this action on the first of December,

1701; but the journal of Peter the Great, fixes it on the nineteenth of July,

1702.

  6th Aug.] After this advantage, the Russian general marched onwards, laid

the  whole  country  under  contributions,  and  takes  the  little  town  of

Marienburg, on the confines of Ingria and Livonia. There are several towns

of this name in the north of Europe; but this, though it no longer exists, is

more celebrated in history than all the others, by the adventure of the empress

Catherine.

  This  little  town,  having  surrendered  at  discretion,  the  Swedes,  who

defended it, either through mistake or design, set fire to the magazine. The

Russians,  incensed  at  this,  destroyed  the  town,  and  carried  away  all  theinhabitants. Among the prisoners was a young woman, a native of Livonia,

who had been brought up in the house of a Lutheran minister of that place,

named Gluck, and who afterwards became the sovereign of those who had

taken her captive, and who governed Russia by the name of the empress

Catherine.

  There had been many instances before this, of private women being raised

to  the  throne;  nothing  was  more  common  in  Russia,  and  in  all  Asiatic

kingdoms, than for crowned heads to marry their own subjects; but that a

poor stranger, who had been taken prisoner in the storming of a town, should

become  the  absolute  sovereign  of  that  very  empire,  whither  she  was  led

captive, is an instance which fortune never produced before nor since in the

annals of the world.

  The Russian arms proved equally successful in Ingria: for their half gallies

on the lake Ladoga compelled the Swedish fleet to retire to Wibourg,[64] a

town at the other extremity of this great lake, from whence they could see the

siege of the fortress of Notebourg, which was then carrying on by general

Sheremeto. This was an undertaking of much greater importance than was

imagined at that time, as it might open a communication with the Baltic Sea,

the constant aim of Peter the Great.

  Notebourg  was  a  strong  fortified  town,  built  on  an  island  in  the  lake

Ladoga,  which  it  entirely  commands,  and  by  that  means,  whoever  is  in

possession of it, must be masters of that part of the river Neva, which falls

into the sea not far from thence. The Russians bombarded the town night and

day, from the 18th of September to the 12th October; and at length gave a

general assault by three breaches. The Swedish garrison was reduced to a

hundred  men  only  capable  of  defending  the  place;  and,  what  is  very

astonishing, they did defend it, and obtain, even in the breach, an honourable

capitulation: moreover, colonel Slipenbak, who commanded there, would not

surrender  the  town,  but  on  condition  of  being  permitted  to  send  for  two

Swedish officers from the nearest post, to examine the breaches (Oct. 16.), in

order to be witnesses for him to the king his master, that eighty-three men,

who were all then left of the garrison capable of bearing arms, besides one

hundred and fifty sick and wounded, did not surrender to a whole army, till it

was  impossible  for  them  to  fight  longer,  or  to  preserve  the  place.  This

circumstance alone shews what sort of an enemy the czar had to contendwith,  and  the  necessity  there  was  of  all  his  great  efforts  and  military

discipline. He distributed gold medals among his officers on this occasion,

and gave rewards to all the private men; except a few, whom he punished for

running  away  during  the  assault.  Their  comrades  spit  in  their  faces,  and

afterwards shot them to death; thus adding ignominy to punishment.

  Notebourg was repaired, and its name changed to that of Shlusselburg, or

the City of the Key; that place being the key of Ingria and Finland. The first

governor was that Menzikoff, whom we have already mentioned, and who

was become an excellent officer, and had merited this honour by his gallant

behaviour during the siege. His example served as an encouragement to all

who have merit without being distinguished by birth.

  After this campaign of 1702, the czar resolved that Sheremeto, and the

officers who had signalized themselves, should make a triumphal entry into

Moscow. (Dec. 17.) All the prisoners taken in this campaign marched in the

train of the victors, who had the Swedish colours and standards carried before

them, together with the flag of the Swedish frigate taken on the lake Peipus.

Peter assisted in the preparations for this triumphal pomp, as he had shared in

the great actions it celebrated.

  These  shows  naturally  inspired  emulation,  otherwise  they  would  have

been no more than idle ostentation. Charles despised every thing of this kind,

and,  after  the  battle  of  Narva,  held  his  enemies,  their  efforts,  and  their

triumphs, in equal contempt.


  CHAPTER XIII.

  Reformation at Moscow.-Further successes.-Founding of Petersburg.-The

czar takes Narva, &c.

  The short stay which the czar made at Moscow, in the beginning of the

winter  1703,  was  employed  in  seeing  all  his  new  regulations  put  into

execution, and in improving the civil as well as the military government.

Even his very amusements were calculated to inspire his subjects with a taste

for the new manner of living he had introduced amongst them. In this view,

he invited all the boyards, and principal ladies of Moscow, to the marriage of

one of his sisters, at which every one was required to appear dressed after the

ancient fashion. A dinner was served up just in the same manner as those inthe sixteenth century.[65] By an old superstitious custom, no one was to light

a  fire  on  the  wedding-day,  even  in  the  coldest  season.  This  custom  was

rigorously observed upon this occasion. The Russians formerly never drank

wine, but only mead and brandy; no other liquors were permitted on this day,

and, when the guests made complaints, he replied, in a joking manner, 'This

was a custom with your ancestors, and old customs are always the best.' This

raillery contributed greatly to the reformation of those who preferred past

times to the present, at least it put a stop to their murmurings; and there are

several nations that stand in need of the like example.

  A  still  more  useful  establishment  than  any  of  the  rest,  was  that  of  a

printing-press, for Russian and Latin types; the implements of which were all

brought from Holland. They began by printing translations in the Russian

language of several books of morality and polite literature. Ferguson founded

schools for geometry, astronomy, and navigation.

  Another foundation, no less necessary, was that of a large hospital; not one

of those houses which encourage idleness, and perpetuate the misery of the

people, but such as the czar had seen at Amsterdam, where old persons and

children are employed at work, and where every one within the walls is made

useful in some way or other.

  He established several manufactories; and, as soon he had put in motion

all those arts to which he gave birth in Moscow, he hastened to Woronitz, to

give directions for building two ships, of eighty guns each, with long cradles,

or caserns, fitted to the ribs of the vessel, to buoy her up, and carry her safely

over  the  shoals  and  banks  of  sand  that  lay  about  Azoph;  an  ingenious

contrivance, similar to that used by the Dutch in Holland, to get their large

ships over the Pampus.

  Having made all the necessary preparations against the Turks, he turned

his attention, in the next place, against the Swedes. He went to visit the ships

that were building at Olonitz (March 30, 1703.), a town between the lakes

Ladago and Onega, where he had established a foundry for making all kinds

of arms; and, when every thing bore a military aspect, at Moscow flourished

all  the  arts  of  peace.  A  spring  of  mineral  waters,  which  has  been  lately

discovered  near  Olonitz,  has  added  to  the  reputation  of  that  place.  From

thence he proceeded to Shlusselburg, which he fortified.  We have already observed, that Peter was determined to pass regularly

through all the military degrees: he had served as lieutenant of bombardiers,

under  prince  Menzikoff,  before  that  favourite  was  made  governor  of

Shlusselburg, and he now took the rank of captain, and served under marshal

Sheremeto.

  There was an important fortress near the lake Ladoga, and not far from the

river Neva, named Nyantz, or Nya.[66] It was necessary to make himself

master of this place, in order to secure his conquest, and favour his other

designs. He therefore undertook to transport a number of small barks, filled

with  soldiers,  and  to  drive  off  the  Swedish  vessels  that  were  bringing

supplies, while Sheremeto had the care of the trenches. (May 22.) The citadel

surrendered, and two Swedish vessels arrived, too late to assist the besieged,

being both attacked and taken by the czar. His journal says, that, as a reward

for his service, 'The captain of bombardiers was created knight of the order of

St. Andrew by admiral Golowin, the first knight of that order.'

  After the taking of the fort of Nya, he resolved upon building the city of

Petersburg, at the mouth of the Neva, upon the gulf of Finland.

  The  affairs  of  king  Augustus  were  in  a  desperate  way;  the  excessive

victories  of  the  Swedes  in  Poland  had  emboldened  his  enemies  in  the

opposition; and even his friends had obliged him to dismiss a body of twenty

thousand Russians, that the czar had sent him to reinforce his army. They

thought, by this sacrifice, to deprive the malcontents of all pretext for joining

the king of Sweden: but enemies are disarmed by force, a show of weakness

serving only to make them more insolent. These twenty thousand men, that

had  been  disciplined  by  Patkul,  proved  of  infinite  service  in  Livonia  and

Ingria, while Augustus was losing his dominions. This reinforcement, and,

above all, the possession of Nya, enabled the czar to found his new capital.

  It was in this barren and marshy spot of ground, which has communication

with  the  main  land  only  by  one  way,  that  Peter  laid  the  foundation  of

Petersburg, in the sixtieth degree of latitude, and the forty-fourth and a half of

longitude. The ruins of some of the bastions of Nya was made use of for the

first stones of the foundation.[67] They began by building a small fort upon

one of the islands, which is now in the centre of the city. The Swedes beheld,

without apprehension, a settlement in the midst of a morass, and inaccessibleto vessels of burden; but, in a very short time, they saw the fortifications

advanced,  a  town  raised,  and  the  little  island  of  Cronstadt,  situated  over

against it, changed, in 1704, into an impregnable fortress, under the cannon

of which even the largest fleets may ride in safety.

  These works, which seemed to require a time of profound peace, were

carried on in the very bosom of war; workmen of every sort were called

together,  from  Moscow,  Astracan,  Casan,  and  the  Ukraine,  to  assist  in

building the new city. Neither the difficulties of the ground, that was to be

rendered  firm,  and  raised,  the  distance  of  the  necessary  materials,  the

unforeseen obstacles, which are for ever starting up in all great undertakings;

nor, lastly, the epidemical disorder, which carried off a prodigious number of

the workmen, could discourage the royal founder; and, in the space of five

months, a new city rose from the ground. It is true, indeed, it was little better

than a cluster of huts, with only two brick houses, surrounded by ramparts;

but this was all that was then necessary. Time and perseverance accomplished

the rest. In less than five months, after the founding of Petersburg, a Dutch

ship  came  to  trade  there,  (Nov.)  the  captain  of  which  was  handsomely

rewarded, and the Dutch soon found the way to Petersburg.

  While Peter was directing the establishment of this colony, he took care to

provide  every  day  for  its  safety,  by  making  himself  master  of  the

neighbouring posts. A Swedish colonel, named Croniort, had taken post on

the river Sestra, and thence threatened the rising city. Peter, without delay,

marched against him with his two regiments of guards, defeated him, (July

8.) and obliged him to repass the river. Having thus put his town in safety, he

repaired to Olonitz,(Sep.) to give directions for building a number of small

vessels, and afterwards returned to Petersburg, on board a frigate that had

been built by his direction, taking with him six transport vessels, for present

use, till the others could be got ready. Even at this juncture he did not forget

his ally, the king of Poland, but sent him (Nov.) a reinforcement of twelve

thousand foot, and a subsidy in money of three hundred thousand rubles,

which make about one million five hundred thousand French livres.[68] It

has been remarked, that his annual revenue did not exceed then five million

rubles; a sum, which the expense of his fleets, of his armies, and of his new

establishments, seemed more than sufficient to exhaust. He had, at almost

one  and  the  same  time,  fortified  Novogorod,  Pleskow,  Kiow,  Smolensko,Azoph, Archangel, and founded a capital. Notwithstanding all which, he had

still a sufficiency left to assist his ally with men and money. Cornelius le

Bruine, a Dutchman, who was on his travels, and at that time in Russia, and

with whom he frequently conversed very freely, as indeed he did with all

strangers,  says,  that  the  czar  himself  assured  him,  that  he  had  still  three

hundred thousand rubles remaining in his coffers, after all the expenses of the

war were defrayed.

  In order to put his infant city of Petersburg out of danger of insult, he went

in person to sound the depth of water thereabouts, fixed upon a place for

building the fort of Cronstadt; and, after making the model of it in wood with

his own hands, he employed prince Menzikoff to put it in execution. From

thence he went to pass the winter at Moscow, (Nov. 5.) in order to establish,

by degrees, the several alterations he had made in the laws, manners, and

customs  of  Russia.  He  regulated  the  finances,  and  put  them  upon  a  new

footing. He expedited the works that were carrying on in the Woronitz, at

Azoph,  and  in  a  harbour  which  he  had  caused  to  be  made  on  the  Palus

Mæotis, under the fort of Taganrock.

  Jan.  1704.]  The  Ottoman  Porte,  alarmed  at  these  preparations,  sent  an

embassy to the czar, complaining thereof: to which he returned for answer

that he was master in his own dominions, as well as the grand seignior was in

Turkey, and that it was no infringement of the peace to render the Russian

power respectable on the Euxine Sea.

  March  30.]  Upon  his  return  to  Petersburg,  finding  his  new  citadel  of

Cronstadt,  which  had  been  founded  in  the  bosom  of  the  sea,  completely

finished, he furnished it with the necessary artillery. But, in order to settle

himself firmly in Ingria, and entirely to repair the disgrace he had suffered

before  Narva,  he  esteemed  it  necessary  to  take  that  city.  While  he  was

making  preparations  for  the  siege,  a  small  fleet  appeared  on  the  lake  of

Peipus, to oppose his designs. The Russian half galleys went out to meet

them, gave them battle, and took the whole squadron, which had on board

ninety-eight pieces of cannon. After this victory, the czar lays siege to Narva

both by sea and land, (April.) and, which was most extraordinary, he lays

siege to the city of Derpt in Esthonia at the same time.

  Who would have imagined, that there was a university in Derpt? GustavusAdolphus had founded one there, but it did not render that city more famous,

Derpt being only known by these two sieges. Peter was incessantly going

from  the  one  to  the  other,  forwarding  the  attacks,  and  directing  all  the

operations.  The  Swedish  general  Slipenbak  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of

Derpt, with a body of two thousand five hundred men.

  The besiegers expected every instant when he would throw succours into

the place; but Peter, on this occasion, had recourse to a stratagem worthy of

more frequent imitation: he ordered two regiments of foot, and one of horse,

to  be  clothed  in  the  same  uniform,  and  to  carry  the  same  standards  and

colours as the Swedes: these sham Swedes attack the trenches, (June 27.) and

the  Russians  pretend  to  be  put  to  flight;  the  garrison,  deceived  by

appearances, make a sally; upon which the mock combatants join their forces

and fall upon the Swedes, one half of whom were left dead upon the place,

and the rest made shift to get back to the town. Slipenbak arrives soon after

with  succours  to  relieve  it,  but  is  totally  defeated.  At  length  Derpt  was

obliged to capitulate, (July 23.) just as the czar was preparing every thing for

a general assault.

  At the same time Peter met with a considerable check, on the side of his

new city of Petersburg; but this did not prevent him either from going on with

the works of that place, or from vigorously prosecuting the siege of Narva. It

has already been observed, that he sent a reinforcement of troops and money

to king Augustus, when his enemies were driving him from his throne; but

both these aids proved useless. The Russians having joined the Lithuanians in

the interest of Augustus, were totally defeated in Courland by the Swedish

general  Levenhaupt:  (July  31.)  and  had  the  victors  directed  their  efforts

towards Livonia, Esthonia, and Ingria, they might have destroyed the czar's

new works, and baffled all the fruits of his great undertakings. Peter was

every  day  sapping  the  breast-work  of  Sweden,  while  Charles  seemed  to

neglect all resistance, for the pursuit of a less advantageous, though a more

brilliant fame.

  On the 13th of July, 1704, only a single Swedish colonel, at the head of his

detachment, obliged the Polish nobility to nominate a new king, on the field

of election, called Kolo, near the city of Warsaw. The cardinal-primate of the

kingdom,  and  several  bishops,  submitted  to  a  Lutheran  prince,

notwithstanding the menaces and excommunications of the supreme pontiff:in short, every thing gave way to force. All the world knows in what manner

Stanislaus  Leczinsky  was  elected  king,  and  how  Charles  XII.  obliged  the

greatest part of Poland to acknowledge him.

  Peter, however, would not abandon the dethroned king, but redoubled his

assistance, in proportion to the necessities of his ally; and, while his enemy

was making kings, he beat the Swedish generals one after another in Esthonia

and Ingria; from thence he passed to the siege of Narva, and gave several

vigorous assaults to the town. There were three bastions, famous at least for

their names, called Victory, Honour, and Glory. The czar carried them all

three sword-in-hand. The besiegers forced their way into the town, where

they pillaged and exercised all those cruelties which were but too customary

at that time, between the Swedes and Russians.

  August 20.] Peter, on this occasion, gave an example that ought to have

gained  him  the  affections  of  all  his  new  subjects:  he  ran  every  where  in

person, to put a stop to the pillage and slaughter, rescues several women out

of the clutches of the brutal soldiery, and, after having, with his own hand,

killed two of those ruffians who had refused to obey his orders, he enters the

town-house, whither the citizens had ran in crowds for shelter, and laying his

sword, yet reeking with blood, upon the table-'This sword,' said he, 'is not

stained  with  the  blood  of  your  fellow  citizens,  but  with  that  of  my  own

soldiers, which I have spilt to save your lives'.


  CHAPTER XIV.

  Peter  the  Great  keeps  possession  of  all  Ingria,  while  Charles  XII.  is

triumphant in other places.-Rise of Menzikoff.-Petersburg secured.-The czar

executes his designs notwithstanding the victories of the king of Sweden.[69]

  1704.


  Peter being now master of all Ingria, conferred the government of that

province upon Menzikoff; and at the same time gave him the title of prince,

and the rank of major-general. Pride and prejudice might, in other countries,

find  means  to  gainsay,  that  a  pastry  cook's  boy  should  be  raised  to  be  a

general  and  governor,  and  to  princely  dignity;  but  Peter  had  already

accustomed his subjects to see, without surprise, every thing given to merit,and nothing to mere nobility. Menzikoff, by a lucky accident, had, while a

boy, been taken from his original obscurity, and placed in the czar's family,

[70] where he learnt several languages, and acquired a knowledge of public

affairs, both in the cabinet and field; and having found means to ingratiate

himself with his master, he afterwards knew how to render himself necessary.

He greatly forwarded the works at Petersburg, of which he had the direction;

several  brick  and  stone  houses  were  already  built,  with  an  arsenal  and

magazines; the fortifications were completed, but the palaces were not built

till some time afterwards.

  Peter was scarcely settled in Narva, when he offered fresh succours to the

dethroned king of Poland; he promised him a body of troops over and above

the twelve thousand men he had already sent him, and actually dispatched

general Repnin (Aug. 19.) from the frontiers of Lithuania, with six thousand

horse, and the same number of foot. All this while he did not lose sight of his

colony of Petersburg: the buildings went on very fast; his navy encreased

daily; several ships and frigates were on the stocks at Olmutz; these he took

care to see finished, and brought them himself into the harbour of Petersburg.

  Oct.  11.]  Each  time  he  returned  to  Moscow,  was  distinguished  by

triumphal entries. In this manner did he revisit it this year, from whence he

made only one excursion, to be present at the launching of his first ship of

eighty  guns  upon  the  Woronitz,  (Dec.  30.)  of  which  ship  he  himself  had

drawn the dimensions the preceding year.

  May,  1705.]  As  soon  as  the  campaign  could  be  opened  in  Poland,  he

hastened to the army, which he had sent to the assistance of Augustus, on the

frontiers  of  that  kingdom;  but,  while  he  was  thus  supporting  his  ally,  a

Swedish fleet put to sea, to destroy Petersburg, and the fortress of Cronslot,

as yet hardly finished. This fleet consisted of twenty-two ships of war, from

fifty-four to sixty-four guns each, besides six frigates, two bomb-ketches, and

two fire-ships. The troops that were sent on this expedition, made a descent

on the little island of Kotin; but a Russian colonel, named Tolbogwin, who

commanded a regiment there, ordered his soldiers to lie down flat on their

bellies, while the Swedes were coming on shore, and then suddenly rising up,

they threw in so brisk and well directed a fire, that the Swedes were put into

confusion, and forced to retreat with the utmost precipitation to their ships,

leaving behind them all their dead, and upwards of three hundred prisoners.(June 7.)

  However,  their  fleet  still  continued  hovering  about  the  coast,  and

threatened  Petersburg.  They  made  another  descent,  and  were  repulsed  as

before (June 25.): a body of land-forces were also advancing from Wiburn,

[71] under the command of the Swedish general Meidel, and took their route

by Shlusselburg: this was the most considerable attempt that Charles had yet

made upon those territories, which Peter had either conquered or new formed.

The Swedes were every where repulsed, and Petersburg remained in security.

  Peter, on the other hand, advanced towards Courland, with a design to

penetrate as far as Riga. His plan was to make himself master of Livonia,

while  Charles  XII.  was  busied  in  reducing  the  Poles  entirely  under  the

obedience of the new king he had given them. The czar was still at Wilnaw in

Lithuania, and his general Sheremeto was approaching towards Mittau, the

capital of Courland; but there he was met by general Levenhaupt, already

famous by several victories, and a pitched battle was fought between the two

armies at a place called Gemavershoff, or Gemavers.

  In all those actions where experience and discipline decide the day, the

Swedes, though inferior in number, had the advantage. The Russians were

totally defeated, (June 28.) and lost their artillery. Peter, notwithstanding the

loss of three battles, viz. at Gemavers, at Jacobstadt, and at Narva, always

retrieved his losses, and even converted them to his advantage.

  After the battle of Gemavers, he marched his army into Courland; came

before Mittau, made himself master of the town, and afterwards laid siege to

the citadel, which he took by capitulation.

  Sept.  14,  1705.]  The  Russian  troops  at  that  time  had  the  character  of

distinguishing their successes by rapine and pillage; a custom of too great

antiquity in all nations. But Peter, at the taking of Narva, had made such

alterations in this custom, that the Russian soldiers appointed to guard the

vaults  where  the  grand  dukes  of  Courland  were  buried,  in  the  castle  of

Mittau, perceiving that the bodies had been taken out of their tombs, and

stripped of their ornaments, refused to take possession of their post, till a

Swedish colonel had been first sent for to inspect the condition of the place;

who gave them a certificate that this outrage had been committed by the

Swedes themselves.  A rumour which was spread throughout the whole empire, that the czar

had  been  totally  defeated  at  the  battle  of  Gemavers,  proved  of  greater

prejudice to his affairs, than even the loss of that battle. The remainder of the

ancient strelitzes in garrison at Astracan, emboldened by this false report,

mutinied, and murdered the governor of the town. Peter was obliged to send

marshal Sheremeto with a body of forces to quell the insurrection, and punish

the mutineers.

  Every  thing  seemed  now  to  conspire  against  the  czar;  the  success  and

valour of Charles XII.; the misfortunes of Augustus; the forced neutrality of

Denmark; the insurrection of the ancient strelitzes; the murmurs of a people,

sensible of the restraint, but not of the utility of the late reform; the discontent

of the grandees, who found themselves subjected to military discipline; and,

lastly, the exhausted state of the finances, were sufficient to have discouraged

any prince except Peter: but he did not despond, even for an instant. He soon

quelled the revolt, and having provided for the safety of Ingria, and secured

the possession of the citadel of Mittau, in spite of the victorious Levenhaupt,

who had not troops enough to oppose him; he found himself at liberty to

march an army through Samojitia and Lithuania.

  He now shared with Charles XII. the glory of giving laws to Poland. He

advanced as far as Tikoczin: where he had an interview for the second time

with  king  Augustus;  when  he  endeavoured  to  comfort  him  under  his

misfortunes, promising to revenge his cause, and, at the same time, made him

a present of some colours, which Menzikoff had taken from the troops of his

rival. The two monarchs afterwards went together to Grodno, the capital of

Lithuania, where they staid till the 15th of December. At their parting, Peter

presented him both men and money, and then, according to his usual custom,

went to pass some part of the winter at Moscow, (30 Dec.) to encourage the

arts and sciences there, and to enforce his new laws there, after having made

a very difficult and laborious campaign.


  CHAPTER XV.

  While Peter is strengthening his conquests, and improving the police of his

dominion, his enemy Charles XII. gains several battles: gives laws to Poland

and  Saxony,  and  to  Augustus,  notwithstanding  a  victory  gained  by  theRussians.-Augustus  resigns  the  crown,  and  delivers  up  Patkul,  the  czar's

ambassador.-Murder of Patkul, who is sentenced to be broke upon the wheel.

  1706.


  Peter was hardly returned to Moscow, when he heard that Charles XII.

after being every where victorious, was advancing towards Grodno, to attack

the Russian troops. King Augustus had been obliged to fly from Grodno, and

retire  with  precipitation  towards  Saxony,  with  four  regiments  of  Russian

dragoons;  a  step  which  both  weakened  and  discouraged  the  army  of  his

protector. Peter found all the advances to Grodno occupied by the Swedes,

and his troops dispersed.

  While  he  was  with  the  greatest  difficulty  assembling  his  troops  in

Lithuania, the famous Schullemburg, who was the last support Augustus had

left,  and  who  afterwards  gained  so  much  glory  by  the  defence  of  Corfu

against the Turks, was advancing on the side of Great Poland, with about

twelve thousand Saxons, and six thousand Russians, taken from the body

troops  with  which  the  czar  had  entrusted  that  unfortunate  prince.

Schullemburg expected with just reason, that he should be able to prop the

sinking fortunes of Augustus; he perceived that Charles XII. was employed in

Lithuania, and that there was only a body of ten thousand Swedes under

general  Renschild  to  interrupt  his  march;  he  therefore  advanced  with

confidence  as  far  as  the  frontiers  of  Silesia;  which  is  the  passage  out  of

Saxony into Upper Poland. When he came near the village of Fraustadt, on

the frontiers of that kingdom, he met marshal Renschild, who was advancing

to give him battle.

  Whatever care I take to avoid repeating what has been already mentioned

in the history of Charles XII., I am obliged in this place to take notice once

more, that there was in the Saxon army a French regiment, that had been

taken prisoners at the famous battle of Hochsted (or Blenheim) and obliged to

serve in the Saxon troops. My memoirs say, that this regiment had the charge

of the artillery, and add, that the French, struck with the fame and reputation

of Charles XII., and discontented with the Saxon service, laid down their

arms as soon as they came in sight of the enemy (Feb.), and desired to be

taken into the Swedish army, in which they continued to the end of the war.This defection was as the beginning, or signal of a total overthrow to the

Russian army, of which no more than three battalions were saved, and almost

every  man  of  these  was  wounded;  and  as  no  quarter  was  granted,  the

remainder was cut in pieces.

  Norberg, the chaplain, pretends, that the Swedish word at this battle was,

'In the name of God,' and that of the Russians, 'Kill all;' but it was the Swedes

who  killed  all  in  God's  name.  The  czar  himself  declares,  in  one  of  his

manifestoes,[72] that a number of Russians, Cossacks, and Calmucks, that

had been made prisoners, were murdered in cool blood three days after that

battle. The irregular troops on both sides had accustomed their generals to

these  cruelties,  than  which  greater  were  never  committed  in  the  most

barbarous times. I had the honour to hear king Stanislaus himself say, that in

one  of  those  engagements  which  were  so  frequent  in  Poland,  a  Russian

officer who had formerly been one of his friends, came to put himself under

his  protection,  after  the  defeat  of  the  corps  he  commanded;  and  that  the

Swedish general Steinbock shot him dead with a pistol, while he held him in

his arms.

  This  was  the  fourth  battle  the  Russians  had  lost  against  the  Swedes,

without reckoning the other victories of Charles XII. in Poland. The czar's

troops that were in Grodno, ran the risk of suffering a still greater disgrace,

by being surrounded on all sides; but he fortunately found means to get them

together,  and  even  to  strengthen  them  with  new  reinforcements.  But

necessitated at once to provide for the safety of this army, and the security of

his conquests in Ingria, he ordered prince Menzikoff to march with the army

under his command eastward, and from thence southward as far as Kiow.

  While his men were upon their march, he repairs to Shlusselburg, from

thence to Narva, and to his colony of Petersburg (August), and puts those

places in a posture of defence. From the Baltic he flies to the banks of the

Boristhenes, to enter into Poland by the way of Kiow, making it still his chief

care  to  render  those  victories  of  Charles,  which  he  had  not  been  able  to

prevent, of as little advantage to the victor as possible. At this very time he

meditated a new conquest; namely, that of Wibourg, the capital of Carelia,

situated on the gulf of Finland. He went in person to lay siege to this place,

but  for  this  time  it  withstood  the  power  of  his  arms;  succours  arrived  in

season, and he was obliged to raise the siege. (Oct.) His rival, Charles XII.did not, in fact, make any conquests, though he gained so many battles: he

was at that time in pursuit of king Augustus in Saxony, being always more

intent upon humbling that prince, and crushing him beneath the weight of his

superior power and reputation, than upon recovering Ingria, that had been

wrested from him by a vanquished enemy.

  He  spread  terror  through  all  Upper  Poland,  Silesia,  and  Saxony.  King

Augustus's  whole  family,  his  mother,  his  wife,  his  son,  and  the  principal

nobility of the country, were retired into the heart of the empire. Augustus

now  sued  for  peace,  choosing  rather  to  trust  himself  to  the  mercy  of  his

conqueror, than in the arms of his protector. He entered into a treaty which

deprived him of the crown of Poland, and covered him at the same time with

ignominy. This was a private treaty, and was to be concealed from the czar's

generals, with whom he had taken refuge in Poland, while Charles XII. was

giving  laws  in  Leipsic,  and  acting  as  absolute  master  throughout  his

electorate.

  His plenipotentiaries had already signed the fatal treaty (Sept. 14.), by

which he not only divested himself of the crown of Poland, but promised

never  more  to  assume  the  title  of  king;  at  the  same  time  he  recognized

Stanislaus,  renounced  his  alliance  with  the  czar  his  benefactor;  and,  to

complete his humiliation, engaged to deliver up to Charles XII. John Reinold

Patkul, the czar's ambassador and general in the Russian service, who was

then actually fighting in his cause. He had some time before ordered Patkul to

be arrested upon false suspicions, contrary to the law of nations; and now, in

direct violation of these laws, he delivered him up to the enemy. It had been

better for him to have died sword-in-hand, than to have concluded such a

treaty;  a  treaty,  which  not  only  robbed  him  of  his  crown,  and  of  his

reputation, but likewise endangered his liberty, because he was at that time in

the power of prince Menzikoff in Posnania, and the few Saxons that he had

with him, were paid by the Russians.

  Prince  Menzikoff  was  opposed  in  that  district  by  a  Swedish  army,

reinforced  with  a  strong  party  of  Poles,  in  the  interest  of  the  new  king

Stanislaus, under the command of general Meyerfeld; and not knowing that

Augustus had engaged in a treaty with the enemies of Russia, had proposed

to attack them, and Augustus did not dare to refuse. The battle was fought

near Calish (Oct. 19.), in the palatinate belonging to Stanislaus; this was thefirst  pitched  battle  the  Russians  had  gained  against  the  Swedes.  Prince

Menzikoff had all the glory of the action, four thousand of the enemy were

left dead on the field, and two thousand five hundred and ninety-eight were

made prisoners.

  It is difficult to comprehend how Augustus could be prevailed on, after

this battle, to ratify a treaty which deprived him of all the fruits of his victory.

But  Charles  was  still  triumphant  in  Saxony,  where  his  very  name  spread

terror. The success of the Russians appeared so inconsiderable, and the Polish

party against Augustus was so strong, and, in fine, that monarch was so ill-

advised, that he signed the fatal convention. Neither did he stop here: he

wrote to his envoy Finkstein a letter, that was, if possible, more shameful

than  the  treaty  itself;  for  therein  he  asked  pardon  for  having  obtained  a

victory, 'protesting, that the battle had been fought against his will; that the

Russians and the Poles, his adherents, had obliged him to it; that he had, with

a  view  of  preventing  it,  actually  made  some  movements  to  abandon

Menzikoff; that Meyerfeld might have beaten him, had he made the most of

that opportunity; that he was ready to restore all the Swedish prisoners, or to

break with the Russians; and that, in fine, he would give the king of Sweden

all possible satisfaction,' for having dared to beat his troops.

  This whole affair, unparalleled and inconceivable as it is, is, nevertheless,

strictly true. When we reflect, that, with all this weakness, Augustus was one

of the bravest princes in Europe, we may plainly perceive, that the loss or

preservation, the rise or decline of empires, are entirely owing to fortitude of

mind.

  Two other circumstances concurred to complete the disgrace of the king of

Poland elector of Saxony, and heighten the abuse which Charles XII. made of

his  good  fortune;  the  first  was  his  obliging  Augustus  to  write  a  letter  of

congratulation to the new king Stanislaus on his election: the second was

terrible,  he  even  compelled  Augustus  to  deliver  up  Patkul,  the  czar's

ambassador and general.[73] It is sufficiently known to all Europe, that this

minister was afterwards broke alive upon the wheel at Casimir, in the month

of September, 1707. Norberg, the chaplain, confesses that the orders for his

execution were all written in Charles's own hand.

  There is not a civilian in all Europe, nay even the vilest slave, but mustfeel  the  whole  horror  of  this  barbarous  injustice.  The  first  crime  of  this

unfortunate man was, the having made an humble representation of the rights

and privileges of his country, at the head of six Livonian gentlemen, who

were sent as deputies from the whole province: having been condemned to

die for fulfilling the first of duties, that of serving his country agreeable to her

laws. This iniquitous sentence put him in full possession of a right, which all

mankind derive from nature, that of choosing his country. Being afterwards

made ambassador to one of the greatest monarchs in the universe, his person

thereby became sacred. On this occasion the law of force violated that of

nature and nations. In former ages cruelties of this kind were hidden in the

blaze of success, but now they sully the glory of a conqueror.


  CHAPTER XVI.

  Attempts made to set up a third king of Poland.-Charles XII. sets out from

Saxony with a powerful army, and marches through Poland in a victorious

manner.-Cruelties committed.-Conduct of the czar.-Successes of the king of

Sweden, who at length advances towards Russia.

  1707.


Charles  XII.  enjoyed  the  fruits  of  his  good  fortune  in  Altranstadt  near

Leipsic,  whither  the  Protestant  princes  of  the  German  empire  repaired  in

droves  to  pay  homage  to  him,  and  implore  his  protection.  He  received

ambassadors from almost all the potentates in Europe. The emperor Joseph

implicitly followed his directions. Peter then perceiving that king Augustus

had renounced his protection and his own crown, and that a part of the Polish

nation had acknowledged Stanislaus, listened to the proposals made him by

Yolkova, of choosing a third king.

  A diet was held at Lublin, in which several of the palatines were proposed;

and among others, Prince Ragotski was put upon the list; that prince, who

was so long kept in prison, when young, by the emperor Leopold, and who

afterwards when he procured his liberty, was his competitor for the throne of

Hungary.

  This negotiation was pushed very far, and Poland was on the point of

having three kings at one time. Prince Ragotski not succeeding, Peter thoughtto bestow the crown on Siniauski, grand general of the republic; a person of

great  power  and  interest,  and  head  of  a  third  party,  that  would  neither

acknowledge the dethroned king, nor the person elected by the opposed party.

  In the midst of these troubles, there was a talk of peace, as is customary on

the like occasions. Besseval the French envoy in Saxony interposed, in order

to bring about a reconciliation between the czar and the king of Sweden. It

was  thought  at  that  time  by  the  court  of  France,  that  Charles,  having  no

longer  either  the  Russians  or  Poles  to  fight  against,  might  turn  his  arms

against the emperor Joseph, with whom he was not on very good terms, and

on whom he had imposed several laws during his stay in Saxony. But Charles

made answer, that he would treat with the czar in Moscow. It was on this

occasion that Peter said, 'My brother Charles wants to act the Alexander, but

he shall not find a Darius in me.'

  The  Russians  however  were  still  in  Poland,  and  were  in  the  city  of

Warsaw, while the king whom Charles XII. had set over the Poles was hardly

acknowledged by that nation. In the mean time, Charles was enriching his

army with the spoils of Saxony.

  Aug. 22.] At length he began his march from Altranstadt, at the head of an

army of forty-five thousand men; a force which it seemed impossible for the

czar to withstand, seeing he had been entirely defeated by eight thousand

only at Narva.

  Aug. 27.] It was in passing by the walls of Dresden, that Charles made that

very extraordinary visit to king Augustus, which, as Norberg says, 'will strike

posterity  with  admiration.'  It  was  running  an  unaccountable  risk,  to  put

himself in the power of a prince whom he had deprived of his kingdom. From

thence he continued his march through Silesia, and re-entered Poland.

  This country has been entirely ravaged by war, ruined by factions, and was

a prey to every kind of calamity. Charles continued advancing with his army

through the province of Muscovia, and chose the most difficult ways he could

take.  The  inhabitants,  who  had  taken  shelter  in  the  morasses,  resolved  to

make him at least pay for his passage. Six thousand peasants dispatched an

old  man  of  their  body  to  speak  to  him:  this  man  who  was  of  a  very

extraordinary figure, clad in white, and armed with two carabines, made a

speech to Charles; but as the standers by did not well understand what hesaid, they, without any further ceremony, dispatched him in his harangue, and

before their king's face. The peasants, in a rage, immediately withdrew, and

took up arms. All who could be found were seized, and obliged to hang one

another; the last was compelled to put the rope about his neck himself, and to

be his own executioner. All their houses were burnt to the ground. This fact is

attested  by  Norberg,  who  was  an  eye-witness,  and  therefore  cannot  be

contradicted, as it cannot be related without inspiring horror.

  1708, Feb. 6.] Charles being arrived within a few leagues of Grodno in

Lithuania, is informed of the czar's being there in person with a body of

troops; upon which, without staying to deliberate, he takes only eight hundred

of his guards, and sets out for Grodno. A German officer, named Mulfels,

who commanded a body of troops, posted at one of the gates of the town,

making no doubt, when he saw Charles, but that he was followed by his

whole army, instead of disputing the passage with him, leaves it open, and

takes to flight. The alarm is now spread through the whole town; every one

imagines the whole Swedish army already entered; the few Russians who

made any resistance, are cut in pieces by the Swedish guards; and all the

officers assure the czar, that the victorious army had made itself master of the

place.  Hereupon  Peter  retreats  behind  the  ramparts,  and  Charles  plants  a

guard of thirty men at the very gate through which the czar had just before

entered.

  In this confusion some of the Jesuits, whose college had been taken to

accommodate the king of Sweden, as being the handsomest structure in the

place, went by night to the czar, and for this time told the whole truth. Upon

this, Peter immediately returns into the town, and forces the Swedish guards.

An engagement ensues in the streets and public places; but, at length, the

whole  Swedish  army  appearing  in  sight,  the  czar  is  obliged  to  yield  to

superior numbers, and leaves the town in the hands of the victor, who made

all Poland tremble.

  Charles had augmented his forces in Livonia and Finland, and Peter had

every thing to fear, not only for his conquests on this side, together with those

in  Lithuania,  but  also  for  his  ancient  territories,  and  even  for  the  city  of

Moscow itself. He was obliged then to provide at once for the safety of all

these different places, at such a distance from each other. Charles could not

make any rapid conquest to the eastward of Lithuania in the depth of winter,and in a marshy country, subject to epidemical disorders, which had been

spread by poverty and famine, from Warsaw, as far as Minski. Peter posted

his troops so as to command the passes of the rivers, (April 8.) guarded all the

important posts, and did every thing in his power to impede the marches of

his  enemy,  and  afterwards  hastened  to  put  things  in  a  proper  situation  at

Petersburg.

  Though Charles was lording it in Poland, he took nothing from the czar;

but  Peter,  by  the  use  he  made  of  his  new  fleet,  by  landing  his  troops  in

Finland, by the taking and dismantling the town of Borgau, (May 22.) and by

seizing  a  great  booty,  was  procuring  many  real  and  great  advantages  to

himself, and distressing his enemy.

  Charles, after being detained a long time in Lithuania, by continual rains,

at  length  reached  the  little  river  of  Berezine,  some  few  leagues  from  the

Boristhenes. Nothing could withstand his activity: he threw a bridge over the

river in sight of the Russians; beat a detachment that guarded the passage,

and  got  to  Holozin  on  the  river  Bibitsch,  where  the  czar  had  posted  a

considerable body of troops to check the impetuous progress of his rival. The

little river of Bibitsch is only a small brook in dry weather; but at this time it

was swelled by the rains to a deep and rapid stream. On the other side was a

morass, behind which the Russians had thrown up an intrenchment for above

a quarter of a league, defended by a large and deep ditch, and covered by a

parapet, lined with artillery. Nine regiments of horse, and eleven of foot, were

advantageously posted in these lines, so that the passage of the river seemed

impracticable.

  The Swedes, according to the custom of war, got ready their pontoons, and

erected batteries to favour their passage; but Charles, whose impatience to

engage would not let him brook the least delay, did not wait till the pontoons

were  ready.  Marshal  Schwerin,  who  served  a  long  time  under  him,  has

assured me several times, that one day that they were to come to action,

observing  his  generals  to  be  very  busy  in  concerting  the  necessary

dispositions, said tartly to them, 'When will you have done with this trifling?'

and immediately advanced in person at the head of his guards, which he did

particularly on this memorable day.

  He flung himself into the river, followed by his regiment of guards. Theirnumbers broke the impetuosity of the current, but the water was as high as

their  shoulders,  and  they  could  make  no  use  of  their  firelocks.  Had  the

artillery of the parapet been but tolerably well served, or had the infantry but

levelled  their  pieces  in  a  proper  manner,  not  a  single  Swede  would  have

escaped.

  July 25.] The king, after wading the river, passed the morass on foot. As

soon  as  the  army  had  surmounted  these  obstacles  within  sight  of  the

Russians,  they  drew  up  in  order  of  battle,  and  attacked  the  enemies

intrenchments seven different times, and it was not till the seventh attack that

the Russians gave way. By the accounts of their own historians, the Swedes

took but twelve field-pieces, and twenty-four mortars.

  It  was  therefore  evident,  that  the  czar  had  at  length  succeeded  in

disciplining his troops, and this victory of Holozin, while it covered Charles

XII. with glory, might have made him sensible of the many dangers he must

have to encounter in adventuring into such distant countries, where his army

could march only in small bodies, through woods, morasses, and where he

would be obliged to fight out every step of his way; but the Swedes, being

accustomed to carry all before them, dreaded neither danger nor fatigue.[74]


  CHAPTER XVII.

  Charles  XII.  crosses  the  Boristhenes,  penetrates  into  the  Ukraine,  but

concerts his measures badly.-One of his armies is defeated by Peter the Great:

he loses his supply of provisions and ammunition: advances forward through

a desert country: his adventures in the Ukraine.

  1708.


  At last Charles arrives on the borders of the Boristhenes, at a small town

called Mohilow. This was the important spot where it was to be determined,

whether  he  should  direct  his  march  eastward,  towards  Moscow;  or

southwards, towards the Ukraine. His own army, his friends, his enemies, all

expected  that  he  would  direct  his  course  immediately  for  the  capital  of

Russia. Which ever way he took, Peter was following him from Smolensko

with a strong army; no one expected that he would turn towards the Ukraine.

He was induced to take this strange resolution by Mazeppa, hetman of theCossacks, who, being an old man of seventy and without children, ought to

have thought only of ending his days in peace: gratitude should have bound

him to the czar, to whom he was indebted for his present dignity; but whether

he had any real cause of complaint against that prince, or that he was dazzled

with the lustre of Charles's exploits, or whether, in time, he thought to make

himself independent, he betrayed his benefactor, and privately espoused the

interests of the king of Sweden, flattering himself with the hopes of engaging

his whole nation in a rebellion with himself.

  Charles made not the least doubt of subduing the Russian empire, as soon

as  his  troops  should  be  joined  by  so  warlike  a  people  as  the  Cossacks.

Mazeppa was to furnish him with what provisions, ammunition, and artillery,

he should want; besides these powerful succours, he was to be joined by an

army  of  sixteen  or  seventeen  thousand  men,  out  of  Livonia,  under  the

command of general Levenhaupt, who was to bring with him a prodigious

quantity of warlike stores and provisions. Charles was not at the trouble of

reflecting,  whether  the  czar  was  within  reach  of  attacking  the  army,  and

depriving  him  of  these  necessary  supplies.  He  never  informed  himself

whether Mazeppa was in a condition to observe his promises; if that Cossack

had  credit  enough  to  change  the  disposition  of  a  whole  nation,  who  are

generally  guided  only  by  their  own  opinion;  or  whether  his  army  was

provided with sufficient resources in case of an accident; but imagined, if

Mazeppa should prove deficient in abilities or fidelity, he could trust in his

own valour and good fortune. The Swedish army then advanced beyond the

Boristhenes  towards  the  Desna;  it  was  between  these  two  rivers,  that  he

expected  to  meet  with  Mazeppa.  His  march  was  attended  with  many

difficulties and dangers, on account of the badness of the road, and the many

parties of Russians that were hovering about these regions.

  Sept. 11.] Menzikoff, at the head of some horse and foot, attacked the

king's advanced guard, threw them into disorder, and killed a number of his

men. He lost a great number of his own, indeed, but that did not discourage

him.  Charles  immediately  hastened  to  the  field  of  battle,  and  with  some

difficulty repulsed the Russians, at the hazard of his own life, by engaging a

party of dragoons, by whom he was surrounded. All this while Mazeppa did

not  appear,  and  provisions  began  to  grow  scarce.  The  Swedish  soldiers,

seeing their king share in all their dangers, fatigues, and wants, were notdispirited; but though they admired his courage, they could not refrain from

murmuring at his conduct.

  The orders which the king had sent to Levenhaupt to march forward with

all  haste,  to  join  him  with  the  necessary  supplies,  were  not  delivered  by

twelve days so soon as they should have been. This was a long delay as

circumstances then stood. However, Levenhaupt at length began his march;

Peter suffered him to pass the Boristhenes, but as soon as his army was got

between that river and the lesser ones, which empty themselves into it, he

crossed over after him, and attacked him with his united forces, which had

followed in different corps at equal distances from one another. This battle

was fought between the Boristhenes and the Sossa.[75]

  Prince Menzikoff was upon his return with the same body of horse, with

which he had lately engaged Charles XII. General Baur followed him, and

the czar himself headed the flower of his army. The Swedes imagined they

had to deal with an army of forty thousand men, and the same was believed

for a long time on the faith of their relation; but my late memoirs inform me,

that Peter had only twenty thousand men in this day's engagement, a number

not  much  superior  to  that  of  the  enemy:  but  his  vigour,  his  patience,  his

unwearied perseverance, together with that of his troops, animated by his

presence, decided the fate, not of that day only, but of three successive days,

during which the fight was renewed at different times.

  They made their first attack upon the rear of the Swedish army, near the

village of Lesnau, from whence this battle borrows its name. This first shock

was bloody, without proving decisive. Levenhaupt retreated into a wood, and

thereby saved his baggage. (Oct. 7.) The next morning, when the Swedes

were to be driven from this wood, the fight was still more bloody, and more

to the advantage of the Russians. Here it was that the czar, seeing his troops

in disorder, cried out to fire upon the runaways, and even upon himself, if

they  saw  him  turn  back.  The  Swedes  were  repulsed,  but  not  thrown  into

confusion.

  At length a reinforcement of four thousand dragoons arriving, he fell upon

the  Swedes  a  third  time;  who  retreated  to  a  small  town  called  Prospock,

where they were again attacked; they then marched towards the Desna, the

Russians still pursuing them: yet they were never broken, but lost upwards ofeight thousand men, seventeen pieces of cannon, and forty-four colours: the

czar took fifty-six officers and near nine hundred private men prisoners; and

the great convoy of provisions and ammunition that were going to Charles's

army, fell into the hands of the conqueror.

  This was the first time that the czar in person gained a pitched battle,

against an enemy who had distinguished himself by so many victories over

his troops: he was employed in a general thanksgiving for his success, when

he received advice that general Apraxin had lately gained an advantage over

the enemy in Ingria, (Sept. 17,) some leagues from Narva, an advantage less

considerable indeed than that of Lesnau; but this concurrence of fortunate

events greatly raised the hopes and courage of his troops.

  Charles XII. heard of these unfortunate tidings just as he was ready to pass

the  Desna,  in  the  Ukraine.  Mazeppa  at  length  joined  him;  but  instead  of

twenty thousand men, and an immense quantity of provisions, which he was

to have brought with him, he came with only two regiments, and appeared

rather like a fugitive applying for assistance, than a prince, who was bringing

powerful succours to his ally. This Cossack had indeed begun his march with

near fifteen or sixteen thousand of his people, whom he had told, at their first

setting out, that they were going against the king of Sweden; that they would

have the glory of stopping that hero on his march, and that he would hold

himself eternally obliged to them for so great a service.

  But when they came within a few leagues of the Desna, he made them

acquainted with his real design. These brave people received his declaration

with disdain: they refused to betray a monarch, against whom they had no

cause of complaint, for the sake of a Swede, who had invaded their country

with an armed force, and who, after leaving it, would be no longer able to

defend them, but must abandon them to the mercy of the incensed Russians,

and  of  the  Poles,  once  their  masters,  and  always  their  enemies:  they

accordingly returned home, and gave advice to the czar of the defection of

their chief: Mazeppa found himself left with only two regiments, the officers

of which were in his own pay.

  He was still master of some strong posts in the Ukraine, and in particular

of Bathurin, the place of his residence, looked upon as the capital of the

country of the Cossacks: it is situated near some forests on the Desna, at agreat distance from the place where Peter had defeated general Levenhaupt.

There  were  always  some  Russian  regiments  quartered  in  these  districts.

Prince  Menzikoff  was  detached  from  the  czar's  army,  and  got  thither  by

round-about marches. Charles could not secure all the passes; he did not even

know them all, and had neglected to make himself master of the important

post of Starowdoub, which leads directly to the Bathurin, across seven or

eight leagues of forest, through which the Desna directs its course. His enemy

had  always  the  advantage  of  him,  by  being  better  acquainted  with  the

country.

  Menzikoff and prince Galitzin, who had accompanied him, easily made

their passage good, and presented themselves before the town of Bathurin,

(Nov. 14,) which surrendered almost without resistance, was plundered, and

reduced to ashes. The Russians made themselves masters of a large magazine

destined for the use of the king of Sweden, and of all Mazeppa's treasures.

The Cossacks chose another hetman, named Skoropasky, who was approved

by the czar, who being willing to impress a due sense of the enormous crime

of treason on the minds of the people, by a striking example of justice, the

archbishop of Kiow, and two other prelates, were ordered to excommunicate

Mazeppa publicly, (Nov. 22,) after which he was hanged in effigy, and some

of his accomplices were broken upon the wheel.

  In the meanwhile, Charles XII. still at the head of about twenty-five or

twenty-seven  thousand  Swedes,  who  were  reinforced  by  the  remains  of

Levenhaupt's army, and the addition of between two or three thousand men,

whom Mazeppa had brought with him, and still infatuated with the same

notion of making all the Ukraine declare for him, passed the Desna at some

distance from Bathurin, and near the Boristhenes, in spite of the czar's troops

which surrounded him on all sides; part of whom followed close in the rear,

while another part lined the opposite side of the river to oppose his passage.

  He  continued  his  march  through  a  desert  country,  where  he  met  with

nothing  but  burned  or  ruined  villages.  The  cold  began  to  set  in  at  the

beginning of December so extremely sharp, that in one of his marches near

two thousand of his men perished before his eyes: the czar's troops did not

suffer near so much, being better supplied; whereas the king of Sweden's

army, being almost naked, was necessarily more exposed to the inclemency

of the weather.  In this deplorable situation, count Piper, chancellor of Sweden, who never

gave his master other than good advice, conjured him to halt, and pass at least

the severest part of the winter in a small town of the Ukraine, called Romna,

where he might intrench himself, and get some provisions by the help of

Mazeppa; but Charles replied, that-He was not a person to shut himself up in

a town. Piper then intreated him to re-pass the Desna and the Boristhenes, to

return back into Poland, to put his troops into winter quarters, of which they

stood  so  much  in  need,  to  make  use  of  the  Polish  cavalry,  which  was

absolutely necessary; to support the king he had nominated, and to keep in

awe  the  partisans  of  Augustus,  who  began  already  to  bestir  themselves.

Charles answered him again-That this would be flying before the czar, that

the season would grow milder, and that he must reduce the Ukraine, and

march on to Moscow.[76]

  January, 1709.] Both armies remained some weeks inactive, on account of

the intenseness of the cold, in the month of January, 1709; but as soon as the

men were able to make use of their arms, Charles attacked all the small posts

that he found in his way; he was obliged to send parties on every side in

search of provisions; that is to say, to scour the country twenty leagues round,

and  rob  all  the  peasants  of  their  necessary  subsistence.  Peter,  without

hurrying himself, kept a strict eye upon all his motions, and suffered the

Swedish army to dwindle away by degrees.

  It is impossible for the reader to follow the Swedes in their march through

these countries: several of the rivers which they crossed are not to be found in

the maps: we must not suppose, that geographers are as well acquainted with

these countries, as we are with Italy, France, and Germany: geography is, of

all  the  arts,  that  which  still  stands  the  most  need  of  improvement,  and

ambition has hitherto been at more pains to desolate the face of the globe,

than to give a description of it.

  We must content ourselves then with knowing, that Charles traversed the

whole Ukraine in the month of February, burning the villages wherever he

came, or meeting with others that had been laid in ashes by the Russians. He

advancing south-east, came to those sandy deserts, bordered by mountains

that separate the Nogay Tartars from the Don Cossacks. To the eastward of

those mountains are the altars of Alexander. Charles was now on the otherside of the Ukraine, in the road that the Tartars take to Russia; and when he

was got there, he was obliged to return back again to procure subsistence: the

inhabitants, having retired with all their cattle into their dens and lurking-

places, would sometimes defend their subsistence against the soldiers, who

came to deprive them of it. Such of these poor wretches, who could be found,

were put to death, agreeably to what are falsely called, the rules of war. I

cannot  here  forbear  transcribing  a  few  lines  from  Norberg.[77]  'As  an

instance,' says he, 'of the king's regard to justice, I shall insert a note, which

he wrote with his own hand to colonel Heilmen.

  'Colonel,

  'I am very well pleased that you have taken those peasants, who carried off

a Swedish soldier; as soon as they are convicted of the crime, let them be

punished with death, according to the exigency of the case.

  'Charles; and lower down, Budis.'

  Such  are  the  sentiments  of  justice  and  humanity  shewn  by  a  king's

confessor; but, had the peasants of the Ukraine had it in their power to hang

up  some  of  those  regimented  peasants  of  East  Gothland,  who  thought

themselves entitled to come so far to plunder them, their wives, and families,

of  their  subsistence,  would  not  the  confessors  and  chaplains  of  these

Ukrainers have had equal reason to applaud their justice?

  Mazeppa had for a considerable time, been in treaty with the Zaporavians,

who dwell about the two shores of the Boristhenes, and of whom part inhabit

the islands on that river. It is this division that forms the nation, of whom

mention has already been made in the first chapter of this history, and who

have neither wives nor families, and subsist entirely by rapine. During the

winter they heap up provisions in their islands, which they afterwards go and

sell in the summer, in the little town of Pultowa; the rest dwell in small

hamlets, to the right and left of this river. All together choose a particular

hetman, and this hetman is subordinate to him of the Ukraine. The person, at

that time at the head of the Zaporavians, came to meet Mazeppa; and these

two barbarians had an interview, at which each of them had a horse's tail, and

a club borne before him, as ensigns of honour.

  To shew what this hetman of the Zaporavians and his people were, I think

it  not  unworthy  of  history,  to  relate  the  manner  in  which  this  treaty  wasconcluded. Mazeppa gave a great feast to the hetman of the Zaporavians, and

his principal officers, who were all served in plate. As soon as these chiefs

had made themselves drunk with brandy, they took an oath (without stirring

from table) upon the Evangelists, to supply Charles with men and provisions;

after which they carried off all the plate and other table-furniture. Mazeppa's

steward ran after them, and remonstrated, that such behaviour ill-suited with

the doctrine of the Gospels, on which they had so lately sworn. Some of

Mazeppa's domestics were for taking the plate away from them by force; but

the Zaporavians went in a body to complain to Mazeppa, of the unparalleled

affront  offered  to  such  brave  fellows,  and  demanded  to  have  the  steward

delivered up to them, that they might punish him according to law. This was

accordingly complied with, and the Zaporavians, according to law, tossed this

poor man from one to another like a ball, and afterwards plunged a knife to

his heart.

  Such were the new allies that Charles XII. was obliged to receive; part of

whom  he  formed  into  a  regiment  of  two  thousand  men;  the  remainder

marched in separate bodies against the Cossacks and Calmucks of the czar's

party, that were stationed about that district.

  The little town of Pultowa, with which those Zaporavians carry on a trade,

was filled with provisions, and might have served Charles for a place of arms.

It  is  situated  on  the  river  Worsklaw,  near  a  chain  of  mountains,  which

command it on the north side. To the eastward is a vast desert. The western

part is the most fruitful, and the best peopled. The Worsklaw empties itself

into the Boristhenes, about fifteen leagues lower down; from Pultowa, one

may go northward, through the defiles, which communicate with the road to

Moscow, a passage used by the Tartars. It is very difficult of access, and the

precautions taken by the czar had rendered it almost impervious; but nothing

appeared impossible to Charles, and he depended upon marching to Moscow,

as soon as he had made himself master of Pultowa: with this view he laid

siege to that town in the beginning of May.


  CHAPTER XVIII.

  Battle of Pultowa.  Here it was that Peter expected him; he had disposed the several divisions

of his army at convenient distances for joining each other, and marching all

together against the besiegers: he had visited the countries which surround

the Ukraine; namely the duchy of Severia, watered by the Desna, already

made famous by his victory: the country of Bolcho, in which the Occa has its

source; the deserts and mountains leading to the Palus Mæotis; and lately he

had been in the neighbourhood of Azoph, where he caused that harbour to be

cleansed, new ships to be built, and the citadel of Taganroc to be repaired.

Thus did he employ the time that passed between the battles of Lesnau and

Pultowa, in preparing for the defence of his dominions. As soon as he heard

the Swedes had laid siege to the town, he mustered all his forces; the horse,

dragoons,  infantry,  Cossacks,  and  Calmucks,  advanced  from  different

quarters. His army was well provided with necessaries of every kind; large

cannon, field pieces, ammunition of all sorts, provisions, and even medicines

for the sick: this was another degree of superiority which he had acquired

over his rival.

  On the 15th day of June, 1709, he appeared before Pultowa, with an army

of about sixty thousand effective men; the river Worsklaw was between him

and Charles. The besiegers were encamped on the north-west side of that

river, the Russians on the south-east.

  Peter ascends the river above the town, fixes his barges, marches over with

his army, and draws a long line of intrenchments, (July 3.) which were begun

and completed in one night, in the face of the enemy. Charles might then

judge, whether the person, whom he had so much despised, and whom he

thought of dethroning at Moscow, understood the art of war. This disposition

being made, Peter posted his cavalry between two woods, and covered it with

several  redoubts,  lined  with  artillery.  Having  thus  taken  all  the  necessary

measures, (July 6.) he went to reconnoitre the enemy's camp, in order to form

the attack.

  This battle was to decide the fate of Russia, Poland, and Sweden, and of

two monarchs, on whom the eyes of all Europe were fixed. The greatest part

of  those  nations,  who  were  attentive  to  these  important  concerns,  were

equally  ignorant  of  the  place  where  these  two  princes  were,  and  of  their

situation: but knowing that Charles XII. had set out from Saxony, at the head

of a victorious army, and that he was driving his enemy every where beforehim, they no longer doubted that he would at length entirely crush him; and

that, as he had already given laws to Denmark, Poland, and Germany, he

would now dictate conditions of peace in the Kremlin of Moscow, and make

a new czar, after having already made a new king of Poland. I have seen

letters from several public ministers to their respective courts, confirming this

general opinion.

  The  risk  was  far  from  being  equal  between  these  two  great  rivals.  If

Charles lost a life, which he had so often and wantonly exposed, there would

after  all  have  been  but  one  hero  less  in  the  world.  The  provinces  of  the

Ukraine, the frontiers of Lithuania, and of Russia, would then rest from their

calamities, and a stop would be put to the general devastation which had so

long been their scourge. Poland would, together with her tranquillity, recover

her lawful prince, who had been lately reconciled to the czar, his benefactor;

and Sweden, though exhausted of men and money, might find motives of

consolation under her heavy losses.

  But, if the czar perished, those immense labours, which had been of such

utility to mankind, would be buried with him, and the most extensive empire

in the world would again relapse into the chaos from whence it had been so

lately taken.

  There had already been some skirmishes between the detached parties of

the  Swedes  and  Russians,  under  the  walls  of  the  town.  In  one  of  these

rencounters, (June 27.) Charles had been wounded by a musket-ball, which

had shattered the bones of his foot: he underwent several painful operations,

which he bore with his usual fortitude, and had been confined to his bed for

several days. In this condition he was informed, that Peter intended to give

him battle; his notions of honour would not suffer him to wait to be attacked

in his intrenchments. Accordingly he gave orders for quitting them, and was

carried himself in a litter. Peter the Great acknowledges, that the Swedes

attacked the redoubts, lined with artillery, that covered his cavalry, with such

obstinate valour, that, notwithstanding the strongest resistance, supported by

a continual fire, the enemy made themselves masters of two redoubts. Some

writers say, that when the Swedish infantry found themselves in possession

of the two redoubts, they thought the day their own, and began to cry out-

Victory. The chaplain, Norberg, who was at some great distance from the

field of battle, amongst the baggage (which was indeed his proper place)pretends, that this was a calumny; but, whether the Swedes cried victory or

not, it is certain they were not victorious. The fire from the other redoubts

was kept up without ceasing, and the resistance made by the Russians, in

every part, was as firm as the attack of their enemies was vigorous. They did

not make one irregular movement; the czar drew up his army without the

intrenchments in excellent order, and with surprising dispatch.

  The  battle  now  became  general.  Peter  acted  as  major-general;  Baur

commanded the right wing, Menzikoff the left, and Sheremeto the centre. The

action lasted about two hours: Charles, with a pistol in his hand, went from

rank to rank, carried in a litter, on the shoulders of his drabans; one of which

was killed by a cannon-ball, and at the same time the litter was shattered in

pieces. He then ordered his men to carry him upon their pikes; for it would

have been difficult, in so smart an action, let Norberg say as he pleases, to

find a fresh litter ready made. Peter received several shots through his clothes

and his hat; both princes were continually in the midst of the fire, during the

whole action. At length, after two hours desperate engagement, the Swedes

were taken on all sides, and fell into confusion; so that Charles was obliged to

fly before him, whom he had hitherto held in so much contempt. This very

hero, who could not mount his saddle during the battle, now fled for his life

on horseback; necessity lent him strength in his retreat: he suffered the most

excruciating pain, which was increased by the mortifying reflection of being

vanquished  without  resource.  The  Russians  reckoned  nine  thousand  two

hundred and twenty-four Swedes left dead on the field of battle, and between

two and three thousand made prisoners in the action, the chief of which was

cavalry.

  Charles XII. fled with the greatest precipitation, attended by the remains

of his brave army, a few field-pieces, and a very small quantity of provisions

and ammunition. He directed his march southward, towards the Boristhenes,

between the two rivers Workslaw and Psol, or Sol, in the country of the

Zaporavians.  Beyond  the  Boristhenes,  are  vast  deserts,  which  lead  to  the

frontiers  of  Turkey.  Norberg  affirms,  that  the  victors  durst  not  pursue

Charles; and yet he acknowledges, that prince Menzikoff appeared on the

neighbouring heights, (July 12.) with ten thousand horse, and a considerable

train of artillery, while the king was passing the Boristhenes.

  Fourteen  thousand  Swedes  surrendered  themselves  prisoners  of  war  tothese ten thousand Russians; and Levenhaupt, who commanded them, signed

the  fatal  capitulation,  by  which  he  gave  up  those  Zaporavians  who  had

engaged in the service of his master, and were then in the fugitive army. The

chief persons taken prisoners in the battle, and by the capitulation, were count

Piper, the first minister, with two secretaries of state, and two of the cabinet;

field-marshal  Renschild,  the  generals  Levenhaupt,  Slipenbak,  Rozen,

Stakelber,  Creutz,  and  Hamilton,  with  three  general  aides-de-camp,  the

auditor-general  of  the  army,  fifty-nine  staff-officers,  five  colonels,  among

whom  was  the  prince  of  Wirtemberg;  sixteen  thousand  nine  hundred  and

forty-two private men and non-commissioned officers: in short, reckoning the

king's own domestics, and others, the conqueror had no less than eighteen

thousand seven hundred and forty-six prisoners in his power: to whom, if we

add nine thousand two hundred and twenty-four slain in battle, and nearly

two thousand that passed the Boristhenes with Charles, it appears, plainly,

that  he  had,  on  that  memorable  day,  no  less  than  twenty-seven  thousand

effective men under his command.[78]

  Charles had begun his march from Saxony with forty-five thousand men,

Levenhaupt had brought upwards of sixteen thousand out of Livonia, and yet

scarce a handful of men was left of all this powerful army; of a numerous

train of artillery, part lost in his marches, and part buried in the morasses; he

had now remaining only eighteen brass cannon, two howitzers, and twelve

mortars;  and,  with  inconsiderable  force,  he  had  undertaken  the  siege  of

Pultowa,  and  had  attacked  an  army  provided  with  a  formidable  artillery.

Therefore he is, with justice, accused of having shewn more courage than

prudence, after his leaving Germany. On the side of the Russians, there were

no more than fifty-two officers and one thousand two hundred and ninety-

three  private  men  killed;  an  undeniable  proof,  that  the  disposition  of  the

Russian  troops  was  better  than  those  of  Charles,  and  that  their  fire  was

infinitely superior to that of the Swedes.

  We find, in the memoirs of a foreign minister to the court of Russia, that

Peter, being informed of Charles's design to take refuge in Turkey, wrote a

friendly letter to him, intreating him not to take so desperate a resolution, but

rather to trust himself in his hands, than in those of the natural enemy of all

Christian princes. He gave him, at the same time, his word of honour, not to

detain him prisoner, but to terminate all their differences by a reasonablepeace.  This  letter  was  sent  by  an  express  as  far  as  the  river  Bug,  which

separates the deserts of the Ukraine from the grand seignior's dominions. As

the messenger did not reach that place till Charles had entered Turkey, he

brought back the letter to his master. The same minister adds further, that he

had this account from the very person who was charged with the letter.[79]

This anecdote is not altogether improbable; but I do not meet with it either in

Peter's journals, or in any of the papers entrusted to my care. What is of

greater importance, in relation to this battle, was its being the only one, of the

many that have stained the earth with blood, that, instead of producing only

destruction, has proved beneficial to mankind, by enabling the czar to civilize

so considerable a part of the world.

  There have been fought more than two hundred pitched battles in Europe,

since the commencement of this century to the present year. The most signal,

and the most bloody victories, have produced no other consequences than the

reduction of a few provinces ceded afterwards by treaties, and retaken again

by other battles. Armies of a hundred thousand men have frequently engaged

each other in the field; but the greatest efforts have been attended with only

slight and momentary successes; the most trivial causes have been productive

of the greatest effects. There is no instance, in modern history, of any war

that  has  compensated,  by  even  a  better  good,  for  the  many  evils  it  has

occasioned: but, from the battle of Pultowa, the greatest empire under the sun

has derived its present happiness and prosperity.


  CHAPTER XIX.

  Consequences of the battle of Pultowa.-Charles XII. takes refuge among

the  Turks.-Augustus,  whom  he  had  dethroned,  recovers  his  dominions.-

Conquests of Peter the Great.

  1709.


  The chief prisoners of rank were now presented to the conqueror, who

ordered their swords to be returned, and invited them to dinner. It is a well

known fact, that, on drinking to the officers, he said, 'To the health of my

masters in the art of war.' However, most of his masters, particularly the

subaltern officers, and all the private men, were soon afterwards sent intoSiberia.  There  was  no  cartel  established  here  for  exchange  of  prisoners

between the Russians and Swedes; the czar, indeed, had proposed one before

the siege of Pultowa, but Charles rejected the offer, and his troops were in

every thing the victims of his inflexible pride.

  It was this unseasonable obstinacy that occasioned all the misfortunes of

this prince in Turkey, and a series of adventures, more becoming a hero of

romance than a wise or prudent king; for, as soon as he arrived at Bender, he

was advised to write to the grand-vizier, as is the custom among the Turks;

but this he thought would be demeaning himself too far. The like obstinacy

embroiled him with all the ministers of the Porte, one after another, in short,

he knew not how to accommodate himself either to times or circumstances.

[80]

  The first news of the battle of Pultowa produced a general revolution in

minds and affairs in Poland, Saxony, Sweden, and Silesia. Charles, while all

powerful in those parts, had obliged the emperor Joseph to take a hundred

and  five  churches  from  the  catholics  in  favour  of  the  Silesians  of  the

confession of Augsburg. The catholics then no sooner received news of the

defeat  of  Charles,  than  they  repossessed  themselves  of  all  the  Lutheran

temples.  The  Saxons  now  thought  of  nothing  but  being  revenged  for  the

extortions  of  a  conqueror,  who  had  robbed  them,  according  to  their  own

account, of twenty-three millions of crowns.

  The  king  of  Poland,  their  elector,  immediately  protested  against  the

abdication that had been extorted from him, and being now reconciled to the

czar  (Aug.  3.),  he  left  no  stone  unturned  to  reascend  the  Polish  throne.

Sweden, overwhelmed with consternation, thought her king for a long time

dead, and in this uncertainty the senate knew not what to resolve.

  Peter in the mean time determined to make the best use of his victory, and

therefore dispatched marshal Sheremeto with an army into Livonia, on the

frontiers of which province that general had so often distinguished himself.

Prince  Menzikoff  was  sent  in  haste  with  a  numerous  body  of  cavalry  to

second the few troops left in Poland, to encourage the nobles who were in the

interest of Augustus to drive out his competitor, who was now considered in

no better light than a rebel, and to disperse a body of Swedes and troops that

were still left in that kingdom under the command of general Crassau.  The czar soon after sets out in person, marches through the province of

Kiow, and the palatinates of Chelm and Upper Volhinia, and at length arrives

at Lublin, where he concerts measures with the general of Lithuania. He then

reviews  the  crown  troops,  who  all  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  king

Augustus, from thence he proceeds to Warsaw, and at Thera enjoyed the

most glorious of all triumphs (Sept. 18.), that of receiving the thanks of a

king,  whom  he  had  reinstated  in  his  dominions.  There  it  was  that  he

concluded a treaty against Sweden, with the kings of Denmark, Poland, and

Prussia (Oct. 7.): in which he was resolved to recover from Charles all the

conquests of Gustavus Adolphus. Peter revived the ancient pretensions of the

czars to Livonia, Ingria, Carelia, and part of Finland; Denmark laid claim to

Scania, and the king of Prussia to Pomerania.

  Thus had Charles XII. by his unsuccessful valour, shook the noble edifice

that had been erected by the prosperous bravery of his ancestor Gustavus

Adolphus. The Polish nobility came in on all sides to renew their oaths to

their king, or to ask pardon for having deserted him; and almost the whole

kingdom acknowledged Peter for its protector.

  To the victorious arms of the czar, to these new treaties, and to this sudden

revolution, Stanislaus had nothing to oppose but a voluntary resignation: he

published a writing called Universale, in which he declares himself ready to

resign the crown, if the republic required it.

  Peter,  having  concerted  all  the  necessary  measures  with  the  king  of

Poland, and ratified the treaty with Denmark, set out directly to finish his

negotiation  with  the  king  of  Prussia.  It  was  not  then  usual  for  sovereign

princes to perform the function of their own ambassadors. Peter was the first

who  introduced  this  custom,  which  has  been  followed  by  very  few.  The

elector of Brandenburg, the first king of Prussia, had a conference with the

czar at Marienverder, a small town situated in the western part of Pomerania,

and built by the old Teutonic knights, and included in the limits of Prussia,

lately erected into a kingdom. This country indeed was poor, and of a small

extent;  but  its  new  king,  whenever  he  travelled,  displayed  the  utmost

magnificence; with great splendour he had received czar Peter at his first

passing through his dominions, when that prince quitted his empire to go in

search  of  instruction  among  strangers.  But  he  received  the  conqueror  of

Charles XII. in a still more pompous manner. (Oct. 20.) Peter for this timeconcluded  only  a  defensive  treaty  with  him,  which  afterwards,  however,

completed the ruin of Sweden.

  Not an instant of time was lost. Peter, having proceeded with the greatest

dispatch in his negotiations, which elsewhere are wont to take up so much

time, goes and joins his army, then before Riga, the capital of Livonia; he

began by bombarding the place (Nov. 21.), and fired off the three first bombs

himself; then changed the siege into a blockade; and, when well assured that

Riga could not escape him, he repaired to his city of Petersburg, to inspect

and forward the works carrying on there, the new buildings, and finishing of

his fleet; and having laid the keel of a ship of fifty-four guns, (Dec. 3.) with

his  own  hands,  he  returned  to  Moscow.  Here  he  amused  himself  with

assisting in the preparations for the triumphal entry, which he exhibited in the

capital. He directed every thing relating to that festival, and was himself the

principal contriver and architect.

  He opened the year 1710 with this solemnity, so necessary to his subjects,

whom it inspired with notions of grandeur, and was highly pleasing to every

one who had been fearful of seeing those enter their walls as conquerors, over

whom they now triumphed. Seven magnificent arches were erected, under

which passed in triumph, the artillery, standards, and colours, taken from the

enemy,  with  their  officers,  generals,  and  ministers,  who  had  been  taken

prisoners, all on foot, amidst the ringing of bells, the sound of trumpets, the

discharge  of  a  hundred  pieces  of  cannon,  and  the  acclamations  of  an

innumerable concourse of people, whose voices rent the air as soon as the

cannon ceased firing. The procession was closed by the victorious army, with

the generals at its head; and Peter, who marched in his rank of major-general.

At each triumphal arch stood the deputies of the several orders of the state;

and at the last was a chosen band of young gentlemen, the sons of boyards,

clad in Roman habits, who presented a crown of laurels to their victorious

monarch.

  This public festival was followed by another ceremony, which proved no

less satisfactory than the former. In the year 1708 happened an accident the

more  disagreeable  to  Peter,  as  his  arms  were  at  that  time  unsuccessful.

Mattheof, his ambassador to the court of London, having had his audience of

leave  of  queen  Anne,  was  arrested  for  debt,  at  the  suit  of  some  English

merchants,  and  carried  before  a  justice  of  peace  to  give  security  for  themonies he owed there. The merchants insisted that the laws of commerce

ought  to  prevail  before  the  privileges  of  foreign  ministers;  the  czar's

ambassador,  and  with  him  all  the  public  ministers,  protested  against  this

proceeding, alleging, that their persons ought to be always inviolable. The

czar wrote to queen Anne, demanding satisfaction for the insult offered him

in the person of his ambassador.

  But the queen had it not in her power to gratify him; because, by the laws

of England, tradesmen were allowed to prosecute their debtors, and there was

no law that excepted public ministers from such prosecution.[81] The murder

of Patkul, the czar's ambassador, who had been executed the year before by

the order of Charles XII. had encouraged the English to shew so little regard

to a character which had been so cruelly profaned. The other public ministers

who were then at the court of London, were obliged to be bound for the czar's

ambassador; and at length all the queen could do in his favour, was to prevail

on her parliament to pass an act, by which no one for the future could arrest

an ambassador for debt; but after the battle of Pultowa, the English court

thought proper to give satisfaction to the czar.

  The queen made by a formal embassy an excuse for what had passed. Mr.

Whitworth,[82] the person charged with this commission, began his harangue

with the following words.-(Feb. 16.) 'Most high and mighty emperor.' He told

the czar that the person who had presumed to arrest his ambassador, had been

imprisoned and rendered infamous. There was no truth in all this, but it was

sufficient that he said so, and the title of emperor, which the queen had not

given Peter before the battle of Pultowa, shewed the consideration he had

now acquired in Europe.

  This title had been already granted him in Holland, not only by those who

had been his fellow-workmen in the dock-yards at Saardam, and seemed to

interest themselves most in his glory, but likewise by the principal persons in

the state, who unanimously styled him emperor, and made public rejoicings

for his victory, even in the presence of the Swedish minister.

  The universal reputation which he had acquired by his victory of Pultowa,

was still further increased by his not suffering a moment to pass without

making some advantages of it. In the first place, he laid siege to Elbing, a

Hans town of Regal Prussia in Poland, where the Swedes had still a garrison.The Russians scaled the walls, entered the town, and the garrison surrendered

prisoners of war. (Mar. 11.) This was one of the largest magazines belonging

to Charles XII. The conquerors found therein one hundred and eighty-three

brass cannon, and one hundred and fifty-seven mortars. Immediately after the

reduction of Elbing, Peter re-marched from Moscow to Petersburg (April 2.);

as soon as he arrived at this latter place, he took shipping under his new

fortress of Cronslot, coasted along the shore of Carelia, and notwithstanding a

violent storm, brought his fleet safely before Wiburg, the capital of Carelia in

Finland; while his land-forces advanced over the frozen morasses, and in a

short time the capital of Livonia beheld itself closely blockaded (June 23.):

and  after  a  breach  was  made  in  the  walls,  Wiburg  surrendered,  and  the

garrison, consisting of four thousand men, capitulated, but did not receive the

honours of war, being made prisoners notwithstanding the capitulation. Peter

charged the enemy with several infractions of this kind, and promised to set

these troops at liberty, as soon as he should receive satisfaction from the

Swedes, for his complaints. On this occasion the king of Sweden was to be

consulted, who continued as inflexible as ever; and those soldiers, whom, by

a little concession, he might have delivered from their confinement, remained

in captivity. Thus did king William III. in 1695, arrest marshal Boufflers,

notwithstanding the capitulation of Namur. There have been several instances

of such violations of treaties, but it is to be wished there never had been any.

  After the taking of this capital, the blockade of Riga was soon changed

into a regular siege, and pushed with vigour. They were obliged to break the

ice on the river Dwina, which waters the walls of the city. An epidemical

disorder, which had raged some time in those parts, now got amongst the

besiegers, and carried off nine thousand; nevertheless, the siege was not in

the least slackened; it lasted a considerable time, but at length the garrison

capitulated  (July  15.):  and  were  allowed  the  honours  of  war;  but  it  was

stipulated  by  the  capitulation,  that  all  the  Livonian  officers  and  soldiers

should enter into the Russian service, as natives of a country that had been

dismembered from that empire, and usurped by the ancestors of Charles XII.

But the Livonians were restored to the privileges of which his father had

stripped them, and all the officers entered into the czar's service: this was the

most  noble  satisfaction  that  Peter  could  take  for  the  murder  of  his

ambassador, Patkul, a Livonian, who had been put to death, for defendingthose privileges. The garrison consisted of near five thousand men. A short

time afterwards the citadel of Pennamund was taken, and the besiegers found

in the town and fort above eight hundred pieces of artillery of different kinds.

  Nothing was now wanting, to make Peter entirely master of the province

of Carelia, but the possession of the strong town of Kexholm, built on an

island in the lake of Ladoga, and deemed impregnable; it was bombarded

soon after, and surrendered in a short time. (Sep. 19.) The island of Oesel in

the sea, bordering upon the north of Livonia, was subdued with the same

rapidity. (Sep. 23.)

  On the side of Esthonia, a province of Livonia, towards the north, and on

the gulf of Finland, are the towns of Pernau and Revel: by the reduction of

these Peter completed the conquest of all Livonia. Pernau surrendered after a

siege  of  a  few  days  (Aug.  25.),  and  Revel  capitulated  (Sep.  10.)  without

waiting to have a single cannon fired against it; but the besieged found means

to escape out of the hands of the conquerors, at the very time that they were

surrendering themselves prisoners of war: for some Swedish ships, having

anchored in the road, under favour of the night, the garrison and most of the

citizens embarked on board, and when the besiegers entered the town, they

were surprised to find it deserted. When Charles XII. gained the victory of

Narva little did he expect that his troops would one day be driven to use such

artifices.

  In Poland, Stanislaus finding his party entirely ruined, had taken refuge in

Pomerania,  which  still  belonged  to  Charles  XII.  Augustus  resumed  the

government,  and  it  was  difficult  to  decide  who  had  acquired  most  glory,

Charles in dethroning him, or Peter in restoring him to his crown.

  The subjects of the king of Sweden were still more unfortunate than that

monarch himself. The contagious distemper, which had made such havock

over  Livonia,  passed  from  thence  into  Sweden,  where,  in  the  city  of

Stockholm, it carried off thirty thousand persons: it likewise desolated the

provinces, already thinned of their inhabitants; for during the space of ten

years successively, most of the able-bodied men had quitted their country to

follow their master, and perished in foreign climes.

  Charles's ill fortune pursued him also in Pomerania: his army had retired

thither from Poland, to the number of eleven thousand; the czar, the kings ofDenmark  and  Prussia,  the  elector  of  Hanover,  and  the  duke  of  Holstein,

joined together to render this army useless, and to compel general Crassau,

who  commanded  it,  to  submit  to  neutrality.  The  regency  of  Stockholm,

hearing no news of their king, and distracted by the mortality that raged in

that city, were glad to sign this neutrality, which seemed to deliver one of its

provinces at least from the horrors of war. The emperor of Germany favoured

this extraordinary convention, by which it was stipulated, that the Swedish

army then in Pomerania should not march from thence to assist their monarch

in any other part of the world; nay, it was furthermore resolved in the German

empire,  to  raise  an  army  to  enforce  the  execution  of  this  unparalleled

convention. The reason of this was, that the emperor of Germany, who was

then at war with France, was in hopes to engage the Swedish army to enter

into  his  service.  This  whole  negotiation  was  carried  on  while  Peter  was

subduing Livonia, Esthonia, and Carelia.

  Charles  XII.  who  was  all  this  time  at  Bender,  putting  every  spring  in

motion to engage the divan to declare war against the czar, received this news

as one of the severest blows his untoward fortune had dealt him: he could not

brook, that his senate at Stockholm should pretend to tie up the hands of his

army, and it was on this occasion that he wrote them word, he would send

one of his boots to govern them.

  The  Danes,  in  the  mean  time,  were  making  preparations  to  invade

Sweden; so that every nation in Europe was now engaged in war, Spain,

Portugal, Italy, France, Germany, Holland, and England, were contending for

the dominions left by Charles II. of Spain; and the whole North was up in

arms against Charles XII. There wanted only a quarrel with the Ottoman

empire, for every village in Europe to be exposed to the ravages of war. This

quarrel happened soon afterwards, when Peter had attained to the summit of

his glory, and precisely for that reason.


  CHAPTER XX.

  Campaign of Pruth.


  Sultan Achmet III. declared war against Peter I. not from any regard to the

king of Sweden, but, as may readily be supposed, merely from a view to hisown interest. The Khan of the Crim Tartars could not without dread, behold a

neighbour  so  powerful  as  Peter  I.  The  Porte  had,  for  some  time,  taken

umbrage at the number of ships which this prince had on the Palus Mæotis,

and in the Black Sea, at his fortifying the city of Azoph, and at the flourishing

state of the harbour of Taganroc, already become famous; and, lastly, at his

great series of successes, and at the ambition which success never fails to

augment.

  It is neither true, nor even probable, that the Porte should have begun the

war against the czar, on the Palus Mæotis, for no other reason than because a

Swedish ship had taken a bark on the Baltic, on board of which was found a

letter from a minister, whose name has never been mentioned. Norberg tells

us, that this letter contained a plan for the conquest of the Turkish empire;

that it was carried to Charles XII. who was then in Turkey, and was by him

sent to the divan; and that immediately after the receipt of this letter, war was

declared.  But  this  story  carries  the  mark  of  fiction  with  it.  It  was  the

remonstrances  of  the  khan  of  Tartary,  who  was  more  uneasy  about  the

neighbourhood of Azoph, than the Turkish divan, that induced this latter to

give orders for taking the field.[83]

  It was in the month of August, and before the czar had completed the

reduction of Livonia, when Achmet III. resolved to declare war against him.

The Turks, at that time, could hardly have had the news of the taking of Riga;

and, therefore, the proposal of restoring to the king of Sweden the value in

money, of the effects he had lost at the battle of Pultowa, would have been

the most absurd thing imaginable, if not exceeded by that of demolishing

Petersburg.  The  behaviour  of  Charles  XII.  at  Bender,  was  sufficiently

romantic; but the conduct of the Turkish divan would have been much more

so, if we suppose it to have made any demands of this kind.

  Nov. 1710.] The khan of Tartary, who was the principal instigator of this

war, paid Charles a visit in his retreat at Bender. They were connected by the

same  interests,  inasmuch  as  Europe  makes  part  of  the  frontiers  of  Little

Tartary. Charles and the khan were the two greatest sufferers by the successes

of the czar; but the khan did not command the forces of the grand seignior.

He was like one of the feudatory princes of Germany, who served in the

armies of the empire with their own troops, and were subject to the authority

of the emperor's generals for the time being.  Nov. 29, 1710.] The first step taken by the divan, was to arrest Tolstoy,

the czar's ambassador at the Porte, in the streets of Constantinople, together

with thirty of his domestics, who, with their master, were all confined in the

prison of the Seven Towers. This barbarous custom, at which even savages

would  blush,  is  owing  to  the  Turks  having  always  a  number  of  foreign

ministers residing amongst them from other courts, whereas they never send

any in return. They look upon the ambassadors of Christian princes in no

other light than as merchants or consuls; and, having naturally as great a

contempt for Christians as they have for Jews, they seldom condescend to

observe the laws of nations, in respect to them, unless forced to it; at least,

they have hitherto persisted in this barbarous pride.

  The famous vizier, Achmet Couprougli, the same who took the island of

Candia, under Mahomet IV., insulted the son of the French ambassador, and

even carried his brutality so far as to strike him, and afterwards to confine

him in prison, without Lewis XIV., proud and lofty as he was, daring to

resent  it,  otherwise  than  by  sending  another  minister  to  the  Porte.  The

Christian princes, who are so remarkably delicate on the point of honour

amongst themselves, and have even made it a part of the law of nations, seem

to be utterly insensible on this head in regard to the Turks.

  Never did a crowned head suffer greater affronts in the persons of his

ministers, than czar Peter. In the space of a few years, his ambassador at the

court  of  London  was  thrown  into  jail  for  debt,  his  plenipotentiary  at  the

courts of Poland and Saxony was broke upon the wheel, by order of the king

of Sweden; and now his minister at the Ottoman Porte was seized and thrown

into a dungeon at Constantinople, like a common felon.[84]

  We have already observed, in the first part of this history, that he received

satisfaction  from  queen  Anne,  of  England,  for  the  insult  offered  to  his

ambassador at London. The horrible affront he suffered, in the person of

Patkul, was washed away in the blood of the Swedes slain at the battle of

Pultowa; but fortune permitted the violation of the law of nations by the

Turks to pass unpunished.

  Jan. 1711.] The czar now found himself obliged to quit the theatre of war

in the west, and march towards the frontiers of Turkey. He began by causing

ten regiments, which he had in Poland, to advance towards Moldavia.[85] Hethen ordered marshal Sheremeto to set out from Livonia, with his body of

forces; and, leaving prince Menzikoff at the head of affairs at Petersburg, he

returned to Moscow, to give orders for opening the ensuing campaign.

  Jan. 18.] He now establishes a senate of regency: the regiment of guards

begin their march, he issues orders for all the young nobility to follow him to

the field, to learn the art of war, and places some of them in the station of

cadets,  and  others  in  that  of  subaltern  officers.  Admiral  Apraxin  goes  to

Azoph to take the command by sea and land. These several measures being

taken, the czar publishes an ordonnance in Moscow for acknowledging a new

empress. This was the person who had been taken prisoner in Marienburg, in

the year 1702. Peter had, in 1696, repudiated his wife Eudoxia Lopoukin (or

Lapouchin) by whom he had two children. The laws of his church allow of no

divorces; but, had they not, Peter would have enacted a new law to permit

them.

  The fair captive of Marienburg, who had taken the name of Catherine, had

a  soul  superior  to  her  sex  and  her  misfortunes.  She  rendered  herself  so

agreeable to the czar, that this prince would have her always near his person.

She accompanied him in all his excursions, and most fatiguing campaigns:

sharing in his toils, and softening his uneasiness by her natural gaiety, and the

great  attention  she  shewed  to  oblige  him  on  all  occasions,  and  the

indifference she expressed for the luxury, dress, and other indulgences, of

which the generality of her sex are, in other countries, wont to make real

necessities. She frequently softened the passionate temper of the czar, and, by

making him more clement and merciful, rendered him more truly great. In a

word, she became so necessary to him, that he married her privately, in 1707.

He had already two daughters by her, and the following year she bore him a

third, who was afterwards married to the duke of Holstein.[86]

  March 17, 1711.] The czar made this private marriage known the very day

he set out with her to try the fortune of his arms against the Turks. The

several dispositions he had made seemed to promise a successful issue. The

hetman of the Cossacks was to keep the Tartars in awe, who had already

began to commit ravages in the Ukraine. The main body of the Russian army

was advancing towards Niester, and another body of troops, under prince

Galitzin, were in full march through Poland. Every thing went on favourably

at the beginning: for Galitzin having met with a numerous body of Tartarsnear Kiow, who had been joined by some Cossacks and some Poles of king

Stanislaus' party, as also a few Swedes, he defeated them entirely, and killed

near five thousand men. These Tartars had, in their march through the open

country, made about ten thousand prisoners. It has been the custom of the

Tartars, time immemorial, to carry with them a much greater number of cords

than  scimitars,  in  order  to  bind  the  unhappy  wretches  they  surprise.  The

captives were all set free, and those who had made them prisoners were put to

the sword. The whole Russian army, if it had been assembled together, would

have amounted to sixty thousand men. It was to have been farther augmented

by the troops belonging to the king of Poland. This prince, who owed every

thing to the czar, came to pay him a visit at Jaroslaw, on the river Sana, the

3d  of  June,  1714,  and  promised  him  powerful  succours.  War  was  now

declared against the Turks, in the name of these two monarchs: but the Polish

diet,  not  willing  to  break  with  the  Ottoman  Porte,  refused  to  ratify  the

engagement their king had entered into. It was the fate of the czar to have, in

the king of Poland, an ally who could never be of any service to him. He

entertained the same hopes of assistance from the princes of Moldavia and

Walachia, and was, in the like manner, disappointed.

  These two provinces ought to have taken this opportunity to shake off the

Turkish yoke. These countries were those of the ancient Daci, who, together

with  the  Gepidi,  with  whom  they  were  intermixed,  did,  for  a  long  time,

disturb  the  Roman  empire.  They  were  at  length  subdued  by  the  emperor

Trajan, and Constantine the First made them embrace the Christian religion.

Dacia was one of the provinces of the eastern empire; but shortly after these

very people contributed to the ruin of that of the west, by serving under the

Odoacers and Theodorics.

  They afterwards continued to be subject to the Greek empire; and when

the Turks made themselves masters of Constantinople, were governed and

oppressed by particular princes; at length they were totally subjected by the

Padisha,  or  Turkish  emperor,  who  now  granted  them  an  investiture.  The

Hospodar,  or  Waiwod,  chosen  by  the  Ottoman  Porte  to  govern  these

provinces,  is  always  a  Christian  of  the  Greek  church.  The  Turks,  by  this

choice, give a proof of their toleration, while our ignorant declaimers are

accusing them of persecution. The prince, nominated by the Porte, is tributary

to, or rather farms these countries of the grand seignior; this dignity beingalways conferred on the best bidder, or him who makes the greatest presents

to  the  vizier,  in  like  manner  as  the  Greek  patriarch,  at  Constantinople.

Sometimes this government is bestowed on a dragoman, that is to say, the

interpreter to the divan. These provinces are seldom under the government of

the same Waiwod, the Porte choosing to divide them, in order to be more

sure of retaining them in subjection. Demetrius Cantemir was at this time

Waiwod of Moldavia. This prince was said to be descended from Tamerlane,

because Tamerlane's true name was Timur, and Timur was a Tartarian khan;

and so, from the name Tamurkan, say they, came the family of Cantemir.

  Bassaraba Brancovan had been invested with the principality of Walachia,

but had not found any genealogist to deduce his pedigree from the Tartarian

conqueror. Cantemir thought the time now come to shake off the Turkish

yoke, and render himself independent by means of the czar's protection. In

this view he acted in the very same manner with Peter as Mazeppa had done

with Charles XII. He even engaged Bassaraba for the present to join him in

the conspiracy, of which he hoped to reap all the benefit himself: his plan

being to make himself master of both provinces. The bishop of Jerusalem,

who was at that time at Walachia, was the soul of this conspiracy. Cantemir

promised the czar to furnish him with men and provisions, as Mazeppa did

the king of Sweden, and kept his word no better than he had done.

  General Sheremeto advanced towards Jassi, the capital of Moldavia, to

inspect and occasionally assist the execution of these great projects. Cantemir

came thither to meet him, and was received with all the honours due to a

prince: but he acted as a prince in no one circumstance, but that of publishing

a manifesto against the Turkish empire. The hospodar of Walachia, who soon

discovered  the  ambitious  views  of  his  colleague,  quitted  his  party,  and

returned  to  his  duty.  The  bishop  of  Jerusalem  dreading,  with  reason,  the

punishment  due  to  his  perfidy,  fled  and  concealed  himself:  the  people  of

Walachia and Moldavia continued faithful to the Ottoman Porte, and those,

who were to have furnished provisions for the Russian army, carried them to

the Turks.

  The vizier, Baltagi Mahomet had already crossed the Danube, at the head

of one hundred thousand men, and was advancing towards Jassi, along the

banks of the river Pruth (formerly the Hierasus), which falls into the Danube,

and  which  is  nearly  the  boundary  of  Moldavia  and  Bessarabia.  He  thendispatched  count  Poniatowsky,[87]  a  Polish  gentleman,  attached  to  the

fortunes of the king of Sweden, to desire that prince to make him a visit, and

see his army. Charles, whose pride always got the better of his interest, would

not consent to this proposal: he insisted that the grand vizier should make him

the first visit, in his asylum near Bender. When Poniatowsky returned to the

Ottoman camp, and endeavoured to excuse this refusal of his master, the

vizier, turning to the khan of the Tartars, said, 'This is the very behaviour I

expected  from  this  proud  pagan.'  This  mutual  pride,  which  never  fails  of

alienating the minds of those in power from each other, did no service to the

king of Sweden's affairs; and indeed that prince might have easily perceived,

from the beginning, that the Turks were not acting for his interest, but for

their own.

  While the Turkish army was passing the Danube, the czar advanced by the

frontiers of Poland, and passed the Boristhenes, in order to relieve marshal

Sheremeto, who was then on the banks of the Pruth, to the southward of Jassi,

and in danger of being daily surrounded by an army of ten thousand Turks,

and an army of Tartars. Peter, before he passed the Boristhenes, was in doubt

whether  he  should  expose  his  beloved  Catherine  to  these  dangers,  which

seemed to increase every day; but Catherine, on her side, looked upon this

solicitude of the czar, for her ease and safety, as an affront offered to her love

and courage; and pressed her consort so strongly on this head, that he found

himself under a necessity to consent that she should pass the river with him.

The army beheld her with eyes of joy and admiration, marching on horseback

at the head of the troops, for she rarely made use of a carriage. After passing

the Boristhenes, they had a tract of desert country to pass through, and then to

cross the Bog, and afterwards the river Tiras, now called the Niester, and then

another  desert  to  traverse,  before  they  came  to  the  banks  of  the  Pruth.

Catherine,  during  this  fatiguing  march,  animated  the  whole  army  by  her

cheerfulness and affability. She sent refreshments to such of the officers who

were sick, and extended her care even to the meanest soldier.

  July 4, 1711.] At length the czar brought his army in sight of Jassi. Here

he was to establish his magazine. Bassaraba, the hospodar of Walachia, who

had again embraced the interest of the Ottoman Porte, but still, in appearance,

continued a friend to the czar, proposed to that prince to make peace with the

Turks, although he had received no commission from the grand vizier for thatpurpose. His deceit, however, was soon discovered; and the czar contented

himself  with  demanding  only  provisions  for  his  army,  which  Bassaraba

neither could nor would furnish. It was very difficult to procure any supplies

from Poland; and these, which prince Cantemir had promised, and which he

vainly hoped to procure from Walachia, could not be brought from thence.

These  disappointments  rendered  the  situation  of  the  Russian  army  very

disagreeable; and, as an addition to their afflictions, they were infested with

an  immense  swarm  of  grasshoppers,  that  covered  the  face  of  the  whole

country,  and  devoured,  or  spoiled,  every  thing  where  they  alighted.  They

were likewise frequently in want of water during their march through sandy

deserts, and beneath a scorching sun: what little they could procure, they

were obliged to have brought in vessels to the camp, from a considerable

distance.

  During this dangerous and fatiguing march, the czar, by a singular fatality,

found  himself  in  the  neighbourhood  of  his  rival  and  competitor,  Charles;

Bender  not  being  above  twenty-five  leagues  from  the  place  where  the

Russian  army  was  encamped,  near  Jassi.  Some  parties  of  Cossacks  made

excursions even to the place of that unfortunate monarch's retreat; but the

Crim Tartars, who hovered round that part of the country, sufficiently secured

him from any attempt that might be made to seize his person; and Charles

waited in his camp with impatience, and did not fear the issue of the war.

  Peter, as soon as he had established some magazines, marched in haste

with  his  army  to  the  right  of  the  river  Pruth.  His  essential  object  was  to

prevent the Turks, who were posted to the left, and towards the head of the

river, from crossing it, and marching towards him. This effected, he would

then  be  master  of  Moldavia  and  Walachia:  with  this  view,  he  dispatched

general Janus, with the vanguard of the army, to oppose the passage of the

Turks; but the general did not arrive till they had already began to cross the

river  upon  their  bridges;  upon  which  he  was  obliged  to  retreat,  and  his

infantry was closely pursued by the Turks, till the czar came up in person to

his assistance.

  The grand vizier now marched directly along the river towards the czar.

The two armies were very unequal in point of numbers: that of the Turks,

which had been reinforced by the Tartarian troops, consisted of nearly two

hundred and fifty thousand men, while that of the Russians hardly amountedto  thirty-five  thousand.  There  was  indeed  a  considerable  body  of  troops,

headed  by  general  Renne,  on  their  march  from  the  other  side  of  the

Moldavian  mountains;  but  the  Turks  had  cut  off  all  communication  with

those parts.

  The czar's army now began to be in want of provisions, nor could, without

the  greatest  difficulty,  procure  water,  though  encamped  at  a  very  small

distance  from  the  river;  being  exposed  to  a  furious  discharge  from  the

batteries, which the grand vizier had caused to be erected on the left side of

the river, under the care of a body of troops, that kept up a constant fire

against the Russians. By this relation, which is strictly circumstantial and

true, it appears that Baltagi Mahomet, the Turkish vizier, far from being the

pusillanimous, or weak commander, which the Swedes have represented him,

gave proofs, on this occasion, that he perfectly well understood his business.

The passing the Pruth in the sight of the enemy, obliging him to retreat, and

harassing him in that retreat; the cutting off all communication between the

czar's army, and a body of cavalry that was marching to reinforce it; the

hemming  in  this  army,  without  the  least  probability  of  a  retreat;  and  the

cutting  off  all  supplies  of  water  and  provisions,  by  keeping  it  constantly

under  the  check  of  the  batteries  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  were

manœuvres that in no ways bespoke the unexperienced or indolent general.

  Peter now saw himself in a situation even worse than that to which he had

reduced his rival, Charles XII. at Pultowa; being, like him, surrounded by a

superior  army,  and  in  greater  want  of  provisions;  and,  like  him,  having

confided in the promises of a prince, too powerful to be bound by those

promises,  he  resolved  upon  a  retreat;  and  endeavoured  to  return  towards

Jassi, in order to choose a more advantageous situation for his camp.

  July 20, 1711.] He accordingly decamped under favour of the night; but

his army had scarcely begun its march, when, at break of day, the Turks fell

upon his rear: but the Preobrazinski regiment turning about, and standing

firm, did, for a considerable time, check the fury of their onset. The Russians

then  formed  themselves,  and  made  a  line  of  intrenchments  with  their

waggons and baggage. The same day (July 21.) the Turks returned again to

the  attack,  with  the  whole  body  of  their  army;  and,  as  a  proof  that  the

Russians knew how to defend themselves, let what will be alleged to the

contrary,  they  also  made  head  against  this  very  superior  force  for  aconsiderable  time,  killed  a  great  number  of  their  enemies,  who  in  vain

endeavoured to break in upon them.

  There were in the Ottoman army two officers belonging to the king of

Sweden, namely, count Poniatowsky and the count of Sparre, who had the

command of a body of Cossacks in that prince's interest. My papers inform

me, that these two generals advised the grand vizier to avoid coming to action

with the Russians, and content himself with depriving them of supplies of

water and provisions, which would oblige them either to surrender prisoners

of war, or to perish with famine. Other memoirs pretend, on the contrary, that

these officers would have persuaded Mahomet to fall upon this feeble and

half-starved  army,  in  a  weak  and  distressed  condition,  and  put  all  to  the

sword. The first of these seems to be the most prudent and circumspect; but

the  second  is  more  agreeable  to  the  character  of  generals  who  had  been

trained up under Charles XII.

  The real fact is, that the grand vizier fell upon the rear of the Russian

army,  at  the  dawn  of  day,  which  was  thrown  into  confusion,  and  there

remained only a line of four hundred men to confront the Turks. This small

body formed itself with amazing quickness, under the orders of a German

general, named Alard, who, to his immortal honour, made such rapid and

excellent  dispositions  on  this  occasion,  that  the  Russians  withstood,  for

upwards  of  three  hours,  the  repeated  attack  of  the  whole  Ottoman  army,

without losing a foot of ground.

  The czar now found himself amply repaid for the immense pains he had

taken to inure his troops to strict discipline. At the battle of Narva, sixty

thousand men were defeated by only eight thousand, because the former were

undisciplined;  and  here  we  behold  a  rear-guard,  consisting  of  only  eight

thousand Russians, sustaining the efforts of one hundred and fifty thousand

Turks, killing seven thousand of them, and obliging the rest to return back.

  After this sharp engagement, both armies intrenched themselves for that

night:  but  the  Russians  still  continued  enclosed,  and  deprived  of  all

provisions, even water; for notwithstanding they were so near the river Pruth,

yet they did not dare approach its banks; for as soon as any parties were sent

out to find water, a body of Turks, posted on the opposite shore, drove them

back by a furious discharge from their cannon, loaded with chain shot: andthe body of the Turkish army, which had attacked that of the czar the day

before, continued to play upon them from another quarter, with the whole

force of their artillery.

  The  Russian  army  appeared  now  to  be  lost  beyond  resource,  by  its

position, by the inequality of numbers, and by the want of provisions. The

skirmishes on both sides were frequent and bloody: the Russian cavalry being

almost all dismounted, could no longer be of any service, unless by fighting

on foot: in a word, the situation of affairs was desperate. It was out of their

power to retreat, they had nothing left but to gain a complete victory; to

perish to the last man, or to be made slaves by the infidels.

  All the accounts and memoirs of those times unanimously agree, that the

czar, divided within himself, whether or not he should expose his wife, his

army,  his  empire,  and  the  fruits  of  all  his  labours,  to  almost  inevitable

destruction; retired to his tent, oppressed with grief, and seized with violent

convulsions,  to  which  he  was  naturally  subject,  and  which  the  present

desperate situation of his affairs brought upon him with redoubled violence.

In this condition he remained alone in his tent, having given positive orders,

that no one should be admitted to be a witness to the distraction of his mind.

But Catherine, hearing of his disorders, forced her way in to him; and, on this

occasion, Peter found how happy it was for him that he had permitted his

wife to accompany him in this expedition.

  A wife, who, like her, had faced death in its most horrible shapes, and had

exposed  her  person,  like  the  meanest  soldier,  to  the  fire  of  the  Turkish

artillery, had an undoubted right to speak to her husband, and to be heard.

The czar accordingly listened to what she had to say, and in the end suffered

himself to be persuaded to try and send to the vizier with proposals of peace.

  It has been a custom, from time immemorial, throughout the East, that

when  any  people  apply  for  an  audience  of  the  sovereign,  or  his

representative, they must not presume to approach them without a present.

On this occasion, therefore, Catherine mustered the few jewels that she had

brought with her, on this military tour, in which no magnificence or luxury

were admitted; to these she added two black foxes' skins, and what ready

money she could collect; the latter was designed for a present to the kiaia.

She made choice herself of an officer, on whose fidelity and understandingshe thought she could depend, who, accompanied with two servants, was to

carry the presents to the grand vizier, and afterwards to deliver the money

intended for the kiaia into his own hand. This officer was likewise charged

with a letter from marshal Sheremeto to the grand vizier. The memoirs of

czar Peter mentions this letter, but they take no notice of the other particulars

of  Catherine's  conduct  in  this  business;  however,  they  are  sufficiently

confirmed  by  the  declaration  issued  by  Peter  himself,  in  1723,  when  he

caused Catherine to be crowned empress, wherein we find these words:-'She

has been of the greatest assistance to us in all our dangers, and particularly in

the battle of Pruth, when our army was reduced to twenty-two thousand men.'

If the czar had then indeed no more men capable of bearing arms, the service

which  Catherine  did  him,  on  that  occasion,  was  fully  equivalent  to  the

honours and dignities conferred upon her. The MS. journal of Peter the Great

observes, that on the day of the bloody battle (on the 20th July), he had thirty-

one thousand five hundred and fifty-four foot, and six thousand six hundred

and ninety-two horse, the latter almost all dismounted; he must then have lost

sixteen thousand two hundred and forty-six men in that engagement. The

same memoirs affirm, the loss sustained by the Turks greatly exceeded that of

the Russians; for as the former rushed upon the czar's troops pell-mell, and

without observing any order, hardly a single fire of the latter missed its effect.

If this is fact, the affair of the 20th and 21st of July, was one of the most

bloody that had been known for many ages.

  We must either suspect Peter the Great of having been mistaken, in his

declaration  at  the  crowning  of  the  empress,  when  he  acknowledges  'his

obligations to her of having saved his army, which was reduced to twenty-

two thousand men,' or accuse him of a falsity in his journal, wherein he says,

that the day on which the above battle was fought, his army, exclusive of the

succours  he  expected  from  the  other  side  the  Moldavian  mountains,

amounted to thirty-one thousand five hundred and fifty-four foot, and six

thousand six hundred and ninety-two horse. According to this calculation, the

battle of Pruth must have been by far more terrible than the historians or

memorials have represented on either side. There must certainly be some

mistake  here,  which  is  no  uncommon  thing  in  the  relation  of  campaigns,

especially when the writer enters into a minute detail of circumstances. The

surest method, therefore, on these occasions, is to confine ourselves to theprincipal events, the victory and the defeat; as we can very seldom know,

with any degree of certainty, the exact loss on either side.

  But however here the Russian army might be reduced in point of numbers,

there were still hopes that the grand vizier, deceived by their vigorous and

obstinate resistance, might be induced to grant them peace, upon such terms

as  might  be  honourable  to  his  master's  arms,  and  at  the  same  time  not

absolutely disgraceful to those of the czar. It was the great merit of Catherine

to have perceived this possibility, at a time when her consort and his generals

expected nothing less than inevitable destruction.

  Norberg, in his History of Charles XII. quotes a letter, sent by the czar to

the  grand  vizier,  in  which  he  expresses  himself  thus:-'If,  contrary  to  my

intentions, I have been so unhappy as to incur the displeasure of his highness,

I  am  ready  to  make  reparation  for  any  cause  of  complaint  he  may  have

against me; I conjure you, most noble general, to prevent the further effusion

of blood; give orders, I beseech you, to put a stop to the dreadful fire of your

artillery, and accept the hostage I herewith send you.'

  This letter carries all the marks of falsity with it, as do indeed most of the

random pieces of Norberg: it is dated 11th July, N. S. whereas no letter was

sent to Baltagi Mahomet till the 21st, N. S. neither was it the czar who wrote

to the vizier, but his general Sheremeto: there were no such expressions made

use of as-'if the czar has had the misfortune to incur the displeasure of his

highness;'  such  terms  being  suitable  only  to  a  subject,  who  implores  the

pardon of his sovereign, whom he has offended. There was no mention made

of any hostage, nor was any one sent. The letter was carried by an officer, in

the midst of a furious cannonade on both sides. Sheremeto, in his letter, only

reminded the vizier of certain overtures of peace that the Porte had made at

the  beginning  of  the  campaign,  through  the  mediation  of  the  Dutch  and

English ministers, and by which the divan demanded that the fort and harbour

of Taganroc should be given up, which were the real subjects of the war.

  21st July, 1711.] Some hours elapsed before the messenger received an

answer from the grand vizier, and it was apprehended that he had either been

killed by the enemy's cannon, or that they detained him prisoner. A second

courier was therefore dispatched, with duplicates of the former letters, and a

council of war was immediately held, at which Catherine was present. At thiscouncil ten general officers signed the following resolution:-

  'Resolved,  If  the  enemy  will  not  accept  the  conditions  proposed,  and

should insist upon our laying down our arms, and surrendering at discretion,

that all the ministers and general officers are unanimously of opinion, to cut

their way through the enemy sword in hand.'

  In  consequence  of  this  resolution,  a  line  of  intrenchments  was  thrown

round the baggage, and the Russians marched some few paces out of their

camp, towards the enemy, when the grand vizier caused a suspension of arms

to be proclaimed between the two armies.

  All the writers of the Swedish party have treated the grand vizier as a

cowardly and infamous wretch, who had been bribed to sell the honour of his

master's arms. In the same manner have several authors accused count Piper

of receiving money from the duke of Marlborough, to persuade the king of

Sweden to continue the war against the czar; and have laid to the charge of

the French minister, that he purchased the peace of Seville for a stipulated

sum. Such accusations ought never to be advanced but on very strong proofs.

It is very seldom that a minister will stoop to such meannesses, which are

always discovered, sooner or later, by those who have been entrusted with the

payment of the money, or by the public registers, which never lie. A minister

of state stands as a public object to the eyes of all Europe. His credit and

influence depend wholly upon his character, and he is always sufficiently rich

to be above the temptation of becoming a traitor.

  The place of viceroy of the Turkish empire is so illustrious, and the profits

annexed to it, in time of war, so immense, there was such a profusion of

every thing necessary, and even luxurious, in the camp of Baltagi Mahomet,

and, on the other hand, so much poverty and distress in that of the czar, that

surely the grand vizier was rather in a condition to give than to receive. The

trifling present of a woman, who had nothing to send but a few skins and

some  jewels,  in  compliance  with  the  established  custom  of  all  courts,  or

rather those in particular of the East, can never be considered in the light of a

bribe. The frank and open conduct of Baltagi Mahomet seems at once to give

the lie to the black accusations with which so many writers have stained their

relations. Vice chancellor Shaffiroff paid the vizier a public visit in his tent:

every  thing  was  transacted  in  the  most  open  manner,  on  both  sides;  andindeed it could not be otherwise. The very first article of the negotiation was

entered  upon  in  the  presence  of  a  person  wholly  devoted  to  the  king  of

Sweden,  a  domestic  of  count  Poniatowsky,  who  was  himself  one  of  that

monarch's generals. This man served as an interpreter, and the several articles

were  publicly  reduced  to  writing  by  the  vizier's  chief  secretary,  Hummer

Effendi. Moreover, count Poniatowsky was there in person. The present sent

to the kiaia was offered probably in form, and every thing was transacted

agreeable to the oriental customs. Other presents were made by the Turks in

return; so that there was not the least appearance of treachery or contrivance.

The motives which determined the vizier to consent to the proposals offered

him, were, first that the body of troops under the command of general Renne,

on the borders of the river Sireth, in Moldavia, had already crossed three

rivers, and were actually in the neighbourhood of the Danube, where Renne

had already made himself master of the town and castle of Brahila, defended

by a numerous garrison, under the command of a basha. Secondly, the czar

had  likewise  another  body  of  troops  advancing  through  the  frontiers  of

Poland; and, lastly, it is more than probable that the vizier was not fully

acquainted with the extreme scarcity that was felt in the Russian camp. One

enemy seldom furnishes another with an exact account of his provisions and

ammunition; on the contrary, either side are accustomed rather to make a

parade of plenty, even at a time when they are in the greatest necessity. There

can  be  no  artifices  practised  to  gain  intelligence  of  the  true  state  of  an

adversary's affairs, by means of spies, between the Turks and the Russians.

The difference of their dress, of their religion, and of their language, will not

permit it. They are, moreover, strangers to that desertion which prevails in

most  of  our  armies;  and,  consequently,  the  grand  vizier  could  not  be

supposed  to  know  the  desperate  condition  to  which  the  czar's  army  was

reduced.

  Baltagi, who was not fond of war, and who, nevertheless, had conducted

this very well, thought that his expedition would be sufficiently successful, if

he put his master in possession of the towns and harbours which made the

subject of the war, stopt the progress of the victorious army under Renne, and

obliged that general to quit the banks of the Danube, and return back into

Russia, and for ever shut the entrance of the Palus Mæotis, the Cimmerian

Bosphorus, and the Black Sea, against an enterprising prince; and, lastly, ifhe avoided taking these certain advantages, on the hazard of a new battle (in

which, after all, despair might have got the better of superiority of numbers).

The preceding day only he had beheld his janissaries repulsed with loss; and

there  wanted  not  examples  of  many  victories  having  been  gained  by  the

weaker over the strong. Such then were Mahomet's reasons for accepting the

proposals of peace. His conduct, however, did not merit the approbation of

Charles's  officers,  who  served  in  the  Turkish  army,  nor  of  the  khan  of

Tartary. It was the interest of the latter, and his followers, to reject all terms

of accommodation which would deprive them of the opportunity of ravaging

the frontiers of Russia and Poland. Charles XII. desired to be revenged on his

rival, the czar: but the general, and the first minister of the Ottoman empire,

was neither influenced by the private thirst of revenge, which animated the

Christian  monarch,  nor  by  the  desire  of  booty,  which  actuated  the  Tartar

chief.

  As soon as the suspension of arms was agreed to, and signed, the Russians

purchased  of  the  Turks  the  provisions,  of  which  they  stood  in  need.  The

articles of the peace were not signed at that time, as is related by La Motraye,

and which Norberg has copied from him. The vizier, among other conditions,

demanded that the czar should promise not to interfere any more in the Polish

affairs. This was a point particularly insisted upon by count Poniatowsky; but

it was, in fact, the interest of the Ottoman crown, that the kingdom of Poland

should continue in its then defenceless and divided state; accordingly this

demand was reduced to that of the Russian troops evacuating the frontiers of

Poland.  The  khan  of  Tartary,  on  his  side,  demanded  a  tribute  of  forty

thousand sequins. This point, after being long debated, was at length given

up.

  The  grand  vizier  insisted  a  long  time,  that  prince  Cantemir  should  be

delivered up to him, as Patkul had been to the king of Sweden. Cantemir was

exactly in the same situation as Mazeppa had been. The czar caused that

hetman  to  be  arraigned  and  tried  for  his  defection,  and  afterwards  to  be

executed in effigy. The Turks were not acquainted with the nature of such

proceeding;  they  knew  nothing  of  trials  for  contumacy,  nor  of  public

condemnations. The affixing a sentence on any person, and executing him in

effigy,  were  the  more  unusual  amongst  them,  as  their  law  forbids  the

representation of any human likeness whatever. The vizier in vain insisted onCantemir's being delivered up; Peter peremptorily refused to comply, and

wrote  the  following  letter  with  his  own  hand,  to  his  vice-chancellor

Shaffiroff.

  'I can resign to the Turks all the country, as far as Curtzka, because I have

hopes of being able to recover it again; but I will, by no means, violate my

faith,  which,  once  forfeited,  can  never  be  retrieved.  I  have  nothing  I  can

properly call my own, but my honour. If I give up that, I cease to be longer a

king.'

  At length the treaty was concluded, and signed, at a village called Falksen,

on the river Pruth. Among other things, it was stipulated, that Azoph, and the

territories  belonging  thereto,  should  be  restored,  together  with  all  the

ammunition and artillery that were in the place, before the czar made himself

master thereof, in 1696. That the harbour of Taganroc, in the Zabach Sea,

should be demolished, as also that of Samara, on the river of the same name;

and  several  other  fortresses.  There  was  likewise  another  article  added,

respecting the king of Sweden, which article alone, sufficiently shews the

little regard the vizier had for that prince; for it was therein stipulated, that the

czar  should  not  molest  Charles,  in  his  return  to  his  dominions,  and  that

afterwards the czar and he might make peace with the other, if they were so

inclined.

  It is pretty evident by the wording of this extraordinary article, that Baltagi

Mahomet  had  not  forgot  the  haughty  manner  in  which  Charles  XII.  had

behaved  to  him  a  short  time  before,  and  it  is  not  unlikely  that  this  very

behaviour  of  the  king  of  Sweden  might  have  been  one  inducement  with

Mahomet to comply so readily with his rival's proposals for peace. Charles's

glory depended wholly on the ruin of the czar: but we are seldom inclinable

to  exalt  those  who  express  a  contempt  for  us:  however,  this  prince,  who

refused the vizier a visit in his camp, on his invitation, when it was certainly

his interest to have been upon good terms with him, now came thither in

haste and unasked, when the work which put an end to all his hopes was on

the point of being concluded. The vizier did not go to meet him in person, but

contented himself with sending two of his bashas, nor would he stir out of his

tent, till Charles was within a few paces of him.

  This interview passed, as every one knows, in mutual reproaches. Severalhistorians have thought, that the answer which the vizier made to the king of

Sweden, when that prince reproached him with not making the czar prisoner,

when he might have done it so easily, was the reply of a weak man. 'If I had

taken  him  prisoner,'  said  Mahomet,  'who  would  there  be  to  govern  his

dominions?'

  It is very easy, however, to comprehend, that this was the answer of a man

who was piqued with resentment, and these words which he added-'For it is

not proper that every crowned head should quit his dominions'-sufficiently

shewed that he intended to mortify the refugee of Bender.

  Charles  gained  nothing  by  his  journey,  but  the  pleasure  of  tearing  the

vizier's robe with his spurs; while that officer, who was in a condition to

make him repent this splenetic insult, seemed not to notice it, in which he

was certainly greatly superior to Charles. If any thing could have made that

monarch  sensible,  in  the  midst  of  his  life,  how  easily  fortune  can  put

greatness to the blush, it would have been the reflection, that at the battle of

Pultowa,  a  pastry-cook's  boy  had  obliged  his  whole  army  to  surrender  at

discretion; and in this of Pruth a wood-cutter was the arbiter of his fate, and

that of his rival the czar: for the vizier, Baltagi Mahomet, had been a cutter of

wood in the grand seignior's seraglio, as his name implied; and, far from

being ashamed of that title, he gloried in it: so much do the manners of the

eastern people differ from ours.

  When the news of this treaty reached Constantinople, the grand seignior

was so well pleased, that he ordered public rejoicings to be made for a whole

week, and Mahomet, the kiaia, or lieutenant-general, who brought the tidings

to the divan, was instantly raised to the dignity of boujouk imraour, or master

of the horse: a certain proof that the sultan did not think himself ill served by

his vizier.

  Norberg seems to have known very little of the Turkish government, when

he  says,  that  'the  grand  seignior  was  obliged  to  keep  fair  with  Baltagi

Mahomet, that vizier having rendered himself formidable.' The janissaries

indeed have often rendered themselves formidable to their sultans; but there

is not one example of a vizier, who has not been easily sacrificed to the will

or  orders  of  his  sovereign,  and  Mahomet  was  in  no  condition  to  support

himself by his own power. Besides, Norberg manifestly contradicts himself,by  affirming  in  the  same  page,  that  the  janissaries  were  irritated  against

Mahomet, and that the sultan stood in dread of his power.

  The king of Sweden was now reduced to the necessity of forming cabals

in the Ottoman court; and a monarch, who had so lately made kings by his

own power, was now seen waiting for audience, and offering memorials and

petitions which were refused.

  Charles  ran  through  all  the  ambages  of  intrigue,  like  a  subject  who

endeavours to make a minister suspected by his master. In this manner he

acted against Mahomet, and against those who succeeded him. At one time

he addressed himself to the sultana Valide by means of a Jewess, who had

admission into the seraglio; at another, he employed one of the eunuchs for

the same purpose. At length he had recourse to a man who was to mingle

among the grand seignior's guards, and, by counterfeiting a person out of his

senses, to attract the attention of the sultan, and by that means deliver into his

own hand a memorial from Charles. From all these various schemes, the king

of  Sweden  drew  only  the  mortification  of  seeing  himself  deprived  of  his

thaim; that is to say, of the daily pension which the Porte of its generosity had

assigned him for his subsistence, and which amounted to about one thousand

five hundred French livres.[88] The grand vizier, instead of remitting this

allowance to him as usual, sent him an order, in the form of a friendly advice,

to quit the grand seignior's dominions.

  Charles, however, was absolutely determined not to depart, still flattering

himself with the vain hope, that he should once more re-enter Poland and

Russia with a powerful army of Turks. Every one knows what was the issue

of his inflexible boldness in the year 1714, and how he engaged an army of

janissaries, Spahis, and Tartars, with only himself, his secretaries, his valet de

chambre, cook, and stable men; that he was taken prisoner in that country,

where he had been treated with the greatest hospitality; and that he at length

got back to his own kingdom in the disguise of a courier, after having lived

five years in Turkey: from all which it remains to be acknowledged, that if

there was reason in the conduct of this extraordinary prince, it was a reason

of a very different nature to that of other men.


  CHAPTER XXI.  Conclusion of the Affairs of Pruth.


  It is necessary in this place to repeat an event already related in the History

of Charles XII. It happened during the suspension of arms which preceded

the treaty of Pruth, that two Tartarian soldiers surprised and took prisoners

two Italian officers belonging to the czar's army, and sold them to an officer

of the Turkish janissaries. The vizier being informed of this breach of public

faith,  punished  the  two  Tartars  with  death.  How  are  we  to  reconcile  this

severe  delicacy  with  the  violation  of  the  law  of  nations  in  the  person  of

Tolstoy, the czar's ambassador, whom this very vizier caused to be arrested in

the streets of Constantinople, and afterwards imprisoned in the castle of the

Seven Towers? There is always some reason for the contradictions we find in

the actions of mankind. Baltagi Mahomet was incensed against the khan of

Tartary, for having opposed the peace he had lately made, and was resolved

to shew that chieftain that he was his master.

  The treaty was no sooner concluded, than the czar quitted the borders of

the Pruth, and returned towards his own dominions, followed by a body of

eight thousand Turks, whom the vizier had sent as an army of observation to

watch the motions of the Russian army during its march, and also to serve as

an escort or safeguard to them against the wandering Tartars which infested

those parts.

  Peter  instantly  set  about  accomplishing  the  treaty,  by  demolishing  the

fortresses of Samara and Kamienska; but the restoring of Azoph, and the

demolition  of  the  port  of  Taganroc,  met  with  some  difficulties  in  the

execution. According to the terms of the treaty it was necessary to distinguish

the artillery and ammunition which belonged to the Turks in Azoph before

that place was taken by the czar, from those which had been sent thither after

it fell into his hands. The governor of the place spun out this affair to a

tedious  length,  at  which  the  Porte  was  greatly  incensed,  and  not  without

reason: the sultan was impatient to receive the keys of Azoph. The vizier

promised they should be sent from time to time, but the governor always

found means to delay the delivery of them. Baltagi Mahomet lost the good

graces of his master, and with them his place. The khan of Tartary and his

other enemies made such good use of their interest with the sultan, that the

grand vizier was deposed, several bashas were disgraced at the same time;but  the  grand  seignior,  well  convinced  of  this  minister's  fidelity,  did  not

deprive him either of his life or estate, but only sent him to Mytilene to take

on him the command of that island. This simple removal from the helm of

affairs (Nov. 1711,), and the continuing to him his fortunes, and above all the

giving him the command in Mytilene, sufficiently contradicts all that Norberg

has advanced, to induce us to believe that this vizier had been corrupted with

the czar's money.

  Norberg asserts furthermore, that the Bostangi basha, who came to divest

him  of  his  office,  and  to  acquaint  him  of  the  grand  seignior's  sentence,

declared him at the same time, 'a traitor, one who had disobeyed the orders of

his sovereign lord, had sold himself to the enemy for money, and was found

guilty of not having taken proper care of the interests of the king of Sweden.'

In the first place, this kind of declarations are not at all in use in Turkey: the

orders of the grand seignior always being issued privately, and executed with

secresy. Secondly, if the vizier had been declared a traitor, a rebel, and a

corrupted person, crimes of this nature would have been instantly punished

with death in a country where they are never forgiven. Lastly, if he was

punishable for not having sufficiently attended to the interests of the king of

Sweden,  it  is  evident  that  this  prince  must  have  had  such  a  degree  of

influence  at  the  Ottoman  Porte,  as  to  have  made  the  other  ministers  to

tremble, who would consequently have endeavoured to gain his good graces;

whereas,  on  the  contrary,  the  basha  Jussuf,  aga  of  the  janissaries,  who

succeeded Mahomet Baltagi as grand vizier, had the same sentiments as his

predecessor, in relation to Charles's conduct, and was so far from doing him

any service that he thought of nothing but how to get rid of so dangerous a

guest; and when count Poniatowsky, the companion and confidant of that

monarch, went to compliment the vizier on his new dignity, the latter spoke

to him thus. 'Pagan, I forewarn thee, that if ever I find thee hatching any

intrigues, I will, upon the first notice, cause thee to be thrown into the sea

with a stone about thy neck.'

  This compliment count Poniatowsky himself relates in the memoirs which

he drew up at my request, and is a sufficient proof of the little influence his

master had in the Turkish court. All that Norberg has related touching the

affairs of that empire, appear to come from a prejudiced person, and one who

was very ill informed of the circumstances he pretends to write about. Andwe may count among the errors of a party-spirit and political falsehoods,

every thing which this writer advances unsupported by proofs, concerning the

pretended  corruption  of  a  grand  vizier,  that  is,  of  a  person  who  had  the

disposal of upwards of sixty millions per annum, without being subject to the

least account.[89] I have now before me the letter which count Poniatowsky

wrote to King Stanislaus immediately after the signing the treaty of Pruth, in

which he upbraids Baltagi Mahomet with the slight he shewed to the king of

Sweden, his dislike to the war, and the unsteadiness of his temper; but never

once hints the least charge of corruption: for he knew too well what the place

of grand vizier was, to entertain an idea, that the czar was capable of setting a

price upon the infidelity of the second person in the Ottoman empire.

  Schaffirow and Sheremeto, who remained at Constantinople as hostages

on the part of the czar for his performance of the treaty, were not used in the

manner they would have been if known to have purchased this peace, and to

have joined with the vizier in deceiving his master. They were left to go at

liberty about the city, escorted by two companies of janissaries.

  The czar's ambassador Tolstoy having been released from his confinement

in the Seven Towers, immediately upon the signing of the treaty of Pruth, the

Dutch and English ministers interposed with the new vizier to see the several

articles of that treaty put into execution.

  Azoph was at length restored to the Turks, and the fortresses mentioned in

the treaty were demolished according to stipulation. And now the Ottoman

Porte,  though  very  little  inclinable  to  interfere  in  the  differences  between

Christian princes, could not without vanity behold himself made arbitrator

between Russia, Poland, and the king of Sweden; and insisted that the czar

should withdraw his troops out of Poland, and deliver the Turkish empire

from so dangerous a neighbour; and, desirous that the Christian princes might

continually be at war with each other, wished for nothing so much as to send

Charles  home  to  his  own  dominions,  but  all  this  while  had  not  the  least

intention of furnishing him with an army. The Tartars were still for war, as an

artificer  is  willing  to  seize  every  opportunity  to  exercise  his  calling.  The

janissaries likewise wished to be called into the field, but more out of hatred

against  the  Christians,  their  naturally  restless  disposition,  and  from  a

fondness  for  rapine  and  licentiousness,  than  from  any  other  motives.

Nevertheless, the English and Dutch ministers managed their negotiations sowell,  that  they  prevailed  over  the  opposite  party:  the  treaty  of  Pruth  was

confirmed, but with the addition of a new article, by which it was stipulated

that the czar should withdraw his forces from Poland within three months,

and  that  the  sultan  should  immediately  send  Charles  XII.  out  of  his

dominions.

  We may judge from this new treaty whether the king of Sweden had that

interest at the Porte which some writers would have us to believe. He was

evidently sacrificed on this occasion by the new vizier, basha Jussuf, as he

had been before by Baltagi Mahomet. The historians of his party could find

no  other  expedient  to  colour  over  this  fresh  affront,  but  that  of  accusing

Jussuf of having been bribed like his predecessor. Such repeated imputations,

unsupported by any proofs, are rather the clamours of an impotent cabal, than

the testimonies of history; but faction, when driven to acknowledge facts, will

ever be endeavouring to alter circumstances and motives; and, unhappily, it is

thus that all the histories of our times will be handed down to posterity so

altered, that they will be unable to distinguish truth from falsehoods.


  CHAPTER XXII.

  Marriage of the czarowitz.-The marriage of Peter and Catherine publicly

solemnized.-Catherine finds her brother.


This unsuccessful campaign of Pruth proved more hurtful to the czar than

ever the battle of Narva was; for after that defeat he had found means not

only to retrieve his losses, but also to wrest Ingria out of the hands of Charles

XII.; but by the treaty of Falksten, in which he consented to give up to the

sultan  his  forts  and  harbours  on  the  Palus  Mæotis,  he  for  ever  lost  his

projected superiority in the Black Sea. He had besides an infinite deal of

work on his hands; his new establishments in Russia were to be perfected, he

had to prosecute his victories over the Swedes, to settle king Augustus firmly

on the Polish throne, and to manage affairs properly with the several powers

with whom he was in alliance; but the fatigues he had undergone having

impaired his health, he was obliged to go to Carlsbad[90] to drink the waters

of  that  place.  While  he  was  there  he  gave  orders  for  his  troops  to  enter

Pomerania,  who  blockaded  Stralsund,  and  took  five  other  towns  in  theneighbourhood.

  Pomerania is the most northern province of Germany, bounded on the east

by  Prussia  and  Poland,  on  the  west  by  Brandenburg,  on  the  south  by

Mecklenburg, and on the north by the Baltic Sea. It has changed masters

almost every century: Gustavus Adolphus got possession of it in his famous

thirty  years  war,  and  it  was  afterwards  solemnly  ceded  to  the  crown  of

Sweden by the treaty of Westphalia: with a reservation of the little bishopric

of Camin, and a few other small towns lying in Upper Pomerania. The whole

of this province properly belongs to the elector of Brandenburg, in virtue of a

family  compact  made  with  the  dukes  of  Pomerania,  whose  family  being

extinct  in  1637,  consequently  by  the  laws  of  the  empire  the  house  of

Brandenburg had an undoubted right to the succession; but necessity, the first

of all laws, occasioned this family compact to be set aside by the treaty of

Osnaburg; after which, almost the whole of Pomerania fell to the lot of the

victorious Swedes.

  The  czar's  intention  was  to  wrest  from  Sweden  all  the  provinces  that

crown was possessed of in Germany; and, in order to accomplish his design,

he found it necessary to enter into a confederacy with the electors of Hanover

and Brandenburg, and the king of Denmark. Peter drew up the several articles

of the treaty he projected with these powers, and also a complete plan of the

necessary operations for rendering him master of Pomerania.

  In the meanwhile he went to Torgau, to be present at the nuptials of his

son the czarowitz Alexis with the princess of Wolfenbuttel (Oct. 23, 1711.),

sister to the consort of Charles VI. emperor of Germany; nuptials which, in

the  end,  proved  fatal  to  his  own  peace  of  mind,  and  to  the  lives  of  the

unfortunate pair.

  The czarowitz was born of the first marriage of Peter the Great to Eudocia

Lapoukin, to whom he was espoused in 1689: she was at that time shut up in

the monastery of Susdal; their son Alexis Petrowitz, who was born the 1st of

March, 1690, was now in his twenty-second year: this prince was not then at

all known in Europe; a minister, whose memoirs of the court of Russia have

been printed, says in a letter he writes to his master, dated August 25, 1711,

that 'this prince was tall and well made, resembled his father greatly, was of

an excellent disposition, very pious, had read the Bible five times over, tookgreat delight in the ancient Greek historians, appeared to have a very quick

apprehension and understanding, was well acquainted with the mathematics,

the art of war, navigation, and hydraulics; that he understood the German

language, and was then learning the French, but that his father would never

suffer him to go through a regular course of study.'

  This character is very different from that which the czar himself gives of

his son some time afterwards, in which we shall see with how much grief he

reproaches  him  with  faults  directly  opposite  to  those  good  qualities,  for

which this minister seems so much to admire him.

  We must leave posterity, therefore, to determine between the testimony of

a stranger, who may have formed too slight a judgment, and the declaration

of a parent, who thought himself under a necessity of sacrificing the dictates

of nature to the good of his people. If the minister was no better acquainted

with the disposition of Alexis than he seems to have been with his outward

form, his evidence will have but little weight; for he describes this prince as

tall and well made, whereas the memoirs sent me from Petersburg say, that he

was neither the one nor the other.

  His mother-in-law, Catherine, was not present at his nuptials; for though

she  was  already  looked  upon  as  czarina,  yet  she  had  not  been  publicly

acknowledged as such: and moreover, as she had only the title of highness

given her at the czar's court, her rank was not sufficiently settled to admit of

her signing the contract, or to appear at the ceremony in a station befitting the

consort of Peter the Great. She therefore remained at Thorn in Polish Prussia.

Soon after the nuptials were celebrated, the czar sent the new-married couple

away  to  Wolfenbuttel  (Jan.  9,  1712),  and  brought  back  the  czarina  to

Petersburg  with  that  dispatch  and  privacy  which  he  observed  in  all  his

journies.

  Feb. 19, 1712.] Having now disposed of his son, he publicly solemnized

his own nuptials with Catherine, which had been declared in private before.

This  ceremony  was  performed  with  as  much  magnificence  as  could  be

expected in a city but yet in its infancy, and from a revenue exhausted by the

late destructive war against the Turks, and that which he was still engaged in

against the king of Sweden. The czar gave orders for, and assisted himself in,

all the preparations for the ceremony, according to the usual custom; andCatherine was now publicly declared czarina, in reward for having saved her

husband and his whole army.

  The acclamations with which this declaration was received at Petersburg

were sincere: the applauses which subjects confer on the actions of a despotic

sovereign are generally suspected; but on this occasion they were confirmed

by  the  united  voice  of  all  the  thinking  part  of  Europe,  who  beheld  with

pleasure, on the one hand, the heir of a vast monarchy with no other glory

than that of his birth, married to a petty princess; and, on the other hand, a

powerful conqueror, and a law-giver, publicly sharing his bed and his throne

with a stranger and a captive, who had nothing to recommend her but her

merit: and this approbation became more general as the minds of men grew

more  enlightened  by  that  sound  philosophy,  which  has  made  so  great  a

progress in our understandings within these last forty years: a philosophy,

equally sublime and discerning, which teaches us to pay only the exterior

respect  to  greatness  and  authority,  while  we  reserve  our  esteem  and

veneration for shining talents and meritorious services.

  And here I think myself under an obligation to relate what I have met

touching this marriage in the dispatches of count Bassewitz, aulic counsellor

at Vienna, and long time minister from Holstein at the court of Russia; a

person of great merit, and whose memory is still held in the highest esteem in

Germany. In some of his letters he speaks thus: 'The czarina had not only

been  the  main  instrument  of  procuring  the  czar  that  reputation  which  he

enjoyed, but was likewise essentially necessary in the preservation of his life.

This  prince  was  unhappily  subject  to  violent  convulsion  fits,  which  were

thought to be the effects of poison which had been given him while he was

young. Catherine alone had found the secret of alleviating his sufferings by

an unwearied assiduity and attention to whatever she thought would please

him, and made it the whole study of her life to preserve a health so valuable

to the kingdom and to herself, insomuch, that the czar finding he could not

live without her, made her the companion of his throne and bed.' I here only

repeat the express words of the writer himself.

  Fortune, which has furnished us with many extraordinary scenes in this

part of the world, and who had raised Catherine from the lowest abyss of

misery  and  distress  to  the  pinnacle  of  human  grandeur,  wrought  another

extraordinary incident in her favour some few years after her marriage withthe czar, and which I find thus related in a curious manuscript of a person

who was at that time in the czar's service, and who speaks of it as a thing to

which he was eye-witness.

  An envoy from king Augustus to the court of Peter the Great, being on his

return home through Courland, and having put up at an inn by the way, heard

the voice of a person who seemed in great distress, and whom the people of

the house were treating in that insulting manner which is but too common on

such occasions: the stranger, with a tone of resentment, made answer, that

they would not dare to use him thus, if he could but once get to the speech of

the czar, at whose court he had perhaps more powerful protectors than they

imagined.

  The  envoy,  upon  hearing  this,  had  a  curiosity  to  ask  the  man  some

questions, and, from certain answers he let fall, and a close examination of

his  face,  he  thought  he  found  in  him  some  resemblance  of  the  empress

Catherine; and, when he came to Dresden, he could not forbear writing to one

of his friends at Petersburg concerning it. This letter, by accident, came to the

czar's hands, who immediately sent an order to prince Repnin, then governor

of Riga, to endeavour to find out the person mentioned in the letter. Prince

Repnin immediately dispatched a messenger to Mittau, in Courland, who, on

inquiry,  found  out  the  man,  and  learned  that  his  name  was  Charles

Scavronsky; that he was the son of a Lithuanian gentleman, who had been

killed in the wars of Poland, and had left two children then in the cradle, a

boy and a girl, who had neither of them received any other education than

that which simple nature gives to those who are abandoned by the world.

Scavronsky,  who  had  been  parted  from  his  sister  while  they  were  both

infants, knew nothing further of her than that she had been taken prisoner in

Marienburg, in the year 1704, and supposed her to be still in the household of

prince  Menzikoff,  where  he  imagined  she  might  have  made  some  little

fortune.

  Prince Repnin, agreeable to the particular orders he had received from the

czar, caused Scavronsky to be seized, and conducted to Riga, under pretence

of some crime laid to his charge; and, to give a better colour to the matter, at

his arrival there, a sham information was drawn up against him, and he was

soon after sent from thence to Petersburg, under a strong guard, with orders

to treat him well upon the road.  When he came to that capital, he was carried to the house of an officer of

the  emperor's  palace,  named  Shepleff,  who,  having  been  previously

instructed in the part he was to play, drew several circumstances from the

young man in relation to his condition; and, after some time, told him, that

although the information, which had been sent up from Riga against him, was

of a very serious nature, yet he would have justice done him; but that it would

be necessary to present a petition to his majesty for that purpose; that one

should accordingly be drawn up in his name, and that he (Shepleff) would

find means that he should deliver it into the czar's own hands.

  The next day the czar came to dine with Shepleff, at his own house, who

presented Scavronsky to him; when his majesty, after asking him abundance

of questions was convinced, by the natural answers he gave, that he was

really the czarina's brother; they had both lived in Livonia, when young, and

the czar found every thing that Scavronsky said to him, in relation to his

family affairs, tally exactly with what his wife had told him concerning her

brother, and the misfortunes which had befallen her and her brother in the

earlier part of their lives.

  The czar, now satisfied of the truth, proposed the next day to the empress

to go and dine with him at Shepleff's; and, when dinner was over, he gave

orders  that  the  man,  whom  he  had  examined  the  day  before,  should  be

brought in again. Accordingly he was introduced, dressed in the same clothes

he had wore while on his journey to Riga; the czar not being willing that he

should appear in any other garb than what his unhappy circumstances had

accustomed him to.

  He interrogated him again, in the presence of his wife; and the MS. adds,

that, at the end, he turned about to the empress, and said these very words:-

'This man is your brother; come hither, Charles, and kiss the hand of the

empress, and embrace your sister.'

  The author of this narrative adds further, that the empress fainted away

with surprise; and that, when she came to herself again, the czar said, 'There

is nothing in this but what is very natural. This gentlemen is my brother in-

law; if he has merit, we will make something of him; if he has not, we must

leave him as he is.'

  I am of opinion, that this speech shews as much greatness as simplicity,and a greatness not very common. My author says, that Scavronsky remained

a  considerable  time  at  Shepleff's  house;  that  the  czar  assigned  him  a

handsome pension, but that he led a very retired life. He carries his relation of

this adventure no farther, as he made use of it only to disclose the secret of

Catherine's brother: but we know, from other authorities, that this gentleman

was afterwards created a count; that he married a young lady of quality, by

whom  he  had  two  daughters,  who  were  married  to  two  of  the  principal

noblemen in Russia. I leave to those, who may be better informed of the

particulars, to distinguish what is fact in this relation, from what may have

been added; and shall only say, that the author does not seem to have told this

story out of a fondness for entertaining his readers with the marvellous, since

his papers were not intended to be published. He is writing freely to a friend,

about a thing of which he says he was an eye-witness. He may have been

mistaken in some circumstances, but the fact itself has all the appearance of

truth; for if this gentleman had known that his sister was raised to so great

dignity  and  power,  he  would  not  certainly  have  remained  so  many  years

without having made himself known to her. And this discovery, however

extraordinary it may seem, is certainly not more so than the exaltation of

Catherine herself; and both the one and the other are striking proofs of the

force of destiny, and may teach us to be cautious how we treat as fabulous

several  events  of  antiquity,  which  perhaps  are  less  contradictory  to  the

common order of things, than the adventures of this empress.

  The rejoicings made by the czar Peter for his own marriage, and that of his

son, were not of the nature of those transient amusements which exhaust the

public treasure, and are presently lost in oblivion. He completed his grand

foundry for cannon, and finished the admiralty buildings. The highways were

repaired, several ships built, and others put upon the stocks; new canals were

dug, and the finishing hand put to the grand warehouses, and other public

buildings, and the trade of Petersburg began to assume a flourishing face. He

issued an ordinance for removing the senate from Moscow to Petersburg,

which was executed in the month of April, 1712. By this step he made his

new  city  the  capital  of  the  empire,  and  early  he  employed  a  number  of

Swedish prisoners in beautifying this city, whose foundation had been laid

upon their defeat.  CHAPTER XXIII.

  Taking of Stetin.-Descent upon Finland.-Event of the year 1712.


  Peter, now seeing himself happy in his own family, and in his state, and

successful in his war against Charles XII. and in the several negotiations

which he had entered into with other powers, who were resolved to assist him

in driving out the Swedes from the continent, and cooping them up for ever

within the narrow isthmus of Scandinavia, began to turn his views entirely

towards the north-west coasts of Europe, not laying aside all thoughts of the

Palus Mæotis, or Black Sea. The keys of Azoph, which had been so long

withheld from the basha, who was to have taken possession of that place for

the  sultan,  his  master,  were  now  given  up;  and,  notwithstanding  all  the

endeavours of the king of Sweden, the intrigues of his friends at the Ottoman

Porte, and even some menaces of a new war on the part of the Turks, both

that nation and the Russian empire continued at peace.

  Charles XII. still obstinate in his resolution not to depart from Bender,

tamely submitted his hopes and fortunes to the caprice of a grand vizier;

while the czar was threatening all his provinces, arming against him the king

of Denmark, and the elector of Hanover, and had almost persuaded the king

of Prussia, and even the Poles and Saxons, to declare openly for him.

  Charles,  ever  of  the  same  inflexible  disposition,  behaved  in  the  like

manner towards his enemies, who now seemed united to overwhelm him, as

he had done in all his transactions with the Ottoman Porte; and, from his

lurking-place  in  the  deserts  of  Bessarabia,  defied  the  czar,  the  kings  of

Poland, Denmark, and Prussia, the elector of Hanover (soon afterwards king

of England), and the emperor of Germany, whom he had so greatly offended,

when  he  was  traversing  Silesia  with  his  victorious  troops,  and  who  now

shewed his resentment, by abandoning him to his ill fortune, and refused to

take under his protection any of those countries, which as yet belonged to the

Swedes in Germany.

  1712.] It would have been no difficult matter for him to have broken the

league which was forming against him, would he have consented to cede

Stetin, in Pomerania, to Frederick (the first) king of Prussia, and elector of

Brandenburg, who had a lawful claim thereto; but Charles did not then lookupon Prussia as a power of any consequence: and indeed neither he, nor any

other  person,  could  at  that  time  foresee,  that  this  petty  kingdom,  and  the

electorate  of  Brandenburg,  either  of  which  were  little  better  than  deserts,

would one day become formidable. Charles therefore would not listen to any

proposal of accommodation, but determined rather to stake all than to give up

any  thing,  sent  orders  to  the  regency  of  Stockholm,  to  make  all  possible

resistance,  both  by  sea  and  land:  and  these  orders  were  obeyed,

notwithstanding  that  his  dominions  were  almost  exhausted  of  men  and

money. The senate of Stockholm fitted out a fleet of thirteen ships of the line,

and every person capable of bearing arms came voluntarily to offer their

service: in a word, the inflexible courage and pride of Charles seemed to be

infused into all his subjects, who were almost as unfortunate as their master.

  It can hardly be supposed, that Charles's conduct was formed upon any

regular plan. He had still a powerful party in Poland, which assisted by the

Crim Tartars, might indeed have desolated that wretched country, but could

not have replaced Stanislaus on the throne; and his hope of engaging the

Ottoman Porte to espouse his cause, or convincing the divan that it was their

interest to send ten or twelve thousand men to the assistance of his friends,

under pretence that the czar was supporting his ally, Augustus, in Poland, was

vain and chimerical.

  Sep. 1712.] Nevertheless, he continued still at Bender, to wait the issue of

these vain projects, while the Russians, Danes, and Saxons, were overrunning

Pomerania.  Peter  took  his  wife  with  him  on  this  expedition.  The  king  of

Denmark had already made himself master of Stade, a sea-port town in the

duchy of Bremen, and the united forces of Russia, Saxony, and Denmark,

were already before Stralsund.

  Oct. 1712.] And now king Stanislaus, seeing the deplorable state of so

many provinces, the impossibility of his recovering the crown of Poland, and

the universal confusion occasioned by the inflexibility of Charles, called a

meeting  of  the  Swedish  generals,  who  were  covering  Pomerania  with  an

army  of  eleven  thousand  men,  as  the  last  resource  they  had  left  in  those

provinces.

  When they were assembled, he proposed to them to make their terms with

king Augustus, offering himself to be the victim of this reconciliation. Onthis occasion, he made the following speech to them, in the French language,

which he afterwards left in writing, and which was signed by nine general

officers, amongst whom happened to be one Patkul, cousin-german to the

unfortunate Patkul, who lost his life on the wheel, by the order of Charles

XII.

  'Having been hitherto the instrument of procuring glory to the Swedish

arms, I cannot think of proving the cause of their ruin. I therefore declare

myself  ready  to  sacrifice  the  crown,  and  my  personal  interests,  to  the

preservation of the sacred person of their king, as I can see no other method

of releasing him from the place where he now is.'

  Having made this declaration (which is here given in his own words), he

prepared to set out for Turkey, in hopes of being able to soften the inflexible

temper of his benefactor, by the sacrifice he had made for him. His ill fortune

would have it, that he arrived in Bessarabia at the very time that Charles, after

having given his word to the sultan, that he would depart from Bender, and

having received the necessary remittances for his journey, and an escort for

his person, took the mad resolution to continue there, and opposed a whole

army of Turks and Tartars, with only his own domestics. The former, though

they  might  easily  have  killed  him,  contented  themselves  with  taking  him

prisoner. At this very juncture, Stanislaus arriving, was seized himself; so

that two Christian kings were prisoners at one time in Turkey.

  At this time, when all Europe was in commotion, and that France had just

terminated a war equally fatal against one part thereof, in order to settle the

grandson  of  Lewis  XIV.  on  the  throne  of  Spain,  England  gave  peace  to

France, and the victory gained by Marshal Villars at Denain in Flanders,

saved that state from its other enemies. France had been, for upwards of a

century, the ally of Sweden, and it was the interest of the former, that its ally

should not be stript of his possessions in Germany. Charles, unhappily, was at

such a distance from his dominions, that he did not even know what was

transacting in France.

  The regency of Stockholm, by a desperate effort, ventured to demand a

sum of money from the French court, at a time when its finances were at so

low an ebb, that Lewis XIV. had hardly money enough to pay his household

servants. Count Sparre was sent with a commission to negotiate this loan, inwhich it was not to be supposed he would succeed. However, on his arrival at

Versailles, he represented to the marquis de Torci the inability of the regency

to pay the little army which Charles had still remaining in Pomerania, and

which was ready to break up and dispute of itself on account of the long

arrears due to the men; and that France was on the point of beholding the

only ally she had left, deprived of those provinces which were so necessary to

preserve the balance of power; that indeed his master, Charles, had not been

altogether so attentive to the interests of France in the course of his conquests

as might have been expected, but that the magnanimity of Lewis XIV. was at

least  equal  to  the  misfortunes  of  his  royal  brother  and  ally.  The  French

minister, in answer to this speech, so effectually set forth the incapacity of his

court  to  furnish  the  requested  succours,  that  count  Sparre  despaired  of

success.

  It so happened, however, that a private individual did that which Sparre

had lost all hopes of obtaining. There was at that time in Paris, a banker,

named  Samuel  Bernard,  who  had  accumulated  an  immense  fortune  by

making remittances for the government to foreign countries, and other private

contracts. This man was intoxicated with a species of pride very rarely to be

met with from people of his profession. He was immoderately fond of every

thing that made an éclat, and knew very well, that one time or another the

government would repay with interest those who hazarded their fortune to

supply its exigencies. Count Sparre went one day to dine with him, and took

care to flatter his foible so well, that before they rose from table the banker

put  six  hundred  thousand  livres[91]  into  his  hand;  and  then  immediately

waiting on the marquis de Torci, he said to him-'I have lent the crown of

Sweden six hundred thousand livres in your name, which you must repay me

when you are able.'

  Count  Steinbock,  who  at  that  time  commanded  Charles's  army  in

Pomerania, little expected so seasonable a supply; and seeing his troops ready

to mutiny, to whom he had nothing to give but promises, and that the storm

was gathering fast upon him, and being, moreover, apprehensive of being

surrounded by the three different armies of Russia, Denmark, and Saxony,

desired a cessation of arms, on the supposition that Stanislaus' abdication

would soften the obstinacy of Charles, and that the only way left him to save

the forces under his command, was by spinning out the time in negotiations.He  therefore  dispatched  a  courier  to  Bender,  to  represent  to  the  king  of

Sweden the desperate state of his finances and affairs, and the situation of the

army,  and  to  acquaint  him  that  he  had  under  these  circumstances,  found

himself necessitated to apply for a cessation of arms, which he should think

himself very happy to obtain. The courier had not been dispatched above

three days, and Stanislaus was not yet set out on his journey to Bender, when

Steinbock received the six hundred thousand livres from the French banker

above-mentioned; a sum, which was at that time an immense treasure in a

country so desolated. Thus unexpectedly reinforced with money, which is the

grand panacea for all disorders of state, Steinbock found means to revive the

drooping spirits of his soldiery; he supplied them with all they wanted, raised

new recruits, and in a short time saw himself at the head of twelve thousand

men, and dropping his former intention of procuring a suspension of arms, he

sought only for an opportunity of engaging the enemy.

  This was the same Steinbock, who in the year 1710, after the defeat of

Pultowa, had revenged the Swedes on the Danes by the eruption he made into

Scania, where he marched against and engaged them with only a few militia,

whom he had hastily gathered together, with their arms slung round them

with ropes, and totally defeated the enemy. He was, like all the other generals

of Charles XII. active and enterprising; but his valour was sullied by his

brutality: as an instance of which, it will be sufficient to relate, that having,

after an engagement with the Russians, given orders to kill all the prisoners,

and perceiving a Polish officer in the service of the czar, who had caught hold

on king Stanislaus' stirrup, then on horseback, in order to save his life, he,

Steinbock, shot him dead with his pistol in that prince's arms, as has been

already mentioned in the life of Charles XII. and king Stanislaus has declared

to the author of this History, that had he not been withheld by his respect and

gratitude to the king of Sweden, he should immediately have shot Steinbock

dead upon the spot.

  Dec. 9, 1712.] General Steinbock now marched by the way of Wismar to

meet  the  combined  forces  of  the  Russians,  Danes,  and  Saxons,  and  soon

found himself near the Danish and Saxon army, which was advanced before

that of the Russians about the distance of three leagues. The czar sent three

couriers, one after another, to the king of Denmark, beseeching him to wait

his coming up, and thereby avoid the danger which threatened him, if heattempted to engage the Swedes with an equality of force; but the Danish

monarch, not willing to share with any one the honour of a victory which he

thought sure, advanced to meet the Swedish general, whom he attacked near

a place called Gadebusch. This day's affair gave a further proof of the natural

enmity that subsisted between the Swedes and Danes. The officers of these

two nations fought with most unparalleled inveteracy against each other, and

neither side would desist till death terminated the dispute.

  Steinbock gained a complete victory before the Russian army could come

up to the assistance of the Danes, and the next day received an order from his

master, Charles, to lay aside all thoughts of a suspension of arms, who, at the

same time, upbraided him for having entertained an idea so injurious to his

honour,  and  for  which  he  told  him  he  could  make  no  reparation,  but  by

conquering or perishing. Steinbock had happily obviated the orders and the

reproach by the victory he had gained.

  But this victory was like that which had formerly brought such a transient

consolation  to  king  Augustus,  when  in  the  torrent  of  his  misfortunes  he

gained the battle of Calish against the Swedes, who were conquerors in every

other  place,  and  which  only  served  to  aggravate  his  situation,  as  this  of

Gadebusch only procrastinated the ruin of Steinbock and his army.

  When the king of Sweden received the news of Steinbock's success, he

looked upon his affairs as retrieved, and even flattered himself with hopes to

engage  the  Ottoman  Porte  to  declare  for  him,  who  at  that  time  seemed

disposed  to  come  to  a  new  rupture  with  the  czar:  full  of  these  fond

imaginations, he sent orders to general Steinbock to fall upon Poland, being

still ready to believe, upon the least shadow of success, that the day of Narva,

and those in which he gave laws to his enemies, were again returned. But

unhappily  he  too  soon  found  these  flattering  hopes  utterly  blasted  by  the

affair of Bender, and his own captivity amongst the Turks.

  The  whole  fruits  of  the  victory  at  Gadebusch  were  confined  to  the

surprising  in  the  night-time,  and  reducing  to  ashes,  the  town  of  Altena,

inhabited  by  traders  and  manufacturers,  a  place  wholly  defenceless,  and

which, not having been in arms, ought, by all the laws of war and nations, to

have  been  spared;  however,  it  was  utterly  destroyed,  several  of  the

inhabitants perished in the flames, others escaped with their lives, but naked,and a number of old men, women, and children, perished with the cold and

fatigue they suffered, at the gates of Hamburg. Such has too often been the

fate of several thousands of men for the quarrels of two only; and this cruel

advantage was the only one gained by Steinbock; for the Russians, Danes,

and Saxons pursued him so closely, that he was obliged to beg for an asylum

in Toningen, a fortress in the duchy of Holstein, for himself and army.

  This duchy was at that time subjected to the most cruel ravages of any part

of the North, and its sovereign was the most miserable of all princes. He was

nephew to Charles XII. and it was on his father's account, who had married

Charles's sister, that that monarch carried his arms even into the heart of

Copenhagen, before the battle of Narva, and for whom he likewise made the

treaty of Travendahl, by which the dukes of Holstein were restored to their

rights.

  This country was in part the cradle of the Cimbri, and of the old Normans,

who overrun the province of Neustria, in France, and conquered all England,

Naples, and Sicily; and yet, at this present time, no state pretends less to

make conquests than this part of the ancient Cimbrica Chersonesus, which

consists only of two petty duchies; namely, that of Sleswic, belonging in

common  to  the  king  of  Denmark  and  the  duke  of  Holstein,  and  that  of

Gottorp, appertaining to the duke alone. Sleswic is a sovereign principality;

Holstein is a branch of the German empire, called the Roman empire.

  The king of Denmark, and the duke of Holstein-Gottorp, were of the same

family; but the duke, nephew to Charles XII. and presumptive heir to his

crown, was the natural enemy of the king of Denmark, who had endeavoured

to crush him in the very cradle. One of his father's brothers, who was bishop

of Lubec, and administrator of the dominions of his unfortunate ward, now

beheld himself in the midst of the Swedish army, whom he durst not succour,

and those of Russia, Denmark, and Saxony, that threatened his country with

daily  destruction.  Nevertheless,  he  thought  himself  obliged  to  try  to  save

Charles's army, if he could do it without irritating the king of Denmark, who

had  made  himself  master  of  his  country,  which  he  exhausted,  by  raising

continual contributions.

  This bishop and administrator was entirely governed by the famous baron

Gortz, the most artful and enterprising man of his age, endowed with a geniusamazingly penetrating, and fruitful in every resource: with talents equal to the

boldest and most arduous attempts; he was as insinuating in his negotiations

as he was hardy in his projects; he had the art of pleasing and persuading in

the highest degree, and knew how to captivate all hearts by the vivacity of his

genius, after he had won them by the softness of his eloquence. He afterwards

gained the same ascendant over Charles XII. which he had then over the

bishop; and all the world knows, that he paid with his life the honour he had

of governing the most ungovernable and obstinate prince that ever sat upon a

throne.

  Gortz had a private conference with general Steinbock,[92] at which he

promised to deliver him up the fortress of Toningen,[93] without exposing

the bishop administrator, his master, to any danger: and, at the same time,

gave the strongest assurances to the king of Denmark, that he would defend

the place to the uttermost. In this manner are almost all negotiations carried

on, affairs of state being of a very different nature from those of private

persons; the honour of ministers consisting wholly in success, and those of

private persons in the observance of their promises.

  General Steinbock presented himself before Toningen: the commandant

refused to open the gates to him, and by this means put it out of the king of

Denmark's  power  to  allege  any  cause  of  complaint  against  the  bishop

administrator; but Gortz causes an order to be given in the name of the young

duke, a minor, to suffer the Swedish army to enter the town. The secretary of

the  cabinet,  named  Stamke,  signs  this  order  in  the  name  of  the  duke  of

Holstein: by this means Gortz preserves the honour of an infant who had not

as yet any power to issue orders; and he at once serves the king of Sweden, to

whom he was desirous to make his court, and the bishop administrator his

master, who appeared not to have consented to the admission of the Swedish

troops. The governor of Toningen, who was easily gained, delivered up the

town to the Swedes, and Gortz excused himself as well as he could to the

king of Denmark, by protesting that the whole had been transacted without

his consent.

  The Swedes retired partly within the walls, and partly under the cannon of

the town: but this did not save them: for general Steinbock was obliged to

surrender  himself  prisoner  of  war,  together  with  his  whole  army,  to  the

number  of  eleven  thousand  men,  in  the  same  manner  as  about  sixteenthousand of their countrymen had done at the battle of Pultowa.

  By this convention it was agreed, that Steinbock with his officers and men

might be ransomed or exchanged. The price for the general's ransom was

fixed at eight thousand German crowns;[94] a very trifling sum, but which

Steinbock however was not able to raise; so that he remained a prisoner in

Copenhagen till the day of his death.

  The territories of Holstein now remained at the mercy of the incensed

conqueror.  The  young  duke  became  the  object  of  the  king  of  Denmark's

vengeance, and was fated to pay for the abuse which Gortz had made of his

name: thus did the ill fortune of Charles XII. fall upon all his family.

  Gortz perceiving his projects thus dissipated, and being still resolved to act

a distinguished part in the general confusion of affairs, recalled to mind a

scheme  which  he  had  formed  to  establish  a  neutrality  in  the  Swedish

territories in Germany.

  The king of Denmark was ready to take possession of Toningen; George,

elector of Hanover, was about to seize Bremen and Verden, with the city of

Stade; the new-made king of Prussia, Frederick William, cast his views upon

Stetin, and czar Peter was preparing to make himself master of Finland; and

all the territories of Charles XII. those of Sweden excepted, were going to

become the spoils of those who wanted to share them. How then could so

many  different  interests  be  rendered  compatible  with  a  neutrality?  Gortz

entered into negotiation at one and the same time with all the several princes

who had any views in this partition; he continued night and day passing from

one province to the other; he engaged the governor of Bremen and Verden to

put those two duchies into the hands of the elector of Hanover by way of

sequestration,  so  that  the  Danes  should  not  take  possession  of  them  for

themselves: he prevailed with the king of Prussia to accept jointly with the

duke of Holstein, of the sequestration of Stetin and Wismar, in consideration

of which, the king of Denmark was to act nothing against Holstein, and was

not to enter Toningen. It was most certainly a strange way of serving Charles

XII. to put his towns into the hands of those who might choose if they would

ever restore them; but Gortz, by delivering these places to them as pledges,

bound them to a neutrality, at least for some time; and he was in hopes to be

able afterwards to bring Hanover and Brandenburg to declare for Sweden: heprevailed on the king of Prussia whose ruined dominions stood in need of

peace, to enter into his views, and in short he found means to render himself

necessary to all these princes, and disposed of the possessions of Charles XII.

like a guardian, who gives up one part of his ward's estate to preserve the

other, and of a ward incapable of managing his affairs himself; and all this

without  any  regular  authority  or  commission,  or  other  warrant  for  his

conduct, than full powers given him by the bishop of Lubec, who had no

authority to grant such powers from Charles himself.

  Such  was  the  baron  de  Gortz,  and  such  his  actions,  which  have  not

hitherto  been  sufficiently  known.  There  have  been  instances  of  an

Oxenstiern, a Richlieu, and an Alberoni, influencing the affairs of all parts of

Europe; but that the privy counsellor of a bishop of Lubec should do the same

as they, without his conduct being avowed by any one, is a thing hitherto

unheard of.

  June, 1713.] Nevertheless he succeeded to his wishes in the beginning; for

he made a treaty with the king of Prussia, by which that monarch engaged, on

condition of keeping Stetin in sequestration, to preserve the rest of Pomerania

for  Charles  XII.  In  virtue  of  this  treaty,  Gortz  made  a  proposal  to  the

governor of Pomerania, Meyerfeld, to give up the fortress of Stetin to the

king of Prussia for the sake of peace, thinking that the Swedish governor of

Stetin would prove as easy to be persuaded as the Holsteiner who had the

command of Toningen; but the officers of Charles XII. were not accustomed

to obey such orders. Meyerfeld made answer, that no one should enter Stetin

but over his dead body and the ruins of the place, and immediately sent notice

to his master of the strange proposal. The messenger at his arrival found

Charles prisoner at Demirtash, in consequence of his adventure at Bender,

and it was doubtful, at that time, whether he would not remain all his life in

confinement in Turkey, or else be banished to some of the islands in the

Archipelago, or some part of Asia under the dominion of the Ottoman Porte.

However Charles from his prison sent the same orders to Meyerfeld, as he

had before done to Steinbock; namely, rather to perish than to submit to his

enemies, and even commanded him to take his inflexibility for his example.

  Gortz, finding that the governor of Stetin had broke in upon his measures,

and would neither hearken to a neutrality nor a sequestration, took it into his

head, not only to sequester the town of Stetin of his own authority, but alsothe city of Stralsund, and found means to make the same kind of treaty (June,

1713,) with the king of Poland, elector of Saxony, for that place, which he

had done with the elector of Brandenburg for Stetin. He clearly saw how

impossible it would be for the Swedes to keep possession of those places

without either men or money, while their king was a captive in Turkey, and

he thought himself sure of turning aside the scourge of war from the North by

means of these sequestrations. The king of Denmark himself at length gave

into  the  projects  of  Gortz:  the  latter  had  gained  an  entire  ascendant  over

prince Menzikoff, the czar's general and favourite, whom he had persuaded

that the duchy of Holstein must be ceded to his master, and flattered the czar

with the prospect of opening a canal from Holstein into the Baltic Sea; an

enterprise perfectly conformable to the inclination and views of this royal

founder: and, above all, he laboured to insinuate to him, that he might obtain

a new increase of power, by condescending to become one of the powers of

the empire, which would entitle him to a vote in the diet of Ratisbon, a right

that he might afterwards for ever maintain by that of arms.

  In a word, no one could put on more different appearances, adapt himself

to  more  opposite  interests,  or  act  a  more  complicated  part,  than  did  this

skilful negotiator; he even went so far as to engage prince Menzikoff to ruin

the very town of Stetin, which he was endeavouring to save; and in which, at

length, to his misfortune, he succeeded but too well.

  When the king of Prussia saw a Russian army before Stetin, he found that

place would be lost to him, and remain in the possession of the czar. This was

just what Gortz expected and waited for. Prince Menzikoff was in want of

money; Gortz got the king of Prussia to lend him four hundred thousand

crowns: he afterwards sent a message to the governor of the place, to know of

him-whether he would rather choose to see Stetin in ashes, and under the

dominion of Russia, or to trust it in the hands of the king of Prussia, who

would engage to restore it to the king, his master?-The commandant at length

suffered himself to be persuaded, and gave up the place, which Menzikoff

entered; and, in consideration of the four hundred thousand crowns, delivered

it afterwards, together with all the territories thereto adjoining, into the hands

of the king of Prussia, who, for form's sake, left therein two battalions of the

troops of Holstein, and has never since restored that part of Pomerania.

  From this period, the second king of Prussia, successor to a weak andprodigal father, laid the foundation of that greatness, to which his state has

since arrived by military discipline and economy.

  The  baron  de  Gortz,  who  put  so  many  springs  in  motion,  could  not,

however, succeed in prevailing on the Danes to spare the duchy of Holstein,

or forbear taking possession of Toningen. He failed in what appeared to have

been  his  first  object,  though  he  succeeded  in  all  his  other  views,  and

particularly in that of making himself the most important personage of the

North, which, indeed, was his principal object.

  The elector of Hanover then had secured to himself Bremen and Verden,

of which Charles XII. was now stripped. The Saxon army was before Wismar

(Sept. 1715); Stetin was in the hands of the king of Prussia; the Russians

were ready to lay siege to Stralsund, in conjunction with the Saxons; and

these latter had already landed in the island of Rugen, and the czar, in the

midst of the numberless negotiations on all sides, while others were disputing

about neutralities and partitions, makes a descent upon Finland. After having

himself pointed the artillery against Stralsund, he left the rest to the care of

his allies and prince Menzikoff, and, embarking in the month of May, on the

Baltic Sea, on board a ship of fifty guns, which he himself caused to be built

at Petersburg, he sailed for the coast of Finland, followed by a fleet of ninety-

two  whole,  and  one  hundred  and  ten  half-gallies,  having  on  board  near

sixteen thousand troops. He made his descent at Elsingford, (May 22. N. S.

1713.) the most southern part of that cold and barren country, lying in 61

degrees north latitude; and, notwithstanding the numberless difficulties he

had to encounter, succeeded in his design. He caused a feint attack to be

made on one side of the harbour, while he landed his troops on the other, and

took possession of the town. He then made himself master of Abo, Borgo,

and the whole coast. The Swedes now seemed not to have one resource left;

for it was at this very time, that their army, under the command of general

Steinbock, was obliged to surrender prisoners of war at Toningen.

  These repeated disasters which befel Charles, were, as we have already

shewn,  followed  by  the  loss  of  Bremen,  Verden,  Stetin,  and  a  part  of

Pomerania; and that prince himself, with his ally and friend, Stanislaus, were

afterwards  both  prisoners  in  Turkey:  nevertheless,  he  was  not  to  be

undeceived in the flattering notion he had entertained of returning to Poland,

at the head of an Ottoman army, replacing Stanislaus on the throne, and onceagain making his enemies tremble.


  CHAPTER XXIV.

  Successes  of  Peter  the  Great.-Return  of  Charles  XII.  into  his  own

dominions.

  1713.


  Peter, while he was following the course of his conquests, completed the

establishment  of  his  navy,  brought  twelve  thousand  families  to  settle  in

Petersburg,  kept  all  his  allies  firm  to  his  person  and  fortunes,  not

withstanding they had all different interests and opposite views; and with his

fleet kept in awe all the sea-ports of Sweden, on the gulfs of Finland and

Bothnia.

  Prince Galitzin, one of his land-generals, whom he had formed himself, as

he had done all his other officers, advanced from Elsingford, where the czar

had  made  his  descent,  into  the  midst  of  the  country,  near  the  village  of

Tavasthus, which was a post that commanded the gulf of Bothnia, and was

defended by a few Swedish regiments, and about eight thousand militia. In

this situation, a battle was unavoidable, (Mar. 13, 1714.) the event of which

proved favourable to the Russians, who entirely routed the whole Swedish

army, and penetrated as far as Vaza, so that they were now masters of about

eighty leagues of country.

  The Swedes were still in possession of a fleet, with which they kept the

sea.  Peter  had,  for  a  considerable  time,  waited  with  impatience  for  an

opportunity of establishing the reputation of his new marine. Accordingly he

set out from Petersburg, and having got together a fleet of sixteen ships of the

line, and one hundred and eighty galleys, fit for working among the rocks and

shoals that surround the island of Aland, and the other islands in the Baltic

Sea, bordering upon the Swedish coast, he fell in with the fleet of that nation

near their own shores. This armament greatly exceeded his in the largeness of

the ships, but was inferior in the number of galleys, and more proper for

engaging in the open sea, than among rocks, or near the shore. The advantage

the czar had in this respect was entirely owing to himself: he served in the

rank of rear-admiral on board his own fleet, and received all the necessaryorders from admiral Apraxin. Peter resolved to make himself master of the

island of Aland, which lies only twelve leagues off the Swedish coast; and,

though obliged to pass full in view of the enemy's fleet, he effected this bold

and hazardous enterprise. His galleys forced a passage through the enemy,

whose cannon did not fire low enough to hurt them, and entered Aland; but as

that  coast  is  almost  surrounded  with  rocks,  the  czar  caused  eighty  small

galleys to be transported by men over a point of land, and launched into the

sea, at a place called Hango, where his large ships were at anchor. Erenschild,

the Swedish rear-admiral, thinking that he might easily take or sink all these

galleys,  stood  in  shore,  in  order  to  reconnoitre  their  situation,  but  was

received with so brisk a fire from the Russian fleet, that most of his men were

killed or wounded; and all the galleys and praams he had brought with him

were  taken,  together  with  his  own  ship.  (Aug.  8.)  The  admiral  himself

endeavoured  to  escape  in  a  boat,  but  being  wounded,  was  obliged  to

surrender himself prisoner, and was brought on board the galley where the

czar was, navigating it himself. The scattered remains of the Swedish fleet

made the best of their way home; and the news of this accident threw all

Stockholm into confusion, which now began to tremble for its own safety.

  Much  about  the  same  time,  colonel  Scouvalow  Neuschlof  attacked  the

only remaining fortress on the western side of Finland, and made himself

master of it, after a most obstinate resistance on the part of the besieged.

  This affair of Aland was, next to that of Pultowa, the most glorious that

had ever befallen the arms of Peter the Great, who now saw himself master of

Finland,  the  government  of  which  he  committed  to  prince  Galitzin,  and

returned to Petersburg (Sept. 15.), victorious over the whole naval force of

Sweden, and more than ever respected by his allies; the stormy season now

approaching,  not  permitting  him  to  remain  longer  with  his  ships  in  the

Finlandish and Bothnic seas. His good fortune also brought him back to his

capital,  just  as  the  czarina  was  brought  to  bed  of  a  princess,  who  died,

however,  about  a  year  afterwards.  He  then  instituted  the  order  of  St.

Catherine,  in  honour  of  his  consort,[95]  and  celebrated  the  birth  of  his

daughter by a triumphal entry, which was of all the festivals to which he had

accustomed his subjects, that which they held in the greatest esteem. This

ceremony  was  ushered  in  by  bringing  nine  Swedish  galleys,  and  seven

praams filled with prisoners, and rear-admiral Erenschild's own ship, into theharbour of Cronstadt.

  The cannon, colours, and standards, taken in the expedition to Finland,

and which had come home in the Russian admiral's ship, were brought on this

occasion  to  Petersburg,  and  entered  that  metropolis  in  order  of  battle.  A

triumphal arch, which the czar had caused to be erected, and which, as usual,

was made from a model of his own, was decorated with the insignia of his

conquests. Under this arch the victors marched in procession, with admiral

Apraxin, at their head; then followed the czar in quality of rear-admiral, and

the other officers according to their several ranks. They were all presented

one after another to the vice-admiral Rodamonoski, who, at this ceremony

represented  the  sovereign.  This  temporary  vice-emperor  distributed  gold

medals  amongst  all  the  officers,  and  others  of  silver  to  the  soldiers  and

sailors. The Swedish prisoners likewise passed under the triumphal arch, and

admiral Erenschild followed immediately after the czar, his conqueror. When

they came to the place where the vice-czar was seated on his throne, admiral

Apraxin presented to him rear-admiral Peter, who demanded to be made vice-

admiral, in reward for his services. It was then put to the vote, if his request

should be granted; and it may easily be conceived that he had the majority on

his side.

  After  this  ceremony  was  over,  which  filled  every  heart  with  joy,  and

inspired every mind with emulation, with a love for his country, and a thirst

of fame, the czar made the following speech to those present: a speech which

deserves to be transmitted to the latest posterity.

  'Countrymen and friends! what man is there among you, who could have

thought, twenty years ago, that we should one day fight together on the Baltic

Sea, in ships built by our own hands; and that we should establish settlements

in countries conquered by our own labours and valour?-Greece is said to have

been the ancient seat of the arts and sciences: they afterwards took up their

abode in Italy, from whence they spread themselves through every part of

Europe. It is now our turn to call them ours, if you will second my designs,

by joining study to obedience. The arts circulate in this globe, as the blood

does  in  the  human  body;  and  perhaps  they  may  establish  their  empire

amongst us, on their return back to Greece, their mother country; and I even

venture to hope, that we may one day put the most civilized nations to the

blush, by our noble labours and the solid glory resulting therefrom.'  Here is the true substance of this speech, so every way worthy of a great

founder,  and  which  has  lost  its  chief  beauties  in  this,  and  every  other

translation; but the principal merit of this eloquent harangue is, its having

been spoken by a victorious monarch, at once the founder and lawgiver of his

empire.

  The old boyards listened to this speech with greater regret for the abolition

of  their  ancient  customs,  than  admiration  of  their  master's  glory;  but  the

young ones could not hear him without tears of joy.

  The splendour of these times were further heightened by the return of the

Russian  ambassadors  from  Constantinople,  (Sept.  15,  1714.)  with  a

confirmation of the peace with the Turks: an ambassador sent by Sha Hussein

from Persia, had arrived some time before with a present to the czar of an

elephant and five lions. He received, at the same time, an ambassador from

Mahomet  Babadir,  khan  of  the  Usbeck  Tartars,  requesting  his  protection

against another tribe of Tartars; so that both extremities of Asia and Europe

seemed to join to offer him homage, and add to his glory.

  The regency of Stockholm, driven to despair by the desperate situation of

their  affairs,  and  the  absence  of  their  sovereign,  who  seemed  to  have

abandoned his dominions, had come to a resolution no more to consult him in

relation  to  their  proceedings;  and,  immediately  after  the  victory  the  czar

gained over their navy, they sent to the conqueror to demand a passport, for

an officer charged with proposals of peace. The passport was sent; but, just as

the person appointed to carry on the negotiation was on the point of setting

out, the princess Ulrica Eleonora, sister to Charles XII. received advice from

the king her brother, that he was preparing, at length, to quit Turkey, and

return home to fight his own battles. Upon this news the regency did not dare

to send the negotiator (whom they had already privately named) to the czar;

and, therefore, resolved to support their ill-fortune till the arrival of Charles to

retrieve it.

  In effect, Charles, after a stay of five years and some months in Turkey,

set  out  from  that  kingdom  in  the  latter  end  of  October,  1714.  Every  one

knows  that  he  observed  the  same  singularity  in  his  journey,  which

characterized all the actions of his life. He arrived at Stralsund the 22d of

November following. As soon as he got there, baron de Gortz came to pay hiscourt  to  him;  and,  though  he  had  been  the  instrument  of  one  part  of  his

misfortunes,  yet  he  justified  his  conduct  with  so  much  art,  and  filled  the

imagination  of  Charles  with  such  flattering  hopes,  that  he  gained  his

confidence, as he had already done that of every other minister and prince

with  whom  he  had  entered  into  any  negotiations.  In  short,  he  made  him

believe, that means might be found to draw off the czar's allies, and thereby

procure an honourable peace, or at least to carry on the war upon an equal

footing; and from this time Gortz gained a greater ascendancy over the mind

of the king of Sweden than ever count Piper had.

  The  first  thing  which  Charles  did  after  his  arrival  at  Stralsund  was  to

demand  a  supply  of  money  from  the  citizens  of  Stockholm,  who  readily

parted with what little they had left, as not being able to refuse any thing to a

king, who asked only to bestow, who lived as hard as the meanest soldier,

and exposed his life equally in defence of his country. His misfortunes, his

captivity, his return to his dominions, so long deprived of his presence, were

arguments which prepossessed alike his own subjects and foreigners in his

favour, who could not forbear at once to blame and admire, to compassionate

and to assist him. His reputation was of a kind totally differing from that of

Peter  the  Great:  it  consisted  not  in  cherishing  the  arts  and  sciences,  in

enacting  laws,  in  establishing  a  form  of  government,  nor  in  introducing

commerce among his subjects; it was confined entirely to his own person. He

placed  his  chief  merit  in  a  valour  superior  to  what  is  commonly  called

courage. He defended his dominions with a greatness of soul equal to that

valour, and aimed only to inspire other nations with awe and respect for him:

hence he had more partizans than allies.


  CHAPTER XXV.

  State of Europe at the return of Charles XII. Siege of Stralsund.


  When Charles XII. returned to his dominions in the year 1714, he found

the state of affairs in Europe very different from that in which he had left

them.  Queen  Anne  of  England  was  dead,  after  having  made  peace  with

France. Lewis XIV. had secured the monarchy of Spain for his grandson the

duke of Anjou, and had obliged the emperor Charles VI. and the Dutch toagree to a peace, which their situation rendered necessary to them; so that the

affairs of Europe had put on altogether a new face.

  Those of the north had undergone a still greater change. Peter was become

sole arbiter in that part of the world: the elector of Hanover, who had been

called  to  fill  the  British  throne,  had  views  of  extending  his  territories  in

Germany, at the expense of Sweden, who had never had any possessions in

that country, but since the reign of the great Gustavus. The king of Denmark

aimed at recovering Scania, the best province of Sweden, which had formerly

belonged  to  the  Danes.  The  king  of  Prussia,  as  heir  to  the  dukes  of

Pomerania,  laid  claim  to  a  part  of  that  province.  On  the  other  hand,  the

Holstein  family,  oppressed  by  the  king  of  Denmark,  and  the  duke  of

Mecklenburg, almost at open war with his subjects, were suing to Peter the

Great  to  take  them  under  his  protection.  The  king  of  Poland,  elector  of

Saxony, was desirous to have the duchy of Courland annexed to Poland; so

that, from the Elbe to the Baltic Sea, Peter the First was considered as the

support of the several crowned heads, as Charles XII. had been their greatest

terror.

  Many  negotiations  were  set  on  foot  after  the  return  of  Charles  to  his

dominions, but nothing had been done. That prince thought he could raise a

sufficient number of ships of war and privateers, to put a stop to the rising

power of the czar by sea; with respect to the land war, he depended upon his

own valour; and Gortz, who was on a sudden become his prime minister,

persuaded him, that he might find means to defray the expense, by coining

copper money, to be taken at ninety-six times less than its real value, a thing

unparalleled in the histories of any state; but in the month of April, 1715, the

first Swedish privateers that put to sea were taken by the czar's men of war,

and a Russian army marched into the heart of Pomerania.

  The Prussians, Danes, and Saxons, now sat down with their united forces

before  Stralsund,  and  Charles  XII.  beheld  himself  returned  from  his

confinement at Demirtash and Demirtoca on the Black Sea, only to be more

closely pent up on the borders of the Baltic.

  We have already shewn, in the history of this extraordinary man, with

what haughty and unembarrassed resolution he braved the united forces of his

enemies in Stralsund; and shall therefore, in this place, only add a singlecircumstance, which, though trivial, may serve to shew the peculiarity of his

character.  The  greatest  part  of  his  officers  having  been  either  killed  or

wounded during the siege, the duty fell hard upon the few who were left.

Baron de Reichel, a colonel, having sustained a long engagement upon the

ramparts, and being tired out by repeated watchings and fatigues, had thrown

himself upon a bench to take a little repose; when he was called up to mount

guard again upon the ramparts. As he was dragging himself along, hardly

able to stand, and cursing the obstinacy of the king his master, who subjected

all  those  about  him  to  such  insufferable  and  fruitless  fatigues,  Charles

happened  to  overhear  him.  Upon  which,  stripping  off  his  own  cloak,  he

spread it on the ground before him, saying, 'My dear Reichel, you are quite

spent; come, I have had an hour's sleep, which has refreshed me, I'll take the

guard for you, while you finish your nap, and will wake you when I think it is

time;'  and  so  saying,  he  wrapt  the  colonel  up  in  his  cloak;  and,

notwithstanding  all  his  resistance,  obliged  him  to  lie  down  to  sleep,  and

mounted the guard himself.

  It was during this siege that the elector of Hanover, lately made king of

England,  purchased  of  the  king  of  Denmark  the  province  of  Bremen  and

Verden, with the city of Stade, (Oct. 1715.) which the Danes had taken from

Charles XII. This purchase cost king George eight hundred thousand German

crowns. In this manner were the dominions of Charles bartered away, while

he defended the city of Stralsund, inch by inch, till at length nothing was left

of it but a heap of ruins, which his officers compelled him to leave; (Dec.

1713.) and, when he was in a place of safety, general Ducker delivered up

those ruins to the king of Prussia.

  Some time afterwards, Ducker, being presented to Charles, that monarch

reproached  him  with  having  capitulated  with  his  enemies;  when  Ducker

replied, 'I had too great a regard for your majesty's honour, to continue to

defend  a  place  which  you  was  obliged  to  leave.'  However  the  Prussians

continued in possession of it no longer than the year 1721, when they gave it

up at the general peace.

  During  the  siege  of  Stralsund,  Charles  received  another  mortification,

which would have been still more severe, if his heart had been as sensible to

the emotions of friendship, as it was to those of fame and honour. His prime

minister, count Piper, a man famous throughout all Europe, and of unshakenfidelity to his prince (notwithstanding the assertions of certain rash persons,

or the authority of a mistaken writer): this Piper, I say, had been the victim of

his master's ambition ever since the battle of Pultowa. As there was as that

time no cartel for the exchange of prisoners subsisting between the Russians

and Swedes, he had remained in confinement at Moscow; and though he had

not been sent into Siberia, as the other prisoners were, yet his situation was

greatly to be pitied. The czar's finances at that time were not managed with so

much fidelity as they ought to be, and his many new establishments required

an expense which he could with difficulty answer. In particular, he owed a

considerable  sum  of  money  to  the  Dutch,  on  account  of  two  of  their

merchant-ships which had been burnt on the coast of Finland, in the descent

the czar had made on that country. Peter pretended that the Swedes were to

make good the damage, and wanted to engage count Piper to charge himself

with this debt: accordingly he was sent for from Moscow to Petersburg, and

his liberty was offered him, in case he could draw upon Sweden letters of

exchange to the amount of sixty thousand crowns. It is said he actually did

draw bills for this sum upon his wife at Stockholm, but that she being unable

or unwilling to take them up, they were returned, and the king of Sweden

never gave himself the least concern about paying the money. Be this as it

may, count Piper was closely confined in the castle of Schlusselburg, where

he died the year after, at the age of seventy. His remains were sent to the king

of  Sweden,  who  gave  them  a  magnificent  burial;  a  vain  and  melancholy

return to an old servant, for a life of suffering, and so deplorable an end!

  Peter  was  satisfied  with  having  got  possession  of  Livonia,  Esthonia,

Carelia, and Ingria, which he looked upon as his own provinces, and to which

he had, moreover, added almost all Finland, which served as a kind of pledge,

in case his enemies should conclude a peace. He had married one of his

nieces to Charles Leopold, duke of Mecklenburg, in the month of April of the

same year, (1715.) so that all the sovereigns of the north were now either his

allies or his creatures. In Poland, he kept the enemies of king Augustus in

awe;  one  of  his  armies,  consisting  of  about  eight  thousand  men,  having,

without  any  loss,  quelled  several  of  those  confederacies,  which  are  so

frequent in that country of liberty and anarchy: on the other hand, the Turks,

by strictly observing their treaties, left him at full liberty to exert his power,

and execute his schemes in their utmost extent.  In this flourishing situation of his affairs, scarcely a day passed without

being distinguished by new establishments, either in the navy, the army, or

the legislature: he himself composed a military code for the infantry.

  Nov. 8.] He likewise founded a naval academy at Petersburg; dispatched

Lange to China and Siberia, with a commission of trade; set mathematicians

to work, in drawing charts of the whole empire; built a summer's palace at

Petershoff; and at the same time built forts on the banks of the Irtish, stopped

the incursions and ravages of the Bukari[96] on the one side, and, on the

other, suppressed the Tartars of Kouban.

  1715.]  His  prosperity  seemed  now  to  be  at  its  zenith,  by  the  empress

Catherine's being delivered of a son, and an heir to his dominions being given

him, in a prince born to the czarowitz Alexis; but the joy for these happy

events, which fell out within a few days of each other, was soon damped by

the death of the empress's son; and the sequel of this history will shew us,

that the fate of the czarowitz was too unfortunate, for the birth of a son to this

prince to be looked upon as a happiness.

  The delivery of the czarina put a stop for some time to her accompanying,

as usual, her royal consort in all his expeditions by sea and land; but, as soon

as she was up again, she followed him to new adventures.


  CHAPTER XXVI.

  New travels of the czar.


  Wismar was at this time besieged by the czar's allies. This town, which

belonged of right to the duke of Mecklenburg, is situated on the Baltic, about

seven leagues distant from Lubec, and might have rivalled that city in its

extensive trade, being once one of the most considerable of the Hans Towns,

and the duke of Mecklenburg exercised therein a full power of protection,

rather  than  of  sovereignty.  This  was  one  of  the  German  territories  yet

remaining to the Swedes, in virtue of the peace of Westphalia: but it was now

obliged to share the same fate with Stralsund. The allies of the czar pushed

the siege with the greatest vigour, in order to make themselves masters of it

before that prince's troops should arrive; but Peter himself coming before the

place in person, after the capitulation, (Feb. 1716,) which had been madewithout his privacy, made the garrison prisoners of war. He was not a little

incensed, that his allies should have left the king of Denmark in possession of

a town which was the right of a prince, who had married his niece; and his

resentment on this occasion (which that artful minister, de Gortz, soon after

turned to his own advantage) laid the first foundation of the peace, which he

meditated to bring about between the czar and Charles XII.

  Gortz took the first opportunity to insinuate to the czar, that Sweden was

sufficiently humbled, and that he should be careful not to suffer Denmark and

Prussia to become too powerful. The czar joined in opinion with him, and as

he had entered into the war, merely from motives of policy, whilst Charles

carried it on wholly on the principles of a warrior; he, from that instant,

slackened in his operations against the Swedes, and Charles, every where

unfortunate in Germany, determined to risk one of those desperate strokes

which success only can justify, and carried the war into Norway.

  In  the  meantime,  Peter  was  desirous  to  make  a  second  tour  through

Europe. He had undertaken his first, as a person who travelled for instruction

in the arts and sciences: but this second he made as a prince, who wanted to

dive into the secrets of the several courts. He took the czarina with him to

Copenhagen, Lubec, Schwerin, and Nystadt. He had an interview with the

king  of  Prussia  at  the  little  town  of  Aversburg,  from  thence  he  and  the

empress went to Hamburg, and to Altena, which had been burned by the

Swedes, and which they caused to be rebuilt. Descending the Elbe as far as

Stade,  they  passed  through  Bremen,  where  the  magistrates  prepared  a

firework and illuminations for them, which formed, in a hundred different

places, these words-'Our deliverer is come amongst us.' At length he arrived

once  more  at  Amsterdam,  (Dec.  17,  1716,)  and  visited  the  little  hut  at

Saardam, where he had first learned the art of ship-building, about eighteen

years  before,  and  found  his  old  dwelling  converted  into  a  handsome  and

commodious house, which is still to be seen, and goes by the name of the

Prince's House.

  It may easily be conceived, with what a kind of idolatry he was received

by a trading and seafaring set of people, whose companion he had heretofore

been, and who thought they saw in the conqueror of Pultowa, a pupil who

had learned from them to gain naval victories; and had, after their example,

established  trade  and  navigation  in  his  own  dominions.  In  a  word,  theylooked upon him as a fellow-citizen, who had been raised to the imperial

dignity.

  The life, the travels, the actions of Peter the Great, as well as of his rival,

Charles of Sweden, exhibit a surprising contrast to the manners which prevail

amongst us, and which are, perhaps, rather too delicate; and this may be one

reason,  that  the  history  of  these  two  famous  men  so  much  excites  our

curiosity.

  The czarina had been left behind at Schwerin indisposed, being greatly

advanced in her pregnancy; nevertheless, as soon as she was able to travel,

she set out to join the czar in Holland, but was taken in labour at Wesel, and

there delivered of a prince, (Jan. 14, 1717,) who lived but one day. It is not

customary with us for a lying-in-woman to stir abroad for some time; but the

czarina set out, and arrived at Amsterdam in ten days after her labour. She

was very desirous to see the little cabin her husband had lived and worked in.

Accordingly, she and the czar went together, without any state or attendance,

excepting only two servants, and dined at the house of a rich ship-builder of

Saardam, whose name was Kalf, and who was one of the first who had traded

to  Petersburg.  His  son  had  lately  arrived  from  France,  whither  Peter  was

going. The czar and czarina took great pleasure in hearing an adventure of

this young man, which I should not mention here, only as it may serve to

shew the great difference between the manners of that country and ours.

  Old Kalf, who had sent this son of his to Paris, to learn the French tongue,

was desirous that he should live in a genteel manner during his stay there;

and  accordingly  had  ordered  him  to  lay  aside  the  plain  garb  which  the

inhabitants of Saardam are in general accustomed to wear, and to provide

himself with fashionable clothes at Paris, and to live, in a manner, rather

suitable to his fortune than his education; being sufficiently well acquainted

with his son's disposition to know, that this indulgence would have no bad

effect on his natural frugality and sobriety.

  As a calf is in the French language called veau, our young traveller, when

he arrived at Paris, took the name of De Veau. He lived in a splendid manner,

spent  his  money  freely,  and  made  several  genteel  connexions.  Nothing  is

more common at Paris, than to bestow, without reserve, the title of count and

marquis, whether a person has any claim to it or not, or even if he is barely agentleman.  This  absurd  practice  has  been  allowed  by  the  government,  in

order that, by thus confounding all ranks, and consequently humbling the

nobility, there might be less danger of civil wars, which, in former times,

were so frequent and destructive to the peace of the state. In a word, the title

of marquis and count, with possessions equivalent to that dignity, are like

those of knight, without being of any order; or abbé, without any church

preferment; of no consequence, and not looked upon by the sensible part of

the nation.

  Young Mr. Kalf was always called the count de Veau by his acquaintance

and his own servants: he frequently made one in the parties of the princesses;

he  played  at  the  duchess  of  Berri's,  and  few  strangers  were  treated  with

greater marks of distinction, or had more general invitations among polite

company. A young nobleman, who had been always one of his companions

in these parties, promised to pay him a visit at Saardam, and was as good as

his word: when he arrived at the village, he inquired for the house of count

Kalf;  when,  being  shewn  into  a  carpenter's  work-shop,  he  there  saw  his

former gay companion, the young count, dressed in a jacket and trowsers,

after the Dutch fashion, with an axe in his hand, at the head of his father's

workmen. Here he was received by his friend, in that plain manner to which

he had been accustomed from his birth, and from which he never deviated.

The  sensible  reader  will  forgive  this  little  digression,  as  it  is  a  satire  on

vanity, and a panegyric on true manners.

  The czar continued three months in Holland, during which he passed his

time in matters of a more serious nature than the adventure just related. Since

the treaties of Nimeguen, Ryswic, and Utrecht, the Hague had preserved the

reputation of being the centre of negotiations in Europe. This little city, or

rather village, the most pleasant of any in the North, is chiefly inhabited by

foreign ministers, and by travellers, who come for instruction to this great

school. They were, at that time, laying the foundation of a great revolution in

Europe.  The  czar,  having  gotten  intelligence  of  the  approaching  storm,

prolonged his stay in the Low Countries, that he might be nearer at hand, to

observe the machinations going forward, both in the North and South, and

prepare  himself  for  the  part  which  it  might  be  necessary  for  him  to  act

therein.  CHAPTER XXVII.

  Continuation  of  the  Travels  of  Peter  the  Great.-Conspiracy  of  baron

Gortz.-Reception of the czar in France.


He plainly saw that his allies were jealous of his power, and found that there

is often more trouble with friends than with enemies.

  Mecklenburg was one of the principal subjects of those divisions, which

almost always subsist between neighbouring princes, who share in conquests.

Peter was not willing that the Danes should take possession of Wismar for

themselves, and still less that they should demolish the fortifications, and yet

they did both the one and the other.

  He openly protected the duke of Mecklenburg, who had married his niece,

and whom he regarded like a son-in-law, against the nobility of the country,

and the king of England as openly protected these latter. On the other hand,

he  was  greatly  discontented  with  the  king  of  Poland,  or  rather  with  his

minister, count Flemming, who wanted to throw off that dependance on the

czar, which necessity and gratitude had imposed.

  The  courts  of  England,  Poland,  Denmark,  Holstein,  Mecklenburg,  and

Brandenburg, were severally agitated with intrigues and cabals.

  Towards the end of the year 1716, and beginning of 1717, Gortz, who, as

Bassewitz tells us in his Memoirs, was weary of having only the title of

counsellor of Holstein, and being only private plenipotentiary to Charles XII.

was the chief promoter of these intrigues, with which he intended to disturb

the peace of all Europe. His design was to bring Charles XII. and the czar

together, not only with a view to finish the war between them, but to unite

them in friendship, to replace Stanislaus on the crown of Poland, and to wrest

Bremen and Verden out of the hands of George I., king of England, and even

to drive that prince from the English throne, in order to put it out of his power

to appropriate to himself any part of the spoils of Charles XII.

  There was at the same time a minister of his own character, who had

formed a design to overturn the two kingdoms of England and France: this

was cardinal Alberoni, who had more power at that time in Spain, than Gortz

had in Sweden, and was of as bold and enterprising a spirit as himself, butmuch more powerful, as being at the head of affairs in a kingdom infinitely

more rich, and never paid his creatures and dependants in copper money.

  Gortz, from the borders of the Baltic Sea, soon formed a connexion with

Alberoni in Spain. The cardinal and he both held a correspondence with all

the wandering English who were in the interest of the house of Stuart. Gortz

made  visits  to  every  place  where  he  thought  he  was  likely  to  find  any

enemies  of  king  George,  and  went  successively  to  Germany,  Holland,

Flanders, and Lorrain, and at length came to Paris, about the end of the year

1716. Cardinal Alberoni began, by remitting to him in Paris a million of

French livres, in order (to use the cardinal's expression) to set fire to the train.

  Gortz proposed, that Charles XII. should yield up several places to the

czar, in order to be in a condition to recover all the others from his enemies,

and  that  he  might  be  at  liberty  to  make  a  descent  in  Scotland,  while  the

partisans of the Stuart family should make an effectual rising in England:

after their former vain attempts to effect these views, it was necessary to

deprive the king of England of his chief support, which at that time was the

regent of France. It was certainly very extraordinary, to see France in league

with England, against the grandson of Lewis XIV., whom she herself had

placed  on  the  throne  of  Spain,  at  the  expence  of  her  blood  and  treasure,

notwithstanding the strong confederacy formed to oppose him; but it must be

considered, that every thing was now out of its natural order, and the interests

of the regent not those of the kingdom. Alberoni, at that time, was carrying

on a confederacy in France against this very regent.[97] And the foundations

of this grand project were laid almost as soon as the plan itself had been

formed. Gortz was the first who was let into the secret, and was to have made

a journey into Italy in disguise, to hold a conference with the pretender, in the

neighbourhood of Rome; from thence he was to have hastened to the Hague,

to have an interview with the czar, and then to have settled every thing with

the king of Sweden.

  The  author  of  this  History  is  particularly  well  informed  of  every

circumstance here advanced, for baron Gortz proposed to him to accompany

him in these journies; and, notwithstanding he was very young at that time,

he was one of the first witnesses to a great part of these intrigues.

  Gortz returned from Holland in the latter part of 1716, furnished with billsof exchange from cardinal Alberoni, and letters plenipotentiary from Charles

XII. It is incontestable that the Jacobite party were to have made a rising in

England, while Charles, in his return from Norway, was to make a descent in

the north of Scotland. This prince, who had not been able to preserve his own

dominions on the continent, was now going to invade and overrun those of

his neighbours, and just escaped from his prison in Turkey, and from amidst

the ruins of his own city of Stralsund, Europe might have beheld him placing

the crown of Great Britain on the head of James III. in London, as he had

before done that of Poland on Stanislaus at Warsaw.

  The czar, who was acquainted with a part of Gortz's projects, waited for

the unfolding of the rest, without entering into any of his plans, or indeed

knowing them all. He was as fond of great and extraordinary enterprises as

Charles XII., Gortz, or Alberoni; but then it was as the founder of a state, a

lawgiver,  and  a  sound  politician;  and  perhaps  Alberoni,  Gortz,  and  even

Charles himself, were rather men of restless souls, who sought after great

adventures,  than  persons  of  solid  understanding,  who  took  their  measures

with  a  just  precaution;  or  perhaps,  after  all,  their  ill  successes  may  have

subjected them to the charge of rashness and imprudence.

  During Gortz's stay at the Hague, the czar did not see him, as it would

have given too much umbrage to his friends the states-general, who were in

close alliance with, and attached to, the party of the king of England; and

even his ministers visited him only in private, and with great precaution,

having orders from their master to hear all he had to offer, and to flatter him

with hopes, without entering into any engagement, or making use of his (the

czar's) name in their conferences. But, notwithstanding all these precautions,

those  who  understood  the  nature  of  affairs,  plainly  saw  by  his  inactivity,

when he might have made a descent upon Scania with the joint fleets of

Russia and Denmark, by his visible coolness towards his allies, and the little

regard he paid to their complaints, and lastly, by this journey of his, that there

was a great change in affairs, which would very soon manifest itself.

  In the month of January, 1717, a Swedish packet-boat, which was carrying

letters over to Holland, being forced by a storm upon the coast of Norway,

put into harbour there. The letters were seized, and those of baron de Gortz

and some other public ministers being opened, furnished sufficient evidence

of the projected revolution. The court of Denmark communicated these lettersto the English ministry, who gave orders for arresting the Swedish minister,

Gillembourg,  then  at  the  court  of  London,  and  seizing  his  papers;  upon

examining  which  they  discovered  part  of  his  correspondence  with  the

Jacobites.

  Feb.  1717.]  King  George  immediately  wrote  to  the  states-general,

requiring them to cause the person of baron Gortz to be arrested, agreeable to

the treaty of union subsisting between England and that republic for their

mutual security. But this minister, who had his creatures and emissaries in

every  part,  was  quickly  informed  of  this  order;  upon  which  he  instantly

quitted the Hague, and was got as far as Arnheim, a town on the frontiers,

when  the  officers  and  guards,  who  were  in  pursuit  of  him,  and  who  are

seldom accustomed to use such diligence in that country, came up with and

took him, together with all his papers: he was strictly confined and severely

treated;  the  secretary  Stank,  the  person  who  had  counterfeited  the  sign

manual of the young duke of Holstein, in the affair of Toningen, experienced

still harsher usage. In fine, the count of Gillembourg, the Swedish envoy to

the court of Great Britain, and the baron de Gortz, minister plenipotentiary

from Charles XII. were examined like criminals, the one at London, and the

other  at  Arnheim,  while  all  the  foreign  ministers  exclaimed  against  this

violation of the law of nations.

  This privilege, which is much more insisted upon than understood, and

whose limits and extent have never yet been fixed, has, in almost every age,

received violent attacks. Several ministers have been driven from the courts

where they resided in a public character, and even their persons have been

more  than  once  seized  upon,  but  this  was  the  first  instance  of  foreign

ministers being interrogated at the bar of a court of justice, as if they were

natives of the country. The court of London and the states-general laid aside

all rules upon seeing the dangers which menaced the house of Hanover; but,

in fact, this danger, when once discovered, ceased to be any longer danger, at

least at that juncture.

  The historian Norberg must have been very ill informed, and have had a

very indifferent knowledge of men and things, or at least have been strangely

blinded  by  partiality,  or  under  severe  restrictions  from  his  own  court,  to

endeavour to persuade his readers, that the king of Sweden had not a very

great share in this plot.  The affront offered to his ministers fixed Charles more than ever in his

resolution to try every means to dethrone the king of England. But here he

found it necessary, once in his life time, to make use of dissimulation. He

disowned his ministers and their proceedings, both to the regent of France

and the states-general; from the former of whom he evicted a subsidy, and

with the latter it was for his interest to keep fair. He did not, however, give

the  king  of  England  so  much  satisfaction,  and  his  ministers,  Gortz  and

Gillembourg, were kept six months in confinement, and this repeated insult

animated in him the desire of revenge.

  Peter, in the midst of all these alarms and jealousies, kept himself quiet,

waiting with patience the event of all from time; and having established such

good order throughout his vast dominions, as that he had nothing to fear,

either at home or from abroad, he resolved to make a journey to France.

Unhappily he did not understand the French language, by which means he

was  deprived  of  the  greatest  advantage  he  might  have  reaped  from  his

journey; but he thought there might be something there worthy observation,

and he had a mind to be a nearer witness of the terms on which the regent

stood with the king of England, and whether that prince was staunch to his

alliance.

  Peter the Great was received in France as such a monarch ought to be.

Marshal Tessé was sent to meet him, with a number of the principal lords of

the court, a company of guards and the king's coaches; but he, according to

his usual custom, travelled with such expedition, that he was at Gournay

when the equipages arrived at Elbeuf. Entertainments were made for him in

every place on the road where he chose to partake of them. On his arrival he

was received in the Louvre, where the royal apartments were prepared for

him, and others for the princes Kourakin and Dolgorouki, the vice-chancellor

Shaffiroff, the ambassador Tolstoy, the same who had suffered in his person

that notorious violation of the laws of nations in Turkey, and for the rest of

his retinue. Orders were given for lodging and entertaining him in the most

splendid and sumptuous manner: but Peter, who was come only to see what

might be of use to him, and not to suffer these ceremonious triflings, which

were a restraint upon his natural plainness, and consumed a time that was

precious to him, went the same night to take up his lodgings at the other end

of the city in the hotel of Lesdiguiére, belonging to marshal Villeroi, wherehe was entertained at the king's expense in the same manner as he would have

been at the Louvre. The next day (May 8, 1717.) the regent of France went to

make him a visit in the before mentioned hotel, and the day afterwards the

young king, then an infant, was sent to him under the care of his governor,

the marshal de Villeroi, whose father had been governor to Lewis XIV. On

this  occasion,  they,  by  a  polite  artifice,  spared  the  czar  the  troublesome

restraint of returning this visit immediately after receiving it, by allowing an

interview  of  two  days  for  him  to  receive  the  respects  of  the  several

corporations  of  the  city;  the  second  night  he  went  to  visit  the  king:  the

household were all under arms, and they brought the young king quite to the

door  of  the  czar's  coach.  Peter,  surprised  and  uneasy  at  the  prodigious

concourse of people assembled about the infant monarch, took him in his

arms, and carried him in that manner for some time.

  Certain ministers, of more cunning than understanding, have pretended in

their writings, that marshal de Villeroi wanted to make the young king of

France take the upper hand on this occasion, and that the czar made use of

this  stratagem  to  overturn  the  ceremonial  under  the  appearance  of  good

nature and tenderness; but this notion is equally false and absurd. The natural

good breeding of the French court, and the respect due to the person of Peter

the Great, would not permit a thought of turning the honours intended him

into an affront. The ceremonial consisted in doing every thing for a great

monarch and a great man, that he himself could have desired, if he had given

any attention to matters of this kind. The journeys of the emperor Charles IV.

Sigismund, and Charles V. to France, were by no means comparable, in point

of splendour, to this of Peter the Great. They visited this kingdom only from

motives of political interest, and at a time when the arts and sciences, as yet

in their infancy, could not render the era of their journey so memorable: but

when Peter the Great, on his going to dine with the duke d'Antin, in the

palace of Petitbourg, about three leagues out of Paris, saw his own picture,

which had been drawn for the occasion, brought on a sudden, and placed in a

room where he was, he then found that no people in the world knew so well

how to receive such a guest as the French.

  He was still more surprised, when, on going to see them strike the medals

in  the  long  gallery  of  the  Louvre,  where  all  the  king's  artists  are  so

handsomely lodged; a medal, which they were then striking, happening to fallto the ground, the czar stooped hastily down to take it up, when he beheld his

own head engraved thereon, and on the reverse a Fame standing with one

foot upon a globe, and underneath these words from Virgil-'Vires acquirit

eundo;' an allusion equally delicate and noble, and elegantly adapted to his

travels and his fame. Several of these medals in gold were presented to him,

and to all those who attended him. Wherever he went to view the works of

any artists, they laid the master-pieces of their performances at his feet, which

they besought him to accept. In a word, when he visited the manufactories of

the  Gobelins,  the  workshop  of  the  king's  statuaries,  painters,  goldsmiths,

jewellers, or mathematical instrument-makers, whatever seemed to strike his

attention at any of those places, were always offered him in the king's name.

  Peter, who was a mechanic, an artist, and a geometrician, went to visit the

academy of sciences, who received him with an exhibition of every thing

they  had  most  valuable  and  curious;  but  they  had  nothing  so  curious  as

himself. He corrected, with his own hand, several geographical errors in the

charts of his own dominions, and especially in those of the Caspian Sea.

Lastly, he condescended to become one of the members of that academy, and

afterwards continued a correspondence in experiments and discoveries with

those among whom he had enrolled himself as a simple brother. If we would

find examples of such travellers as Peter, we must go back to the times of a

Pythagoras and an Anacharsis, and even they did not quit the command of a

mighty empire, to go in search of instruction.

  And  here  we  cannot  forbear  recalling  to  the  mind  of  the  reader  the

transport with which Peter the Great was seized on viewing the monument of

cardinal Richelieu. Regardless of the beauties of the sculpture, which is a

master-piece of its kind, he only admired the image of a minister who had

rendered himself so famous throughout Europe by disturbing its peace, and

restored to France that glory which she had lost after the death of Henry IV.

It is well known, that, embracing the statue with rapture, he burst forth into

this exclamation-'Great man! I would have bestowed one half of my empire

on thee, to have taught me to govern the other.' And now, before he quitted

France, he was desirous to see the famous madame de Maintenon, whom he

knew to be, in fact, the widow of Lewis XIV. and who was now drawing very

near  her  end;  and  his  curiosity  was  the  more  excited  by  the  kind  of

conformity he found between his own marriage and that of Lewis; thoughwith  this  difference  between  the  king  of  France  and  him,  that  he  had

publickly  married  an  heroine,  whereas  Lewis  XIV.  had  only  privately

enjoyed an amiable wife.

  The  czarina  did  not  accompany  her  husband  in  this  journey:  he  was

apprehensive that the excess of ceremony would be troublesome to her, as

well as the curiosity of a court little capable of distinguishing the true merit of

a woman, who had braved death by the side of her husband both by sea and

land, from the banks of the Pruth to the coast of Finland.


  CHAPTER XXVIII.

  Of the return of the czar to his dominions.-Of his politics and occupations.

  The  behaviour  of  the  Sorbonne  to  Peter,  when  he  went  to  visit  the

mausoleum of cardinal Richelieu, deserves to be treated of by itself.


  Some  doctors  of  this  university  were  desirous  to  have  the  honour  of

bringing about a union between the Greek and Latin churches. Those who are

acquainted with antiquity need not be told, that the Christian religion was

first introduced into the west by the Asiatic Greeks: that it was born in the

east, and that the first fathers, the first councils, the first liturgies, and the first

rites, were all from the east; that there is not a single title or office in the

hierarchy,  but  was  in  Greek,  and  thereby  plainly  shews  the  same  from

whence they are all derived to us. Upon the division of the Roman empire, it

was next to impossible, but that sooner or later there must be two religions as

well  as  two  empires,  and  that  the  same  schism  should  arise  between  the

eastern and western Christians, as between the followers of Osman and the

Persians.

  It is this schism which certain doctors of the Sorbonne thought to crush all

at once by means of a memorial which they presented to Peter the Great, and

effect what Pope Leo XI. and his successors had in vain laboured for many

ages to bring about, by legates, councils, and even money. These doctors

should have known, that Peter the Great, who was the head of the Russian

church, was not likely to acknowledge the pope's authority. They expatiated

in their memorial on the liberties of the Gallican church, which the czar gave

himself no concern about. They asserted that the popes ought to be subject tothe  councils,  and  that  a  papal  decree  is  not  an  article  of  faith:  but  their

representations were in vain; all they got by their pains, was to make the pope

their enemy by such free declarations, at the same time that they pleased

neither the czar nor the Russian church.

  There were, in this plan of union, certain political views, which the good

fathers  did  not  understand,  and  some  points  of  controversy  which  they

pretended  to  understand,  and  which  each  party  explained  as  they  thought

proper.  It  was  concerning  the  Holy  Ghost,  which,  according  to  the  Latin

church, proceeds from the Father and Son, and which, at present, according

to the Greeks, proceeds from the Father through the Son, after having, for a

considerable  time,  proceeded  from  the  Father  only:  on  this  occasion  they

quoted a passage in St. Epiphanius, where it is said, 'That the Holy Ghost is

neither brother to the Son, nor grandson to the Father.'

  But Peter, when he left Paris, had other business to mind, than that of

clearing  up  passages  in  St.  Epiphanius.  Nevertheless,  he  received  the

memorial of the Sorbonne with his accustomed affability. That learned body

wrote to some of the Russian bishops, who returned a polite answer, though

the major part of them were offended at the proposed union. It was in order to

remove any apprehensions of such a union, that Peter, some time afterwards,

namely,  in  1718,  when  he  had  driven  the  jesuits  out  of  his  dominions,

instituted the ceremony of a burlesque conclave.

  He had at his court an old fool, named Jotof, who had learned him to

write, and who thought he had, by that trivial service, merited the highest

honours and most important posts: Peter, who sometimes softened the toils of

government, by indulging his people in amusements, which befitted a nation

as yet not entirely reformed by his labours, promised his writing-master, to

bestow  on  him  one  of  the  highest  dignities  in  the  world;  accordingly,  he

appointed him knéz papa, or supreme pontiff, with an appointment of two

thousand crowns, and assigned him a house to live in, in the Tartarian quarter

at  Petersburg.  He  was  installed  by  a  number  of  buffoons,  with  great

ceremony, and four fellows who stammered were appointed to harangue him

on  the  accession.  He  created  a  number  of  cardinals,  and  marched  in

procession at their head, and the whole sacred college was made drunk with

brandy. After the death of this Jotof, an officer, named Buturlin, was made

Pope: this ceremony has been thrice renewed at Moscow and Petersburg, theridiculousness of which, though it appeared of no moment, yet has by its

ridiculousness  confirmed  the  people  in  their  aversion  to  a  church,  which

pretended to the supreme power, and whose church had anathematized so

many crowned heads. In this manner did the czar revenge the cause of twenty

emperors of Germany, ten kings of France, and a number of other sovereigns;

and this was all the advantage the Sorbonne gained from its impolitic attempt

to unite the Latin and Greek churches.

  The czar's journey to France proved of more utility to his kingdom, by

bringing about a connexion with a trading and industrious people, than could

have arisen from the projected union between two rival churches; one of

which will always maintain its ancient independence, and the other its new

superiority.

  Peter carried several artificers with him out of France, in the same manner

as he had done out of England; for every nation, which he visited, thought it

an honour to assist him in his design of introducing the arts and sciences into

his new-formed state, and to be instrumental in this species of new creation.

  In  this  expedition,  he  drew  up  a  sketch  of  a  treaty  of  commerce  with

France, and which he put into the hands of his ministers at Holland, as soon

as  he  returned  thither,  but  it  was  not  signed  by  the  French  ambassador,

Chateauneuf, till the 15th August, 1717, at the Hague. This treaty not only

related to trade, but likewise to bringing about peace in the North. The king

of France and the elector of Brandenburg accepted of the office of mediators,

which Peter offered them. This was sufficient to give the king of England to

understand, that the czar was not well pleased with him, and crowned the

hopes of baron Gortz, who from that time, left nothing undone to bring about

a union between Charles and Peter, to stir up new enemies against George I.

and to assist cardinal Alberoni in his schemes in every part of Europe. Gortz

now paid and received visits publicly from the czar's ministers at the Hague,

to whom he declared, that he was invested with full power from the court of

Sweden to conclude a peace.

  The  czar  suffered  Gortz  to  dispose  all  his  batteries,  without  assisting

therein  himself,  and  was  prepared  either  to  make  peace  with  the  king  of

Sweden, or to carry on the war, and continued still in alliance with the kings

of  Denmark,  Poland,  and  Russia,  and  in  appearance  with  the  elector  ofHanover.

  It  was  evident,  that  he  had  no  fixed  design,  but  that  of  profiting  of

conjunctures and circumstances, and that his main object was to complete the

general establishments he had set on foot. He well knew, that the negotiations

and interests of princes, their leagues, their friendships, their jealousies, and

their enmities, were subject to change with each revolving year, and that

frequently not the smallest traces remain of the greatest efforts in politics. A

simple manufactory, well established, is often of more real advantage to a

state than twenty treaties.

  Peter  having  joined  the  czarina,  who  was  waiting  for  him  in  Holland,

continued his travels with her. They crossed Westphalia, and arrived at Berlin

in a private manner. The new king of Prussia was as much an enemy to

ceremonious vanities, and the pomp of a court, as Peter himself; and it was an

instructive lesson to the etiquette of Vienna and Spain, the punctilio of Italy,

and the politesse of the French court, to see a king, who only made use of a

wooden elbow-chair, who went always in the dress of a common soldier, and

who had banished from his table, not only all the luxuries, but even the more

moderate indulgences of life.

  The czar and czarina observed the same plain manner of living; and had

Charles been with them, the world might have beheld four crowned heads,

with less pomp and state about them than a German bishop, or a cardinal of

Rome. Never were luxury and effeminacy opposed by such noble examples.

  It cannot be denied, that if one of our fellow-subjects had, from mere

curiosity, made the fifth part of the journeys that Peter I. did for the good of

his kingdom, he would have been considered as an extraordinary person, and

one who challenged our consideration. From Berlin he went to Dantzic, still

accompanied by his wife, and from thence to Mittau, where he protected his

niece, the duchess of Courland, lately become a widow. He visited all the

places  he  had  conquered,  made  several  new  and  useful  regulations  in

Petersburg; he then goes to Moscow, where he rebuilds the houses of several

persons that had fallen to ruin; from thence he transports himself to Czaritsin,

on the river Wolga, to stop the incursions of the Cuban Tartars, constructs

lines of communication from the Wolga to the Don, and erects forts at certain

distances, between the two rivers. At the same time he caused the militarycode, which he had lately composed, to be printed, and erected a court of

justice,  to  examine  into  the  conduct  of  his  ministers,  and  to  retrieve  the

disorders  in  his  finances;  he  pardons  several  who  were  found  guilty,  and

punishes others. Among the latter was the great prince Menzikoff himself,

who stood in need of the royal clemency. But a sentence more severe, which

he thought himself obliged to utter against his own son, filled with bitterness

those days, which were, in other respects, covered with so much glory.


  CHAPTER XXIX.

  Proceedings against prince Alexis Petrowitz.


  Peter the Great, at the age of seventeen, had married, in the year 1689,

Eudocia Theodora, or Theodorouna Lapoukin. Bred up in the prejudices of

her country, and incapable of surmounting them like her husband, the greatest

opposition he met with in erecting his empire, and forming his people, came

from her: she was, as is too common to her sex, a slave to superstition; every

new and useful alteration she looked upon as a species of sacrilege; and every

foreigner, whom the czar employed to execute his great designs, appeared to

her no better than as corruptors and innovators.

  Her open and public complaints gave encouragement to the factious, and

those who were the advocates for ancient customs and manners. Her conduct,

in other respects, by no means made amends for such heavy imperfections.

The czar was at length obliged to repudiate her in 1696, and shut her up in a

convent at Susdal, where they obliged her to take the veil under the name of

Helena.

  The  son,  whom  he  had  by  her  in  1690,  was  born  unhappily  with  the

disposition of his mother, and that disposition received additional strength

from his very first education. My memoirs say, that he was entrusted to the

care of superstitious men, who ruined his understanding for ever. 'Twas in

vain that they hoped to correct these first impressions, by giving him foreign

preceptors; their very quality of being foreigners disgusted him. He was not

born destitute of genius; he spoke and wrote German well; he had a tolerable

notion  of  designing,  and  understood  something  of  mathematics:  but  these

very memoirs affirm, that the reading of ecclesiastical books was the ruin ofhim. The young Alexis imagined he saw in these books a condemnation of

every thing which his father had done. There were some priests at the head of

the malcontents, and by the priests he suffered himself to be governed.

  They persuaded him that the whole nation looked with horror upon the

enterprises of Peter; that the frequent illnesses of the czar promised but a

short  life;  and  that  his  son  could  not  hope  to  please  the  nation,  but  by

testifying his aversion for all changes of custom. These murmurs, and these

counsels, did not break out into an open faction or conspiracy, but every thing

seemed to tend that way, and the tempers of the people were inflamed.

  Peter's marriage with Catherine in 1707, and the children which he had by

her,  began  to  sour  the  disposition  of  the  young  prince.  Peter  tried  every

method to reclaim him: he even placed him at the head of the regency for a

year;  he  sent  him  to  travel;  he  married  him  in  1711,  at  the  end  of  the

campaign of Pruth, to the princess of Brunswick. This marriage was attended

with great misfortunes. Alexis, now twenty years old, gave himself up to the

debauchery of youth, and that boorishness of ancient manners he so much

delighted in. These irregularities almost brutalized him. His wife, despised,

ill-treated, wanting even necessaries, and deprived of all comforts, languished

away in disappointment, and died at last of grief, the first of November, 1715.

  She left the prince Alexis one son; and according to the natural order, this

son was one day to become heir to the empire. Peter perceived with sorrow,

that when he should be no more, all his labours were likely to be destroyed

by those of his own blood. After the death of the princess, he wrote a letter to

his son, equally tender and resolute: it finished with these words: 'I will still

wait a little time, to see if you will correct yourself; if not, know that I will

cut  you  off  from  the  succession,  as  we  lop  off  a  useless  member.  Don't

imagine, that I mean only to intimidate you; don't rely upon the title of being

my only son; for if I spare not my own life for my country, and the good of

my people, how shall I spare you? I will rather choose to leave my kingdom

to  a  foreigner  who  deserves  it,  than  to  my  own  son,  who  makes  himself

unworthy of it.'

  This is the letter of a father, but it is still more the letter of a legislator; it

shews us, besides, that the order of succession was not invariably established

in Russia, as in other kingdoms, by those fundamental laws which take awayfrom fathers the right of disinheriting their children; and the czar believed he

had an undoubted prerogative to dispose of an empire which he had founded.

  At this very time the empress Catherine was brought to bed of a prince,

who died afterwards in 1719. Whether this news sunk the courage of Alexis,

or whether it was imprudence or bad counsel, he wrote to his father, that he

renounced the crown, and all hopes of reigning. 'I take God to witness,' says

he, 'and I swear by my soul that I will never pretend to the succession. I put

my children into your hands, and I desire only a provision for life.'

  The  czar  wrote  him  a  second  letter,  as  follows:[98]-'You  speak  of  the

succession, as if I stood in need of your consent in the disposal thereof. I

reproached you with the aversion you have shewn to all kind of business, and

signified to you, that I was highly dissatisfied with your conduct in general;

but to these particulars you have given me no answer. Paternal exhortations

make no impression on you, wherefore I resolved to write you this once for

the last time. If you despise the advice I give you while I am alive, what

regard  will  you  pay  to  them  after  my  death?  But  though  you  had  the

inclination at present to be true to your promises, yet a corrupt priesthood

will be able to turn you at pleasure, and force you to falsify them. They have

no dependance but upon you. You have no sense of gratitude towards him

who gave you your being. Have you ever assisted him in toils and labours

since you arrived at the age of maturity? Do you not censure and condemn,

nay, even affect to hold in detestation, whatever I do for the good of my

people? In a word, I have reason to conclude, that if you survive me, you will

overturn every thing that I have done. Take your choice, either endeavour to

make yourself worthy of the throne, or embrace a monastic state. I expect

your answer, either in writing, or by word of mouth, otherwise I shall treat

you as a common malefactor.'

  This letter was very severe, and it was easy for the prince to have replied,

that he would alter his conduct; instead of which, he only returned a short

answer to his father, desiring permission to turn monk.[100]

  This resolution appeared altogether unnatural; and it may furnish matter of

surprise, that the czar should think of travelling, and leaving a son at home so

obstinate and ill-affected; but, at the same time, his doing so, is next to a

proof, that he thought he had no reason to apprehend a conspiracy from thatson.

  The czar, before he set out for Germany and France, went to pay his son a

visit. The prince, who was at that time ill, or at least feigned himself so,

received  his  father  in  his  bed,  where  he  protested,  with  the  most  solemn

oaths, that he was ready to retire into a cloister. The czar gave him six months

to consider of it, and then set out on his travels with the czarina.

  No sooner was he arrived at Copenhagen, than he heard (what he might

reasonably expect) that the czarowitz conversed only with factions and evil-

minded persons, who strove to feed his discontent. Upon this the czar wrote

to him, that he had to choose between a throne and a convent; and that, if he

had any thoughts of succeeding him, he must immediately set out and join

him at Copenhagen.

  But the confidants of the prince remonstrating to him how dangerous it

would be to trust himself in a place where he could have no friends to advise

him, and where he would be exposed to the anger of an incensed father, and

the machinations of a revengeful step-mother; he, under pretence of going to

join his father at Copenhagen, took the road to Vienna, and threw himself

under the protection of the emperor Charles VI. his brother-in-law, intending

to remain at his court till the death of the czar.

  This adventure of the czarowitz was nearly the same as that of Lewis XI.

of France, who, when he was dauphin, quitted the court of his father Charles

VII. and took refuge with the duke of Burgundy; but the dauphin was much

more culpable than Alexis, inasmuch as he married in direct opposition to his

father's will, raised an army against him, and threw himself into the arms of a

prince, who was Charles's declared enemy, and refused to hearken to the

repeated remonstances of his father, to return back to his court.

  The czarowitz, on the contrary, had married only in compliance with his

father's orders, had never rebelled against him, nor raised an army, nor taken

refuge in the dominions of an enemy, and returned to throw himself at his

feet, upon the very first letter he received from him; for, as soon as Peter

knew that his son had been at Vienna, and had afterwards retired to Tyrol,

and from thence to Naples, which, at that time, belonged to the emperor, he

dispatched  Romanzoff,  a  captain  of  his  guards,  and  the  privy-counsellor

Tolstoy, with a letter written with his own hand, and dated at Spa, the 21st ofJuly, N. S. 1717. They found the prince at Naples, in the castle of St. Elme,

and delivered to him his father's letter, which was as follows:-

  'I  now  write  to  you  for  the  last  time,  to  acquaint  you,  that  you  must

instantly comply with my orders, which will be communicated to you by

Tolstoy  and  Romanzoff.  If  you  obey,  I  give  you  my  sacred  word  and

promise, that I will not punish you; and that, if you will return home, I will

love you more than ever; but, if you do not, I, as your father, and in virtue of

the authority which God has given me over you, denounce against you my

eternal curse; and, as your sovereign, declare to you, that I will find means to

punish your disobedience, in which I trust God himself will assist me, and

espouse the just cause of an injured parent and king.

  'For the rest, remember that I have never laid any restraint upon you. Was

I obliged to leave you at liberty to choose your way of life? Had I not the

power in my own hands to oblige you to conform to my will? I had only to

command, and make myself obeyed.'

  The  viceroy  of  Naples  found  it  no  difficult  matter  to  persuade  the

czarowitz  to  return  to  his  father.  This  is  an  incontestable  proof  that  the

emperor had no intention to enter into any engagements with the prince, that

might give umbrage to his father. Alexis therefore returned with the envoys,

bringing with him his mistress, Aphrosyne, who had been the companion of

his elopement.

  We may consider the czarowitz as an ill-advised young man, who had

gone to Vienna and to Naples, instead of going to Copenhagen, agreeable to

the orders of his father and sovereign. Had he been guilty of no other crime

than this, which is common enough with young and giddy persons, it was

certainly very excusable. The prince determined to return to his father, on the

faith of his having taken God to witness, that he not only would pardon him,

but that he would love him better than ever. But it appears by the instructions

given to the two envoys who went to fetch him, and even by the czar's own

letter, that his father required him to declare the persons who had been his

counsellors,  and  also  to  fulfil  the  oath  he  had  made  of  renouncing  the

succession.

  It seemed difficult to reconcile this exclusion of the czarowitz from the

succession, with the other part of the oath, by which the czar had boundhimself in his letter, namely that of loving his son better than ever. Perhaps

divided between paternal love, and the justice he owed to himself and people,

as a sovereign, he might limit the renewal of his affection to his son in a

convent, instead of to that son on a throne: perhaps, likewise, he was in hopes

to reduce him to reason, and to render him worthy of the succession at last,

by making him sensible of the loss of a crown which he had forfeited by his

own  indiscretion.  In  a  circumstance  so  uncommon,  so  intricate,  and  so

afflicting, it may be easily supposed that the minds of both father and son

were under equal perturbation, and hardly consistent with themselves.

  The prince arrived at Moscow on the 13th of February, N. S. 1717; and the

same day went to throw himself at his father's feet, who was returned to the

city from his travels. They had a long conference together, and a report was

immediately  spread  through  the  city,  that  the  prince  and  his  father  were

reconciled, and that all past transactions were buried in oblivion. But the next

day, orders were issued for the regiments of guards to be under arms at break

of day, and for all the czar's ministers, boyards, and counsellors, to repair to

the great hall of the castle; as also for the prelates, together with two monks

of St. Basile, professors of divinity, to assemble in the cathedral, at the tolling

of the great bell. The unhappy prince was then conducted to the great castle

like a prisoner, and being come in his father's presence, threw himself in tears

at his feet, and presented a writing, containing a confession of his faults,

declaring himself unworthy of the succession, and imploring only that his life

might be spared.[101]

  The czar, raising up his son, withdrew with him into a private room, where

he put many questions to him, declaring to him at the same time, that if he

concealed any one circumstance relating to his elopement, his life should

answer for it. The prince was then brought back to the great hall, where the

council was assembled, and the czar's declaration, which had been previously

prepared, was there publicly read in his presence.[102]

  In this piece the czar reproaches his son with all those faults we have

before related, namely, his little application to study, his connexions with the

favourers of the ancient customs and manners of the country, and his ill-

behaviour to his wife.-'He has even violated the conjugal faith,' saith the czar

in his manifesto, 'by giving his affection to a prostitute of the most servile and

low condition, during the life-time of his lawful spouse.' It is certain thatPeter himself had repudiated his own wife in favour of a captive, but that

captive was a person of exemplary merit, and the czar had just cause for

discontent  against  his  wife,  who  was  at  the  same  time  his  subject.  The

czarowitz, on the contrary, had abandoned his princess for a young woman,

hardly known to any one, and who had no other merit but that of personal

charms. So far there appears some errors of a young man, which a parent

ought to reprimand in secret, and which he might have pardoned.

  The  czar,  in  his  manifesto,  next  reproaches  his  son  with  his  flight  to

Vienna, and his having put himself under the emperor's protection; and adds,

that  he  had  calumniated  his  father,  by  telling  the  emperor  that  he  was

persecuted  by  him;  and  that  he  had  compelled  him  to  renounce  the

succession; and, lastly, that he had made intercession with the emperor to

assist him with an armed force.

  Here  it  immediately  occurs,  that  the  emperor  could  not,  with  any

propriety, have entered into a war with the czar on such an occasion; nor

could  he  have  interposed  otherwise  between  an  incensed  father  and  a

disobedient  son,  than  by  his  good  offices  to  promote  a  reconciliation.

Accordingly  we  find,  that  Charles  VI.  contented  himself  with  giving  a

temporary asylum to the fugitive prince, and readily sent him back on the

first requisition of the czar, in consequence of being informed of the place his

son had chosen for his retreat.

  Peter adds, in this terrible piece, that Alexis had persuaded the emperor,

that he went in danger of his life, if he returned back to Russia. Surely it was

in some measure justifying these complaints of the prince, to condemn him to

death at his return, and especially after so solemn a promise to pardon him;

but we shall see, in the course of this history, the cause which afterwards

moved the czar to denounce this ever-memorable sentence. For the present let

us turn our eyes upon an absolute prince, pleading against his son before an

august assembly.-

  'In  this  manner,'  says  he,  'has  our  son  returned;  and  although,  by  his

withdrawing himself and raising calumnies against us, he has deserved to be

punished with death, yet, out of our paternal affection, we pardon his crimes;

but, considering his unworthiness, and the series of his irregular conduct, we

cannot  in  conscience  leave  him  the  succession  to  the  throne  of  Russia;foreseeing that, by his vicious courses, he would, after our decease, entirely

destroy the glory of our nation, and the safety of our dominions, which we

have recovered from the enemy.

  'Now, as we should pity our states and our faithful subjects, if, by such a

successor, we should throw them back into a much worse condition than ever

they  were  yet;  so,  by  the  paternal  authority,  and,  in  quality  of  sovereign

prince, in consideration of the safety of our dominions, we do deprive our

said son Alexis, for his crimes and unworthiness, of the succession after us to

our throne of Russia, even though there should not remain one single person

of our family after us.

  'And we do constitute and declare successor to the said throne after us, our

second son, Peter,[103] though yet very young, having no successor that is

older.

  'We lay upon our said son Alexis our paternal curse, if ever at any time he

pretends to, or reclaims, the said succession.

  'And we desire our faithful subjects, whether ecclesiastics or seculars, of

all ranks and conditions, and the whole Russian nation, in conformity to this

constitution  and  our  will,  to  acknowledge  and  consider  our  son  Peter,

appointed by us to succeed, as lawful successor, and agreeably to this our

constitution, to confirm the whole by oath before the holy altar, upon the holy

gospel, kissing the cross.

  'And all those who shall ever at any time oppose this our will, and who,

from this day forward, shall dare to consider our son Alexis as successor, or

assist him for that purpose, declare them traitors to us and our country. And

we  have  ordered  that  these  presents  shall  be  every  where  published  and

promulgated, to the end that no person may pretend ignorance.'

  It would seem that this declaration had been prepared beforehand for the

occasion, or that it had been drawn up with astonishing dispatch: for the

czarowitz  did  not  return  to  Moscow  till  the  13th  of  February,  and  his

renunciation in favour of the empress Catherine's son is dated the 14th.

  The prince on his part signed his renunciation, whereby he acknowledges

his  exclusion  to  be  just,  as  having  merited  it  by  his  own  fault  and

unworthiness; 'And I do hereby swear,' adds he, 'in presence of God Almightyin the Holy Trinity, to submit in all things to my father's will,' &c.

  These  instruments  being  signed,  the  czar  went  in  procession  to  the

cathedral,  where  they  were  read  a  second  time,  when  the  whole  body  of

clergy  signed  their  approbation  with  their  seals  at  the  bottom,  to  a  copy

prepared  for  that  purpose.[104]  No  prince  was  ever  disinherited  in  so

authentic a manner. There are many states in which an act of this kind would

be of no validity; but in Russia, as in ancient Rome, every father has a power

of depriving his son of his succession, and this power was still stronger in a

sovereign than in a private subject, and especially in such a sovereign as

Peter.

  But,  nevertheless,  it  was  to  be  apprehended,  that  those  who  had

encouraged the prince in his opposition to his father's will, and had advised

him to withdraw himself from his court, might one day endeavour to set aside

a renunciation which had been procured by force, and restore to the eldest

son that crown which had been violently snatched from him to place on the

head of a younger brother by a second marriage. In this case it was easy to

foresee a civil war, and a total subversion of all the great and useful projects

which Peter had so much laboured to establish; and therefore the present

matter in question was to determine between the welfare of near eighteen

millions of souls (which was nearly the number which the empire of Russia

contained  at  that  time),  and  the  interest  of  a  single  person  incapable  of

governing. Hence it became necessary to find out those who were disaffected,

and accordingly the czar a second time threatened his son with the most fatal

consequences  if  he  concealed  any  thing:  and  the  prince  was  obliged  to

undergo  a  judicial  examination  by  his  father,  and  afterwards  by  the

commissioners appointed for that purpose.

  One principal article of the charge brought against him, and that which

served  chiefly  to  his  condemnation,  was,  a  letter  from  one  Beyer,  the

emperor's resident at the court of Russia, dated at Petersburg, after the flight

of the prince. This letter makes mention of a mutiny in the Russian army then

assembled at Mecklenburg, and that several officers talked of clapping up

Catherine and her son in the prison where the late empress, whom Peter had

repudiated, was then confined, and of placing the czarowitz on the throne, as

soon as he could be found out and brought back. These idle projects fell to

the ground of themselves, and there was not the least appearance that Alexishad ever countenanced them. The whole was only a piece of news related by

a foreigner; the letter itself was not directed to the prince, and he had only a

copy thereof transmitted him while at Vienna.

  But a charge of a more grievous nature appeared against him, namely, the

heads of a letter written with his own hand, and which he had sent, while at

the court of Vienna, to the senators and prelates of Russia, in which were the

following very strong assertions:-'The continual ill-treatment which I have

suffered without having deserved it, have at length obliged me to consult my

peace  and  safety  by  flight.  I  have  narrowly  escaped  being  confined  in  a

convent, by those who have already served my mother in the same manner. I

am now under the protection of a great prince, and I beseech you not to

abandon me in this conjuncture.'

  The  expression,  in  this  conjuncture,  which  might  be  construed  into  a

seditious meaning, appeared to have been blotted out, and then inserted again

by his own hand, and afterwards blotted out a second time; which shewed it

to be the action of a young man disturbed in his mind, following the dictates

of his resentment, and repenting of it at the very instant. There were only the

copies of these letters found: they were never sent to the persons they were

designed  for,  the  court  of  Vienna  having  taken  care  to  stop  them;  a

convincing proof that the emperor never intended to break with the czar, or to

assist the son to take up arms against his father.

  Several witnesses were brought to confront the prince, and one of them,

named  Afanassief,  deposed,  that  he  had  formerly  heard  him  speak  these

words,-'I shall mention something to the bishops, who will mention it again

to the lower clergy, and they to the parish priests, and the crown will be

placed on my head whether I will or not.'

  His  own  mistress,  Aphrosyne,  was  likewise  brought  to  give  evidence

against him. The charge, however, was not well supported in all its parts;

there did not appear to have been any regular plan formed, any chain of

intrigues,  or  any  thing  like  a  conspiration  or  combination,  nor  the  least

shadow of preparation for a change in the government. The whole affair was

that of a son, of a depraved and factious disposition, who thought himself

injured by his father, who fled from him, and who wished for his death; but

this son was heir to the greatest monarchy in our hemisphere, and in hissituation and place he could not be guilty of trivial faults.

  After the accusations of his mistress, another witness was brought against

him, in relation to the former czarina his mother, and the princess Mary his

sister. He was charged with having consulted the former in regard to his

flight,  and  of  having  mentioned  it  to  the  princess  Mary.  The  bishop  of

Rostow, who was the confidant of all three, having been seized, deposed, that

the two princesses, who were then shut up in a convent, had expressed their

wishes for a revolution in affairs that might restore them their liberty, and had

even encouraged the prince, by their advice, to withdraw himself out of the

kingdom.  The  more  natural  their  resentment  was,  the  more  it  was  to  be

apprehended. We shall see, at the end of this chapter, what kind of a person

the bishop of Rostow was, and what had been his conduct.

  The  czarowitz  at  first  denied  several  facts  of  this  nature  which  were

alleged  against  him,  and  by  this  very  behaviour  subjected  himself  to  the

punishment of death, with which his father had threatened him in case he did

not make an open and sincere confession.

  At  last,  however,  he  acknowledged  several  disrespectful  expressions

against his father, which were laid to his charge, but excused himself by

saying, he had been hurried away by passion and drink.

  The czar himself drew up several new interrogations. The fourth ran as

follows:-

  'When you found by Beyer's letter that there was a mutiny among the

troops in Mecklenburg, you seemed pleased with it; you must certainly have

had some reason for it; and I imagine you would have joined the rebels even

during my life-time?'

  This was interrogating the prince on the subject of his private thoughts,

which, though they might be revealed to a father, who may, by his advice,

correct them, yet might they also with justice be concealed from a judge, who

decides only upon acknowledged facts. The private sentiments of a man's

heart have nothing to do in a criminal process, and the prince was at liberty

either to deny them or disguise them, in such manner as he should think best

for his own safety, as being under no obligation to lay open his heart, and yet

we find him returning the following answer: 'If the rebels had called upon me

during  your  life-time,  I  do  verily  believe  I  should  have  joined  them,supposing I had found them sufficiently strong.'

  It is hardly conceivable that he could have made this reply of himself, and

it would be full as extraordinary, at least according to the custom in our part

of the world, to condemn a person for confessing that he might have thought

in a certain manner in a conjuncture that never happened.

  To this strange confession of his private thoughts, which had till then been

concealed in the bottom of his heart, they added proofs that could hardly be

admitted as such in a court of justice in any other country.

  The  prince,  sinking  under  his  misfortunes,  and  almost  deprived  of  his

senses, studied within himself, with all the ingenuity of fear, for whatever

could most effectually serve for his destruction; and at length acknowledged,

that in private confession to the archpriest James, he had wished his father

dead; and that his confessor made answer, 'God will pardon you this wish: we

all wish the same.'

  The canons of our church do not admit of proofs resulting from private

confession, inasmuch as they are held inviolable secrets between God and the

penitent: and both the Greek and Latin churches are agreed, that this intimate

and secret correspondence between a sinner and the Deity are beyond the

cognizance of a temporal court of justice. But here the welfare of a kingdom

and  a  king  were  concerned.  The  archpriest,  being  put  to  the  torture,

confirmed  all  that  the  prince  had  revealed;  and  this  trial  furnished  the

unprecedented  instance  of  a  confessor  accused  by  his  penitent,  and  that

penitent  by  his  own  mistress.  To  this  may  be  added  another  singular

circumstance,  namely,  the  archbishop  of  Rezan  having  been  involved  in

several accusations on account of having spoken too favourably of the young

czarowitz in one of his sermons, at the time that his father's resentment first

broke out against him; that weak prince declared, in his answer to one of the

interrogations, that he had depended on the assistance of that prelate, at the

same time that he was at the head of the ecclesiastical court, which the czar

had consulted in relation to this criminal process against his son, as we shall

see in the course of this chapter.

  There is another remark to be made in this extraordinary trial, which we

find so very lamely related in the absurd History of Peter the Great, by the

pretended bojar Nestersuranoy, and that is the following:  Among  other  answers  which  the  czarowitz  Alexis  made  to  the  first

question put to him by his father, he acknowledges, that while he was at

Vienna, finding that he could not be admitted to see the emperor, he applied

himself to count Schonborn, the high chamberlain, who told him, the emperor

would not abandon him, and that as soon as occasion should offer, by the

death of his father, that he would assist him to recover the throne by force of

arms. 'Upon which,' adds the prince, 'I made him the following answer: "This

is what I by no means desire: if the emperor will only grant me his protection

for the present, I ask no more."' This deposition is plain, natural, and carries

with  it  strong  marks  of  the  truth;  for  it  would  have  been  the  height  of

madness to have asked the emperor for an armed force to dethrone his father,

and  no  one  would  have  ventured  to  have  made  such  an  absurd  proposal,

either to the emperor, prince Eugene, or to the council. This deposition bears

date in the month of February, and four months afterwards, namely, after the

1st  of  July,  and  towards  the  latter  end  of  the  proceedings  against  the

czarowitz, that prince is made to say, in the last answers he delivered in

writing:-

  'Being unwilling to imitate my father in any thing, I endeavoured to secure

myself the succession by any means whatever, excepting such as were just. I

attempted to get it by a foreign assistance; and, had I succeeded, and that the

emperor had fulfilled what he had promised me, to replace me on the throne

of Russia even by force of arms, I would have left nothing undone to have

got possession of it. For instance, if the emperor had demanded of me, in

return for his services, a body of my own troops to fight for him against any

power whatever, that might be in arms against him, or a large sum of money

to defray the charges of a war, I should have readily granted every thing he

asked, and should have gratified his ministers and generals with magnificent

presents. I would at my own expense have maintained the auxiliary troops he

might have furnished to put me in possession of the crown; and, in a word, I

should have thought nothing too much to have accomplished my ends.'

  This  answer  seems  greatly  strained,  and  appears  as  if  the  unhappy

deponent was exerting his utmost efforts to appear more culpable than he

really was; nay, he seems to have spoken absolutely contrary to truth in a

capital point. He says the emperor had promised to procure him the crown by

force of arms. This is absolutely false: Schonborn had given him hopes that,after the death of his father, the emperor might assist him to recover his birth-

right; but the emperor himself never made him any promise. And lastly, the

matter in question was not if he should take arms against his father, but if he

should succeed him after his death?

  By this last deposition he declares what he believes he should have done,

had he been obliged to dispute his birth-right, which he had not formally

renounced till after his journey to Vienna and Naples. Here then we have a

second  deposition,  not  of  any  thing  he  had  already  done,  and  the  actual

commission of which, would have subjected him to the rigorous inquiry of

the law, but of what he imagines he should have done had occasion offered,

and which consequently is no subject of a juridical inquiry. Thus does he

twice  together  accuse  himself  of  private  thoughts  that  he  might  have

entertained in a future time. The known world does not produce an instance

of a man tried and condemned for vague and inconsequential notions that

came into his head, and which he never communicated to any one; nor is

there a court of justice in Europe that will hear a man accuse himself of

criminal thoughts; nay, we believe that they are not punished by God himself,

unless accompanied by a fixed resolution to put them in practice.

  To these natural reflections it may be answered, that the czarowitz had

given his father a just right to punish him, by having withheld the names of

several of the accomplices of his flight. His pardon was promised him only

on condition of making a full and open confession, which he did not till it

was too late. Lastly, after so public an affair, it was not in human nature that

Alexis  should  ever  forgive  a  brother  in  favour  of  whom  he  had  been

disinherited; therefore, it was thought better to punish one guilty person, than

to  expose  a  whole  nation  to  danger,  and  herein  the  rigour  of  justice  and

reasons of state acted in concert.

  We must not judge of the manners and laws of one nation by those of

others.  The  czar  was  possessed  of  the  fatal,  but  incontestable  right  of

punishing  his  son  with  death,  for  the  single  crime  of  having  withdrawn

himself out of the kingdom against his consent; and he thus explains himself

in his declaration addressed to the prelates and others, who composed the

high courts of justice. 'Though, according to all laws, civil and divine, and

especially those of this empire, which grant an absolute jurisdiction to fathers

over their children (even fathers in private life) we have a full and unlimitedpower to judge our son for his crimes according to our pleasure, without

asking the advice of any person whatsoever: yet, as men are more liable to

prejudice and partiality in their own affairs, than in those of others, and as the

most eminent and expert physicians rely not on their judgment concerning

themselves, but call in the advice and assistance of others; so we, under the

fear  of  God,  and  an  awful  dread  of  offending  him,  in  like  manner  make

known our disease, and apply to you for a cure; being apprehensive of eternal

death, if ignorant perhaps of the nature of our distemper, we should attempt

to cure ourselves; and the rather as in a solemn appeal to Almighty God, I

have signed, sworn, and confirmed a promise of pardon to my son, in case he

should declare to me the truth.

  'And  though  he  has  violated  this  promise,  by  concealing  the  most

important circumstances of his rebellious design against us; yet that we may

not in any thing swerve from our obligations, we pray you to consider this

affair with seriousness and attention, and report what punishment he deserves

without favour or partiality either to him or me; for should you apprehend

that he deserves but a slight punishment, it will be disagreeable to me. I

swear to you by the great God and his judgments, that you have nothing to

fear on this head.

  'Neither let the reflection of your being to pass sentence on the son of your

prince have any influence on you, but administer justice without respect of

persons, and destroy not your own souls and mine also, by doing any thing to

injure our country, or upbraid our consciences in the great and terrible day of

judgment.'

  The  czar  afterwards  addressed  himself  to  the  clergy,[105]  by  another

declaration to the same purpose; so that every thing was transacted in the

most authentic manner, and Peter's behaviour through the whole of this affair

was  so  open  and  undisguised,  as  shewed  him  to  be  fully  satisfied  of  the

justice of his cause.

  On the first of July the clergy delivered their opinion in writing. In fact, it

was their opinion only, and not a judgment, which the czar required of them.

The beginning is deserving the attention of all Europe.

  'This affair (say the prelates and the rest of the clergy) does in no wise fall

within the verge of the ecclesiastical court, nor is the absolute power investedin  the  sovereign  of  the  Russian  empire  subject  to  the  cognizance  of  his

people; but he has an unlimited power of acting herein as to him shall seem

best, without any inferior having a right to intermeddle therein.'

  After  their  preamble  they  proceed  to  cite  several  texts  of  scripture,

particularly Leviticus, wherein it is said, 'Cursed be he that curseth his father

or  mother;'  and  the  gospel  of  St.  Matthew,  which  repeats  this  severe

denunciation. And they concluded, after several other quotations,[106] with

these remarkable words:

  'If his majesty is inclinable to punish the offender according to his deeds

and the measure of his crimes, he has before him the examples in the Old

Testament, if on the other hand, he is inclined to shew mercy, he has a pattern

in our Lord Jesus Christ, who receives the prodigal son, when returning with

a contrite heart, who set free the woman taken in adultery, whom the law

sentenced to be stoned to death, and who prefers mercy to burnt-offerings. He

has likewise the example of David, who spared his son Absalom, who had

rebelled against and persecuted him, saying to his captains, when going forth

to  the  fight,  "Spare  my  son  Absalom."  The  father  was  here  inclinable  to

mercy, but divine Justice suffered not the offender to go unpunished.

  'The heart of the czar is in the hands of God; let him take that side to

which it shall please the Almighty to direct him.'

  This  opinion  was  signed  by  eight  archbishops  and  bishops,  four

archpriests, and two professors of divinity; and, as we have already observed,

the metropolitan archbishop of Rezan, the same with whom the prince had

held a correspondence, was the first who signed.

  As soon as the clergy had signed this opinion, they presented it to the czar.

It is easy to perceive that this body was desirous of inclining his mind to

clemency; and nothing can be more beautiful than the contrast between the

mercy of Jesus Christ, and the rigour of the Jewish law, placed before the

eyes of a father, who was the prosecutor of his own son.

  The same day the czarowitz was again examined for the last time, and

signed his final confession in writing, wherein he acknowledges himself 'to

have been a bigot in his youthful days, to have frequented the company of

priests and monks, to have drank with them, and to have imbibed from their

conversations the first impressions of dislike to the duties of his station, andeven to the person of his father.'

  If he made this confession of his own accord, it shews that he must have

been ignorant of the mild advice the body of clergy, whom he thus accuses,

had lately given his father; and it is a still stronger proof, how great a change

the czar had wrought in the manners of the clergy of his time, who, from a

state  of  the  most  deplorable  ignorance,  were  in  so  short  a  time  become

capable of drawing up a writing, which for its wisdom and eloquence might

have  been  owned,  without  a  blush,  by  the  most  illustrious  fathers  of  the

church.

  It is in this last confession that the czarowitz made that declaration on

which we have already commented, viz. that he endeavoured to secure to

himself the succession by any means whatever, except such as were just.

  One  would  imagine,  by  this  last  confession,  that  the  prince  was

apprehensive he had not rendered himself sufficiently criminal in the eyes of

his judges, by his former self-accusations, and that, by giving himself the

character of a dissembler and a bad man, and supposing how he might have

acted had he been the master, he was carefully studying how to justify the

fatal sentence which was about to be pronounced against him, and which was

done on the 5th of July. This sentence will be found, at length, at the end of

this volume; therefore, we shall only observe in this place that it begins, like

the opinion of the clergy, by declaring, that 'it belongs not to subjects to take

cognizance of such an affair, which depends solely on the absolute will of the

sovereign, whose authority is derived from God alone;' and then, after having

set forth the several articles of the charge brought against the prince, the

judges express themselves thus: 'What shall we think of a rebellious design,

almost unparalleled in history, joined to that of a horrid parricide against him,

who was his father in a double capacity?'

  Probably these words have been wrong translated from the trial printed by

order of the czar; for certainly there have been instances in history of much

greater  rebellions;  and  no  part  of  the  proceedings  against  the  czarowitz

discover  any  design  in  him  of  killing  his  father.  Perhaps,  by  the  word

parricide, is understood the deposition made by the prince, that one day he

declared at confession, that he had wished for the death of his father. But,

how  can  a  private  declaration  of  a  secret  thought,  under  the  seal  ofconfession, be a double parricide?

  Be this as it may, the czarowitz was unanimously condemned to die, but

no mention was made in the sentence of the manner in which he was to

suffer. Of one hundred and forty-four judges, there was not one who thought

of a lesser punishment than death. Whereas, an English tract, which made a

great  noise  at  that  time,  observes,  that  if  such  a  cause  had  been  brought

before an English parliament, there would not have been one judge out of one

hundred and forty-four, that would have inflicted even a penalty.

  There cannot be a stronger proof of the difference of times and places. The

consul Manlius would have been condemned by the laws of England to lose

his own life, for having put his son to death; whereas he was admired and

extolled for that action by the rigid Romans: but the same laws would not

punish a prince of Wales for leaving the kingdom, who, as a peer of the

realm, has a right to go and come when he pleases.[107] A criminal design,

not perpetrated, is not punishable by the laws in England[108] or France, but

it is in Russia. A continued formal and repeated disobedience of commands

would, amongst us, be considered only an error in conduct, which ought to be

suppressed; but, in Russia, it was judged a capital crime in the heir of a great

empire, whose ruin might have been the consequence of that disobedience.

Lastly, the czarowitz was culpable towards the whole nation, by his design of

throwing it back into that state of darkness and ignorance, from which his

father had so lately delivered it.

  Such was the acknowledged power of the czar, that he might put his son to

death for disobedience to him, without consulting any one; nevertheless, he

submitted the affair to the judgment of the representatives of the nation, so

that it was in fact the nation itself who passed sentence on the prince; and

Peter  was  so  well  satisfied  with  the  equity  of  his  own  conduct,  that  he

voluntarily submitted it to the judgment of every other nation, by causing the

whole proceedings to be printed and translated into several languages.

  The law of history would not permit us to disguise or palliate aught in the

relation  of  this  tragic  event.  All  Europe  was  divided  in  its  sentiments,

whether  most  to  pity  a  young  prince,  prosecuted  by  his  own  father,  and

condemned to lose his life, by those who were one day to have been his

subjects; or the father, who thought himself under a necessity to sacrifice hisown son to the welfare of his nation.

  It was asserted in several books, published on this subject, that the czar

sent to Spain for a copy of the proceedings against Don Carlos, who had been

condemned to death by his father, king Philip II. But this is false, inasmuch

as Don Carlos was never brought to his trial: the conduct of Peter I. was

totally different from that of Philip. The Spanish monarch never made known

to the world the reasons for which he had confined his son, nor in what

manner that prince died. He wrote letters on this occasion to the pope and the

empress, which were absolutely contradictory to each other. William prince

of Orange accused Philip publicly of having sacrificed his son and his wife to

his jealousy, and to have behaved rather like a jealous and cruel husband, and

an unnatural and murderous father, than a severe and upright judge. Philip

suffered  this  accusation  against  him  to  pass  unanswered:  Peter,  on  the

contrary, did nothing but in the eye of the world; he openly declared, that he

preferred his people to his own son, submitted his cause to the judgment of

the principal persons of his kingdom, and made the whole world the judge of

their proceedings and his own.

  There  was  another  extraordinary  circumstance  attending  this  unhappy

affair,  which  was,  that  the  empress  Catherine,  who  was  hated  by  the

czarowitz, and whom he had publicly threatened with the worst of treatment,

whenever he should mount the throne, was not in any way accessary to his

misfortunes;  and  was  neither  accused,  nor  even  suspected  by  any  foreign

minister residing at the court of Russia, of having taken the least step against

a son-in-law, from whom she had so much to fear. It is true, indeed, that no

one pretends to say she interceded with the czar for his pardon: but all the

accounts  of  these  times,  and  especially  those  of  the  count  de  Bassewitz,

agree, that she was greatly affected with his misfortunes.

  I have now before me the memoirs of a public minister, in which I find the

following words: 'I was present when the czar told the duke of Holstein, that

the czarina Catherine, had begged of him to prevent the sentence passed upon

the czarowitz, being publicly read to that prince. 'Content yourself,' said she,

'with obliging him to turn monk; for this public and formal condemnation of

your son will reflect an odium on your grandson.'

  The czar, however, would not hearken to the intercession of his spouse; hethought there was a necessity to have the sentence publicly read to the prince

himself, in order that he might have no pretence left to dispute this solemn

act, in which he himself acquiesced, and that being dead in law, he could

never after claim a right to the crown.

  Nevertheless, if, after the death of Peter, a formidable party had arose in

favour  of  Alexis,  would  his  being  dead  in  law  have  prevented  him  from

ascending the throne?

  The prince then had his sentence read to him: and the memoirs I have just

mentioned observe, that he fell into a fit on hearing these words: 'The laws

divine  and  ecclesiastical,  civil  and  military,  condemn  to  death,  without

mercy, those whose attempts against their father and their sovereign have

been fully proved.' These fits it is said, turned to an apoplexy, and it was with

great difficulty he was recovered at that time. Afterwards, when he came a

little to himself, and in the dreadful interval, between life and death, he sent

for his father to come to him: the czar accordingly went, and both father and

son  burst  into  a  flood  of  tears.  The  unhappy  culprit  asked  his  offended

parent's forgiveness, which he gave him publicly: then, being in the agonies

of  death,  extreme  unction  was  administered  to  him  in  the  most  solemn

manner, and soon after he expired in the presence of the whole court, the day

after  the  fatal  sentence  had  been  pronounced  upon  him.  His  body  was

immediately carried to the cathedral, where it lay in state, exposed to public

view for four days, after which it was interred in the church of the citadel, by

the side of his late princess; the czar and czarina assisting at the funeral.

  And  here  I  think  myself  indispensably  obliged  to  imitate,  in  some

measure, the conduct of the czar; that is to say, to submit to the judgment of

the public, the several facts which I have related with the most scrupulous

exactness, and not only the facts themselves, but likewise the various reports

which were propagated in relation to them, by authors of the first credit.

Lamberti, the most impartial of any writer on this subject and at the same

time the most exact, and who has confined himself to the simple narrative of

the original and authentic pieces, relating to the affairs of Europe, seems in

this matter to have departed from that impartiality and discernment for which

he is so remarkable; for he thus expresses himself.

  'The czarina, ever anxious for the fortune of her own son, did not sufferthe czar to rest till she had obliged him to commence the proceedings against

the czarowitz, and to prosecute that unhappy prince to death: and, what is still

more extraordinary, the czar, after having given him the knout (which is a

kind of torture) with his own hand, was himself his executioner, by cutting

off his head, which was afterwards so artfully joined to the body, that the

separation could not be perceived, when it was exposed to public view. Some

little time afterwards, the czarina's son died, to the inexpressible regret of her

and the czar. This latter, who had beheaded his own son, coming now to

reflect, that he had no successor, grew exceedingly ill-tempered. Much about

that time also, he was informed, that his spouse, the czarina, was engaged in a

secret and criminal correspondence with prince Menzikoff. This, joined to the

reflection, that she had been the cause of his putting to death with his own

hand his eldest son, made him conceive a design to strip her of the imperial

honours, and shut her up in a convent, in the same manner as he had done his

first wife, who is still living there. It was a custom with the czar to keep a

kind  of  diary  of  his  private  thoughts  in  his  pocket  book,  and  he  had

accordingly entered therein a memorandum of this his intention. The czarina

having found means to gain over to her interest all the pages of the czar's bed-

chamber, one of them finding his pocket-book, which he had carelessly left

on the table, brought it to Catherine, who upon reading this memorandum,

immediately sent for prince Menzikoff, and communicated it to him, and, in a

day or two afterwards, the czar was seized with a violent distemper, of which

he died. This distemper was attributed to poison, on account of its being so

sudden and violent, that it could not be supposed to proceed from a natural

cause, and that the horrible act of poisoning was but too frequently used in

Russia.'

  These  accusations,  thus  handed  down  by  Lamberti,  were  soon  spread

throughout Europe; and, as there still exist a great number of pieces, both in

print and manuscript, which may give a sanction to the belief of this fact to

the latest posterity, I think it is my duty to mention, in this place, what is

come to my knowledge from unexceptionable authority.

  In the first place, then, I take it upon me to declare, that the person who

furnished Lamberti with this strange anecdote, was in fact a native of Russia,

but of a foreign extraction, and who himself did not reside in that country, at

the  time  this  event  happened,  having  left  it  several  years  before.  I  wasformerly acquainted with him; he had been in company with Lamberti, at the

little town of Nyon,[109] whither that writer had retired, and where I myself

have often been. This very man declared to me, that he had never told this

story to Lamberti, but in the light of a report, which had been handed about at

that time.

  This  example  may  suffice  to  shew,  how  easy  it  was  in  former  times,

before the art of printing was found out, for one man to destroy the reputation

of another, in the minds of whole nations, by reason that manuscript histories

were  in  a  few  hands  only,  and  not  exposed  to  general  examination  and

censure, or of the observations of contemporaries, as they now are. A single

line  in  Tacitus  or  Sallust,  nay,  even  in  the  authors  of  the  most  fabulous

legends was enough to render a great prince odious to the half of mankind,

and to perpetuate his name with infamy to successive generations.

  How was it possible that the czar could have beheaded his son with his

own  hand,  when  extreme  unction  was  administered  to  the  latter  in  the

presence of the whole court? Was he dead when the sacred oil was poured

upon his head? When or how could this dissevered head have been rejoined

to  its  trunk?  It  is  notorious,  that  the  prince  was  not  left  alone  a  single

moment, from the first reading of his sentence to him to the instant of his

death.

  Besides, this story of the czar's having had recourse to the sword, acquits

him at least of having made use of poison. I will allow, that it is somewhat

uncommon, that a young man in the vigour of his days should die of a sudden

fright, occasioned by hearing the sentence of his own death read to him, and

especially when it was a sentence that he expected; but, after all, physicians

will tell us that this is not a thing impossible.

  If  the  czar  dispatched  his  son  by  poison,  as  so  many  authors  would

persuade us, he by that means deprived himself of every advantage he might

expect from this fatal process, in convincing all Europe that he had a right to

punish every delinquent. He rendered all the reasons for pronouncing the

condemnation of the czarowitz suspected; and, in fact, accused himself. If he

was desirous of the death of his son, he was in possession of full power to

have  caused  the  sentence  to  be  put  in  execution:  would  a  man  of  any

prudence then, would a sovereign, on whom the eyes of all his neighbourswere  fixed,  have  taken  the  base  and  dastardly  method  of  poisoning  the

person,  over  whose  devoted  head  he  himself  already  held  the  sword  of

justice? Lastly, would he have suffered his memory to have been transmitted

to  posterity  as  an  assassin  and  a  poisoner,  when  he  could  so  easily  have

assumed the character of an upright though severe judge?

  It appears then, from all that has been delivered on this subject in the

preceding pages, that Peter was more the king than the parent; and that he

sacrificed his own son to the sentiments of the father and lawgiver of his

country,  and  to  the  interest  of  his  people,  who,  without  this  wholesome

severity, were on the verge of relapsing again into that state from which he

had taken them. It is evident that he did not sacrifice this son to the ambition

of a step-mother, or to the son he had by her, since he had often threatened

the czarowitz to disinherit him, before Catherine brought him that other son,

whose infirm infancy gave signs of a speedy death, which actually happened

in a very short time afterwards. Had Peter taken this important step merely to

please his wife, he must have been a fool, a madman, or a coward; neither of

which, most certainly, could be laid to his charge. But he foresaw what would

be the fate of his establishments, and of his new-born nation, if he had such a

successor as would not adopt his views. The event has verified this foresight:

the Russian empire is become famous and respectable throughout Europe,

from  which  it  was  before  entirely  separated;  whereas,  had  the  czarowitz

succeeded to the throne, every thing would have been destroyed. In fine,

when this catastrophe comes to be seriously considered, the compassionate

heart shudders, and the rigid applauds.

  This great and terrible event is still fresh in the memories of mankind; and

it is frequently spoken of as a matter of so much surprise, that it is absolutely

necessary to examine what contemporary writers have said of it. One of these

hireling scribblers, who has taken on him the title of historian, speaks thus of

it in a work which he has dedicated to count Bruhl, prime minister to his

Polish majesty, whose name indeed may seem to give some weight to what

he advances. 'Russia was convinced that the czarowitz owed his death to

poison, which had been given him by his mother-in-law.' But this accusation

is overturned by the declaration which the czar made to the duke of Holstein,

that the empress Catherine had advised him to confine his son in a monastery.

  With  regard  to  the  poison  which  the  empress  is  said  to  have  givenafterwards to her husband, that story is sufficiently destroyed by the simple

relation of the affair of the page and pocket-book. What man would think of

making such a memorandum as this, 'I must remember to confine my wife in

a convent?' Is this a circumstance of so trivial a nature, that it must be set

down lest it should be forgotten? If Catherine had poisoned her son-in-law

and her husband she would have committed crimes; whereas, so far from

being suspected of cruelty, she had a remarkable character for lenity and

sweetness of temper.

  It may now be proper to shew what was the first cause of the behaviour of

the czarowitz, of his flight, and of his death, and that of his accomplices, who

fell by the hands of the executioner. It was owing then to mistaken notions in

religion, and to a superstitious fondness for priests and monks. That this was

the real source from whence all his misfortunes were derived, is sufficiently

apparent  from  his  own  confession,  which  we  have  already  set  before  the

reader, and in particular, by that expression of the czar in his letter to his

unhappy son, 'A corrupt priesthood will be able to turn you at pleasure.'

  The following is, almost word for word, the manner in which a certain

ambassador to the court of Russia explains these words.-Several ecclesiastics,

says he, fond of the ancient barbarous customs, and regretting the authority

they had lost by the nation having become more civilized, wished earnestly to

see prince Alexis on the throne, from whose known disposition they expected

a return of those days of ignorance and superstition which were so dear to

them. In the number of these was Dozitheus, bishop of Rostow. This prelate

feigned a revelation from St. Demetrius, and that the saint had appeared to

him, and had assured him as from God himself, that the czar would not live

above three months; that the empress Eudocia, who was then confined in the

convent of Susdal (and had taken the veil under the name of sister Helena),

and the princess Mary the czar's sister, should ascend the throne and reign

jointly with prince Alexis. Eudocia and the princess Mary were weak enough

to  credit  this  imposture,  and  were  even  so  persuaded  of  the  truth  of  this

prediction, that the former quitted her habit and the convent, and throwing

aside the name of sister Helena, reassumed the imperial title and the ancient

dress of the czarina's, and caused the name of her rival Catherine to be struck

out of the form of prayer. And when the lady abbess of the convent opposed

these  proceedings,  Eudocia  answered  her  haughtily-That  as  Peter  hadpunished the strelitzes who had insulted his mother, in like manner would

prince Alexis punish those who had offered an indignity to his. She caused

the abbess to be confined to her apartment. An officer named Stephen Glebo

was  introduced  into  the  convent;  this  man  Eudocia  made  use  of  as  the

instrument of her designs, having previously won him over to her interest by

heaping favours on him. Glebo caused Dozitheus's prediction to be spread

over the little town of Susdal, and the neighbourhood thereof. But the three

months being nearly expired, Eudocia reproached the bishop with the czar's

being still alive, 'My father's sins,' answered Dozitheus, 'have been the cause

of this; he is still in purgatory, and has acquainted me therewith.' Upon this

Eudocia caused a thousand masses for the dead to be said, Dozitheus assuring

her that this would not fail of having the desired effect: but in about a month

afterwards, he came to her and told, that his father's head was already out of

purgatory; in a month afterwards he was freed as far as his waist, so that then

he only stuck in purgatory by his feet; but as soon as they should be set free,

which was the most difficult part of the business, the czar would infallibly

die.

  The princess Mary, persuaded by Dozitheus, gave herself up to him, on

condition that his father should be immediately released from purgatory, and

the prediction accomplished, and Glebo continued his usual correspondence

with the old czarina.

  It was chiefly on the faith of these predictions that the czarowitz quitted

the kingdom, and retired into a foreign country, to wait for the death of his

father.  However  the  whole  scheme  was  soon  discovered;  Dozitheus  and

Glebo were seized; the letters of the princess Mary to Dozitheus, and those of

sister  Helena  to  Glebo,  were  read  in  the  open  senate.  In  consequence  of

which, the princess Mary was shut up in the fortress of Schusselbourg, and

the  old  czarina  removed  to  another  convent,  where  she  was  kept  a  close

prisoner. Dozitheus and Glebo, together with the other accomplices of these

idle and superstitious intrigues, were put to the torture, as were likewise the

confidants  of  the  czarowitz's  flight.  His  confessor,  his  preceptor,  and  the

steward of his household, all died by the hands of the executioner.

  Such then was the dear and fatal price at which Peter the Great purchased

the happiness of his people, and such were the numberless obstacles he had to

surmount in the midst of a long and dangerous war without doors, and anunnatural rebellion at home. He saw one half of his family plotting against

him, the majority of the priesthood obstinately bent to frustrate his designs,

and almost the whole nation for a long time opposing its own felicity, of

which as yet it was not become sensible. He had prejudices to overcome, and

discontents to sooth. In a word, there wanted a new generation formed by his

care, who would at length entertain the proper ideas of happiness and glory,

which their fathers were not able to comprehend or support.


  CHAPTER XXX.

  Works and establishments in 1718, and the following years.


  Throughout the whole of the foregoing dreadful catastrophe, it appeared

clearly, that Peter had acted only as the father of his country, and that he

considered his people as his family. The punishments he had been obliged to

inflict  on  such  of  them,  who  had  endeavoured  to  obstruct  or  impede  the

happiness of the rest, were necessary, though melancholy sacrifices, made to

the general good.

  1718.] This year, which was the epoch of the disinheriting and death of his

eldest son, was also that of the greatest advantage he procured to his subjects,

by  establishing  a  general  police  hitherto  unknown;  by  the  introduction  or

improvement  of  manufactures  and  works  of  every  kind,  by  opening  new

branches of trade, which now began to flourish, and by the construction of

canals, which joined rivers, seas, and people, that nature had separated from

each other. We have here none of those striking events which charm common

readers;  none  of  those  court-intrigues  which  are  the  food  of  scandal  and

malice,  nor  of  those  great  revolutions  which  amaze  the  generality  of

mankind;  but  we  behold  the  real  springs  of  public  happiness,  which  the

philosophic eye delights to contemplate.

  He now appointed a lieutenant-general of police over the whole empire,

who was to hold his court at Petersburg, and from thence preserve order from

one end of the kingdom to the other. Extravagance in dress, and the still more

dangerous extravagance of gaming, were prohibited under severe penalties;

schools for teaching arithmetic, which had been first set on foot in 1716, were

now established in many towns in Russia. The hospitals, which had beenbegan, were now finished, endowed, and filled with proper objects.

  To these we may add the several useful establishments which had been

projected  some  time  before,  and  which  were  completed  a  few  years

afterwards. The great towns were now cleared of those innumerable swarms

of beggars, who will not follow any other occupation but that of importuning

those who are more industrious than themselves, and who lead a wretched

and shameful life at the expense of others: an abuse too much overlooked in

other nations.

  The rich were obliged to build regular and handsome houses in Petersburg,

agreeable  to  their  circumstances,  and,  by  a  master-stroke  of  police,  the

several materials were brought carriage free to the city, by the barks and

waggons which returned empty from the neighbouring provinces.

  Weights and measures were likewise fixed upon an uniform plan, in the

same manner as the laws. This uniformity, so much, but in vain desired, in

states  that  have  for  many  ages  been  civilized,  was  established  in  Russia

without the least difficulty or murmuring; and yet we fancy that this salutary

regulation is impracticable amongst us.

  The prices of the necessaries of life were also fixed. The city of Petersburg

was well lighted with lamps during the night; a convenience which was first

introduced in Paris by Louis XIV., and to which Rome is still a stranger.

Pumps were erected for supplying water in cases of fire; the streets were well

paved, and rails put up for the security of foot passengers: in a word, every

thing was provided that could minister to safety, decency, and good order,

and  to  the  quicker  dispatch  and  convenience  of  the  inland  trade  of  the

country.  Several  privileges  were  granted  to  foreigners,  and  proper  laws

enacted to prevent the abuse of those privileges. In consequence of these

useful and salutary regulations, Petersburg and Moscow put on a new face.

  The  iron  and  steel  manufactories  received  additional  improvements,

especially those which the czar had founded at about ten miles distance from

Petersburg, of which he himself was the first superintendant, and wherein no

less than a thousand workmen were employed immediately under his eye. He

went in person to give directions to those who farmed the corn-mills, powder-

mills, and mills for sawing timber, and to the managers of the manufactories

for cordage and sail-cloth, to the brick-makers, slaters, and the cloth-weavers.Numbers of workmen in every branch came from France to settle under him;

these were the fruits he reaped from his travels.

  He established a board of trade, which was composed of one half natives,

and the other half foreigners, in order that justice might be equally distributed

to all artists and workmen. A Frenchman settled a manufactory for making

fine  looking-glass  at  Petersburg,  with  the  assistance  of  prince  Menzikoff.

Another set up a loom for working curious tapestry, after the manner of the

Gobelins; and this manufactory still meets with great encouragement. A third

succeeded in making of gold and silver thread, and the czar ordered that no

more than four thousand marks of gold or silver should be expended in these

works  in  the  space  of  a  year;  by  this  means  to  prevent  the  too  great

consumption of bullion in the kingdom.

  He  gave  thirty  thousand  rubles,  that  is,  about  one  hundred  and  fifty

thousand French livres,[110] together with all the materials and instruments

necessary  for  making  the  several  kinds  of  woollen  stuffs.  By  this  useful

bounty he was enabled to clothe all his troops with the cloth made in his own

country; whereas, before that time, it was purchased from Berlin and other

foreign kingdoms.

  They made as fine linen cloth in Moscow as in Holland; and at his death

there were in that capital and at Jaroslaw, no less than fourteen linen and

hempen manufactories.

  It could certainly never be imagined, at the time that silk sold in Europe

for its weight in gold, that one day there would arise on the banks of the lake

Ladoga, in the midst of a frozen region, and among unfrequented marshes, a

magnificent  and  opulent  city,  where  the  silks  of  Persia  should  be

manufactured in as great perfection as at Ispahan. Peter, however, undertook

this  great  phenomenon  in  commerce,  and  succeeded  in  the  attempt.  The

working  of  iron  mines  was  carried  to  their  highest  degree  of  perfection;

several other mines of gold and silver were discovered, and the council of

mines was appointed to examine and determine, whether the working of these

would bring in a profit adequate to the expense.

  But, to make so many different arts and manufactures flourish, and to

establish so many various undertakings, it was not alone sufficient to grant

patents,  or  to  appoint  inspectors:  it  was  necessary  that  our  great  foundershould behold all these pass under his own eye in their beginnings, and work

at them with his own hands, in the same manner as we have already seen him

working  at  the  construction,  the  rigging,  and  the  sailing  of  a  ship.  When

canals were to be dug in marshy and almost impassable grounds, he was

frequently seen at the head of the workmen digging the earth, and carrying it

away himself.

  In this same year (1718) he formed the plan of the canal and sluices of

Ladoga: this was intended to make a communication between the Neva and

another  navigable  river,  in  order  for  the  more  easy  conveyance  of

merchandize  to  Petersburg,  without  taking  the  great  circuit  of  the  lake

Ladoga, which, on account of the storms that prevailed on the coast, was

frequently impassable for barks or small vessels. Peter levelled the ground

himself, and they still preserve the tools which he used in digging up and

carrying  off  the  earth.  The  whole  court  followed  the  example  of  their

sovereign, and persisted in a work, which, at the same time, they looked upon

as  impracticable;  and  it  was  finished  after  his  death:  for  not  one  of  his

projects, which had been found possible to be effected, was abandoned.

  The great canal of Cronstadt, which is easily drained of its waters, and

wherein they careen and clean the men of war, was also began at the same

time that he was engaged in the proceedings against his son.

  In this year also he built the new city of Ladoga. A short time afterwards,

he made the canal which joins the Caspian Sea to the gulf of Finland and to

the  ocean.  The  boats,  after  sailing  up  the  Wolga,  came  first  to  the

communication of two rivers, which he joined for that purpose; from thence,

by another canal, they enter into the lake of Ilmen, and then fall into the canal

of Ladoga, from whence goods and merchandizes may be conveyed by sea to

all parts of the world.

  In the midst of these labours, which all passed under his inspection, he

carried his views from Kamschatka to the most eastern limits of his empire,

and  caused  two  forts  to  be  built  in  these  regions,  which  were  so  long

unknown to the rest of the world. In the meantime, a body of engineers, who

were draughted from the marine academy established in 1715, were sent to

make the tour of the empire, in order to form exact charts thereof, and lay

before mankind the immense extent of country which he had civilized andenriched.


  CHAPTER XXXI.

  Of the trade of Russia.


  The Russian trade without doors was in a manner annihilated before the

reign of Peter. He restored it anew, after his accession to the throne. It is

notorious,  that  the  current  of  trade  has  undergone  several  changes  in  the

world. The south part of Russia was before the time of Tamerlane, the staple

of Greece, and even of the Indies; and the Genoese were the principal factors.

The Tanais and the Boristhenes were loaded with the productions of Asia: but

when Tamerlane, towards the end of the fourteenth century, had conquered

the Taurican Chersonesus, afterwards called Crimea or Crim Tartary, and

when the Turks became masters of Azoph, this great branch of trade was

totally  destroyed.  Peter  formed  the  design  of  reviving  it,  by  getting

possession of Azoph; but the unfortunate campaign of Pruth wrested this city

out of his hands, and with it all his views on the Black Sea: nevertheless he

had it still in his power to open as extensive a road to commerce through the

Caspian Sea. The English who, in the end of the fifteenth, and beginning of

the sixteenth century, had opened a trade to Archangel, had endeavoured to

do the same likewise by the Caspian Sea, but failed in all their attempts for

this purpose.

  It has been already observed, that the father of Peter the Great caused a

ship to be built in Holland, to trade from Astracan to the coast of Persia. This

vessel was burnt by the rebel Stenkorazin, which put an immediate stop to

any views of trading on a fair footing with the Persians. The Armenians, who

are the factors of that part of Asia, were received by Peter the Great into

Astracan;  every  thing  was  obliged  to  pass  through  their  hands,  and  they

reaped all the advantage of that trade; as is the case with the Indian traders,

and  the  Banians,  and  with  the  Turks,  as  well  as  several  nations  in

Christendom, and the Jews: for those who have only one way of living, are

generally very expert in that art on which they depend for a support; and

others  pay  a  voluntary  tribute  to  that  knowledge  in  which  they  know

themselves deficient.  Peter had already found a remedy for this inconvenience, in the treaty

which he made with the sophi of Persia, by which all the silk, which was not

used  for  the  manufactories  in  that  kingdom,  was  to  be  delivered  to  the

Armenians of Astracan, and by them to be transported into Russia.

  The troubles which arose in Persia soon overturned this arrangement; and

in the course of this history, we shall see how the sha, or emperor of Persia,

Hussein, when persecuted by the rebels, implored the assistance of Peter; and

how that monarch, after having supported a difficult war against the Turks

and the Swedes, entered Persia, and subjected three of its provinces. But to

return to the article of trade.

  Of the Trade with China.

  The undertaking of establishing a trade with China seemed to promise the

greatest advantages. Two vast empires, bordering on each other, and each

reciprocally possessing what the other stood in need of, seemed to be both

under  the  happy  necessity  of  opening  a  useful  correspondence,  especially

after the treaty of peace, so solemnly ratified between these two empires in

the year 1689, according to our way of reckoning.

  The first foundation of this trade had been laid in the year 1653. There was

at  that  time  two  companies  of  Siberian  and  Bukarian  families  settled  in

Siberia. Their caravans travelled through the Calmuck plains; after they had

crossed the deserts of Chinese Tartary, and made a considerable profit by

their trade; but the troubles which happened in the country of the Calmucks,

and  the  disputes  between  the  Russians  and  the  Chinese,  in  regard  to  the

frontiers, put a stop to this commerce.

  After the peace of 1689, it was natural for the two great nations to fix on

some neutral place, whither all the goods should be carried. The Siberians,

like all other nations, stood more in need of the Chinese, than these latter did

of them; accordingly permission was asked of the emperor of China, to send

caravans to Pekin, which was readily granted. This happened in the beginning

of the present century.

  It  is  worthy  of  observation,  that  the  emperor  Camhi  had  granted

permission for a Russian church in the suburbs of Pekin; which church was to

be served by Siberian priests, the whole at the emperor's own expense, who

was so indulgent to cause this church to be built for the accommodation ofseveral families of eastern Siberia; some of whom had been prisoners before

the peace of 1680, and the others were adventurers from their own country,

who would not return back again after the peace of Niptchou. The agreeable

climate of Pekin, the obliging manners of the Chinese, and the ease with

which they found a handsome living, determined them to spend the rest of

their days in China. The small Greek church could not become dangerous to

the peace of the empire, as those of the Jesuits have been to that of other

nations;  and  moreover,  the  emperor  Camhi  was  a  favourer  of  liberty  of

conscience. Toleration has, in all times, been the established custom in Asia,

as it was in former times all over the world, till the reign of the Roman

emperor  Theodosius  I.  The  Russian  families,  thus  established  in  China,

having intermarried with the natives, have since quitted the Christian religion,

but their church still subsists.

  It was stipulated, that this church should be for the use of those who come

with the Siberian caravans, to bring furs and other commodities wanted at

Pekin. The voyage out and home, and the stay in the country, generally took

up three years. Prince Gagarin, governor of Siberia, was twenty years at the

head of this trade. The caravans were sometimes very numerous; and it was

difficult to keep the common people, who made the greatest number, within

proper bounds.

  They passed through the territories of a Laman priest, who is a kind of

Tartarian sovereign, resides on the sea-coast of Orkon, and has the title of

Koutoukas:  he  is  the  vicar  of  the  grand  Lama,  but  has  rendered  himself

independent, by making some change in the religion of the country, where

the Indian tenet of metempsychosis is the prevailing opinion. We cannot find

a  more  apt  comparison  for  this  priest  than  in  the  bishops  of  Lubeck  and

Osnaburg, who have shaken off the dominion of the church of Rome. The

caravans, in their march, sometimes committed depredations on the territories

of  this  Tartarian  prelate,  as  they  did  also  on  those  of  the  Chinese.  This

irregular conduct proved an impediment to the trade of those parts; for the

Chinese  threatened  to  shut  the  entrance  into  their  empire  against  the

Russians, unless a stop was put to these disorders. The trade with China was

at that time very advantageous to the Russians, who brought from thence

gold, silver, and precious stones, in return for their merchandize. The largest

ruby in the world was brought out of China to prince Gagarin, who sent it toprince Menzikoff; and it is now one of the ornaments of the imperial crown.

  The exactions put in practice by prince Gagarin were of great prejudice to

that trade, which had brought him so much riches; and, at length, they ended

in  his  own  destruction;  for  he  was  accused  before  the  court  of  justice,

established  by  the  czar,  and  sentenced  to  lose  his  head,  a  year  after  the

condemnation of the czarowitz, and the execution of all those who had been

his accomplices.

  About the same time, the emperor Camhi, perceiving his health to decay,

and knowing, by experience, that the European mathematicians were much

more  learned  in  their  art  than  those  of  his  own  nation,  thought  that  the

European physicians must also have more knowledge than those of Pekin,

and therefore sent a message to the czar, by some ambassadors who were

returning from China to Petersburg, requesting him to send him one of his

physicians.  There  happened  at  that  time  to  be  an  English  surgeon  at

Petersburg,  who  offered  to  undertake  the  journey  in  that  character;  and

accordingly set out in company with a new ambassador, and one Laurence

Lange, who has left a description of that journey. This embassy was received,

and all the expense of it defrayed with great pomp, by Camhi. The surgeon, at

his arrival, found the emperor in perfect health, and gained the reputation of a

most  skilful  physician.  The  caravans  who  followed  this  embassy  made

prodigious profits; but fresh excesses having been committed by this very

caravan, the Chinese were so offended thereat, that they sent back Lange,

who was at that time resident from the czar at the Chinese court, and with

him all the Russian merchants established there.

  The emperor Camhi dying, his son Yontchin, who had as great a share of

wisdom, and more firmness than his father, and who drove the Jesuits out of

his empire, as the czar had done from Russia in 1718, concluded a treaty with

Peter, by which the Russian caravans were no more to trade on the frontiers

of the two empires. There are only certain factors, dispatched in the name of

the  emperor  or  empress  of  Russia,  and  these  have  liberty  to  enter  Pekin,

where they are lodged in a vast house, which the emperor of China formerly

assigned for the reception of the envoys from Corea: but it is a considerable

time since either caravans or factors have been sent from Russia thither so

that the trade is now in a declining way, but may possibly soon be revived.  Of the Trade of PETERSBURG, and the other ports of the RUSSIAN

EMPIRE.

  There were at this time above two hundred foreign vessels traded to the

new capital, in the space of a year. This trade has continued increasing, and

has frequently brought in five millions (French money) to the crown. This

was greatly more than the interest of the money which this establishment had

cost.  This  trade,  however,  greatly  diminished  that  of  Archangel,  and  was

precisely  what  the  founder  desired;  for  the  port  of  Archangel  is  too

dangerous, and at too great distance from other ports: besides that, a trade

which is carried on immediately under the eye of an assiduous sovereign, is

always the most advantageous. That of Livonia continued still on the same

footing. The trade of Russia in general has proved very successful; its ports

have received from one thousand to twelve hundred vessels in a year, and

Peter discovered the happy expedient of joining utility to glory.


  CHAPTER XXXII.

  Of the laws.


It is well known, that good laws are scarce, and that the due execution of

them is still more so. The greater the extent of any state, and the variety of

people of which it is composed, the more difficult it is to unite them by the

same body of laws. The father of czar Peter formed a digest or code under the

title of Oulogenia, which was actually printed, but it by no means answered

the end intended.

  Peter, in the course of his travels, had collected materials for repairing this

great structure, which was falling to decay in many of its parts. He gathered

many  useful  hints  from  the  governments  of  Denmark,  Sweden,  England,

Germany, and France, selecting from each of these different nations what he

thought most suitable to his own.

  There was a court of boyards or great men, who determined all matters en

dernier ressort. Rank and birth alone gave a seat in this assembly; but the czar

thought that knowledge was likewise requisite, and therefore this court was

dissolved.  He then instituted a procurator-general, assisted by four assistors, in each

of the governments of the empire. These were to overlook the conduct of the

judges,  whose  decrees  were  subject  to  an  appeal  to  the  senate  which  he

established.  Each  of  those  judges  was  furnished  with  a  copy  of  the

Oulogenia, with additions and necessary alterations, until a complete body of

laws could be formed.

  It  was  forbid  to  these  judges  to  receive  any  fees,  which,  however

moderate, are always an abusive tax on the fortunes and properties of those

concerned in suits of law. The czar also took care that the expenses of the

court were moderate, and the decisions speedy. The judges and their clerks

had salaries appointed them out of the public treasury, and were not suffered

to purchase their offices.

  It was in the year 1718, at the very time that he was engaged in the process

against his son, that he made the chief part of these regulations. The greatest

part of the laws he enacted were borrowed from those of the Swedes, and he

made no difficulty to admit to places in his courts of judicature such Swedish

prisoners who were well versed in the laws of their own country, and who,

having learnt the Russian language, were willing to continue in that kingdom.

  The governor of each province and his assistors had the cognizance of

private causes within such government; from them there was an appeal to the

senate; and if any one, after having been condemned by the senate, appealed

to the czar himself, and such appeal was found unjust, he was punished with

death: but to mitigate the rigour of this law, the czar created a master of the

requests, who received the petitions of those who had affairs depending in the

senate, or in the inferior courts, concerning which the laws then in force were

not sufficiently explanatory.

  At length, in 1722, he completed his new code, prohibiting all the judges,

under pain of death, to depart therefrom in their decrees, or to set up their

own  private  opinions  in  place  of  the  general  statutes.  This  dreadful

ordonnance  was  publicly  fixed  up,  and  still  remains  in  all  the  courts  of

judicature of the empire.

  He erected every thing anew; there was not, even to the common affairs of

society, aught but what was his work. He regulated the degrees between man

and man, according to their posts and employments, from the admiral and thefield-marshal to the ensign, without any regard to birth.

  Having always in his own mind, and willing to imprint it on those of his

subjects, that services are preferable to pedigree, a certain rank was likewise

fixed for the women; and she who took a seat in a public assembly, that did

not properly belong to her, was obliged to pay a fine.

  By a still more useful regulation, every private soldier, on being made an

officer, instantly became a gentleman; and a nobleman, if his character had

been impeached in a court of justice, was degraded to a plebeian.

  After the settling of these several laws and regulations, it happened that

the  increase  of  towns,  wealth,  and  population  in  the  empire,  new

undertakings,  and  the  creation  of  new  employs,  necessarily  introduced  a

multitude of new affairs and unforeseen cases, which were all consequences

of  that  success  which  attended  the  czar  in  the  general  reformation  of  his

dominions.

  The empress Elizabeth completed the body of laws which her father had

begun,  in  which  she  gave  the  most  lively  proofs  of  that  mildness  and

clemency for which she was so justly famed.


  CHAPTER XXXIII.

  Of Religion.


  At this time Peter laboured more than ever to reform the clergy. He had

abolished the patriarchal office, and by this act of authority had alienated the

minds of the ecclesiastics. He was determined that the imperial power should

be free and absolute, and that of the church respected, but submissive. His

design was, to establish a council of religion, which should always subsist,

but dependent on the sovereign, and that it should give no laws to the church,

but such as should be approved of by the head of the state, of which the

church was a part. He was assisted in this undertaking by the archbishop of

Novogorod, named Theophanes Procop, or Procopowitz, i.e. son of Procop.

  This  prelate  was  a  person  of  great  learning  and  sagacity:  his  travels

through  the  different  parts  of  Europe  had  afforded  him  opportunities  of

remarks on the several abuses which reign amongst them. The czar, who hadhimself been a witness of the same, had this great advantage in forming all

his regulations, that he was possessed of an unlimited power to choose what

was useful, and reject what was dangerous. He laboured, in concert with the

archbishop, in the years 1718 and 1719, to effect his design. He established a

perpetual  synod,  to  be  composed  of  twelve  members,  partly  bishops,  and

partly  archpriests,  all  to  be  chosen  by  the  sovereign.  This  college  was

afterwards augmented to fourteen.

  The  motives  of  this  establishment  were  explained  by  the  czar  in  a

preliminary discourse. The chief and most remarkable of these was, 'That

under  the  administration  of  a  college  of  priests,  there  was  less  danger  of

troubles and insurrections, than under the government of a single head of the

church; because the common people, who are always prone to superstition,

might, by seeing one head of the church, and another of the state, be led to

believe that they were in fact two different powers.' And hereupon he cites as

an example, the divisions which so long subsisted between the empire and the

papal see, and which stained so many kingdoms with blood.

  Peter thought, and openly declared, that the notion of two powers in a

state, founded on the allegory of the two swords, mentioned in the apostles,

was absurd and erroneous.

  This  court  was  invested  with  the  ecclesiastical  power  of  regulating  all

penances, and examining into the morals and capacity of those nominated by

the  court  to  bishoprics,  to  pass  judgment  en  dernier  ressort  in  all  causes

relating to religion, in which it was the custom formerly to appeal to the

patriarch, and also to take cognizance of the revenues of monasteries, and the

distribution of alms.

  This synod had the title of most holy, the same which the patriarchs were

wont to assume, and in fact the czar seemed to have preserved the patriarchal

dignity, but divided among fourteen members, who were all dependant on the

crown, and were to take an oath of obedience, which the patriarchs never did.

The members of this holy synod, when met in assembly, had the same rank as

the senators; but they were like the senate, all dependant on the prince. But

neither this new form of church administration, nor the ecclesiastical code,

were in full vigour till four years after its institution, namely in 1722. Peter at

first intended, that the synod should have the presentation of those whomthey  thought  most  worthy  to  fill  the  vacant  bishoprics.  These  were  to  be

nominated by the emperor, and consecrated by the synod, Peter frequently

presided in person at the assembly. One day that a vacant see was to be filled,

the synod observed to the emperor, that they had none but ignorant persons to

present to his majesty: 'Well, then,' replied the czar, 'you have only to pitch

upon the most honest man, he will be worth two learned ones.'

  It is to be observed, that the Greek church has none of that motley order

called secular abbots. The petit collet is unknown there, otherwise than by the

ridiculousness of its character, but by another abuse (as every thing in this

world must be subject to abuse) the bishops and prelates are all chosen from

the monastic orders. The first monks were only laymen, partly devotees, and

partly  fanatics,  who  retired  into  the  deserts,  where  they  were  at  length

gathered together by St. Basil, who gave them a body of rules, and then they

took vows, and were reckoned as the lower order of the church, which is the

first step to be taken to arise at higher dignities. It was this that filled all

Greece and Asia with monks. Russia was overrun with them. They became

rich, powerful, and though excessively ignorant, they were, at the accession

of Peter to the throne, almost the only persons who knew how to write. Of

this knowledge they made such an abuse, when struck and confounded with

the  new  regulations  which  Peter  introduced  in  all  the  departments  of

government, that he was obliged in 1703 to issue an edict, forbidding the use

of  pen  and  ink  to  the  monks,  without  an  express  order  from  the

archimandrite, or prior of the convent, who in that case was responsible for

the behaviour of those to whom he granted this indulgence.

  Peter designed to make this a standing law, and at first he intended, that no

one  should  be  admitted  into  any  order  under  fifty  years  of  age;  but  that

appeared too late an age, as the life of man being in general so limited, there

was  not  time  sufficient  for  such  persons  to  acquire  the  necessary

qualifications for being made bishops; and therefore, with the advice of his

synod, he placed it at thirty years complete, but never under; at the same time

expressly prohibiting any person exercising the profession of a soldier, or an

husbandman, to enter into a convent, without an immediate order from the

emperor, or the synod, and to admit no married man upon any account, even

though  divorced  from  his  wife;  unless  that  wife  should  at  the  same  time

embrace a religious life of her own pure will, and that neither of them hadany children. No person in actual employ under government can take the

habit, without an express order of the state for that purpose. Every monk is

obliged to work with his own hands at some trade. The nuns are never to go

without the walls of their convent, and at the age of fifty are to receive the

tonsure,  as  did  the  deaconesses  of  the  primitive  church;  but  if,  before

undergoing that ceremony, they have an inclination to marry, they are not

only  allowed,  but  even  exhorted  so  to  do.  An  admirable  regulation  in  a

country where population is of infinitely greater use than a monastic life.

  Peter was desirous that those unhappy females, whom God has destined to

people a kingdom, and who, by a mistaken devotion, annihilated in cloisters

that race of which they would otherwise become mothers, should at least be

of some service to society, which they thus injure; and therefore ordered, that

they should all be employed in some handy works, suitable to their sex. The

empress  Catherine  took  upon  herself  the  care  of  sending  for  several

handicrafts  over  from  Brabant  and  Holland,  whom  she  distributed  among

these convents, and, in a short time, they produced several kinds of work,

which the empress and her ladies always wore as a part of their dress.

  There cannot perhaps be any thing conceived more prudent than these

institutions; but what merits the attention of all ages, is the regulation which

Peter  made  himself,  and  which  he  addressed  to  the  synod  in  1724.  The

ancient ecclesiastical institution is there very learnedly explained, and the

indolence  of  the  monkish  life  admirably  well  exposed;  and  he  not  only

recommends an application to labour and industry, but even commands it;

and that the principal occupation of those people should be, to assist and

relieve the poor. He likewise orders, that sick and infirm soldiers shall be

quartered in the convents, and that a certain number of monks shall be set

apart to take care of them, and that the most strong and healthy of these shall

cultivate  the  lands  belonging  to  those  convents.  He  orders  the  same

regulations  to  be  observed  in  the  monasteries  for  women,  and  that  the

strongest of these shall take care of the gardens, and the rest to wait on sick or

infirm women, who shall be brought from the neighbouring country into the

convents for that purpose. He also enters into the minutest details relating to

these services; and lastly, he appoints certain monasteries of both sexes for

the reception and education of orphans.

  In reading this ordinance of Peter the Great, which was published the 31stJanuary, 1724, one would imagine it to have been framed by a minister of

state and a father of the church.

  Almost all the customs in the Russian church are different from those of

ours.  As  soon  as  a  man  is  made  a  sub-deacon,  we  prohibit  him  from

marrying, and he is accounted guilty of sacrilege if he proves instrumental to

the population of his country. On the contrary, when any one has taken a sub-

deacon's order in Russia, he is obliged likewise to take a wife, and then may

rise to the rank of priest, and arch-priest, but he cannot be made a bishop,

unless he is a widower and a monk.

  Peter forbid all parish-priests from bringing up more than one son to the

service of the church, unless it was particularly desired by the parishioners;

and this he did, lest a numerous family might in time come to tyrannize over

the parish. We may perceive in these little circumstances relating to church-

government, that the legislator had always the good of the state in view, and

that he took every precaution to make the clergy properly respected, without

being dangerous, and that they should be neither contemptible nor powerful.

  In those curious memoirs, composed by an officer who was a particular

favourite of Peter the Great, I find the following anecdote:-One day a person

reading to the czar that number of the English Spectator, in which a parallel is

drawn between him and Lewis XIV. 'I do not think,' said Peter, 'that I deserve

the  preference  that  is  here  given  me  over  that  monarch;  but  I  have  been

fortunate  enough  to  have  the  superiority  over  him  in  one  essential  point,

namely, that of having obliged my clergy to live in peace and submission;

whereas my brother Lewis has suffered himself to be ruled by his.'

  A prince, whose days were almost wholly spent in the fatigues of war, and

his nights in the compiling laws for the better government of so large an

empire,  and  in  directing  so  many  great  labours,  through  a  space  of  two

thousand  leagues,  must  stand  in  need  of  some  hours  of  amusement.

Diversions at that time were neither so noble or elegant as they now are, and

therefore we must not wonder if Peter amused himself with the entertainment

of the sham conclave, of which mention has been already made, and other

diversions of the same stamp, which were frequently at the expense of the

Romish  church,  to  which  he  had  a  great  dislike,  and  which  was  very

pardonable in a prince of the Greek communion, who was determined to bemaster in his own dominions. He likewise gave several entertainments of the

same kind at the expense of the monks of his own country; but of the ancient

monks, whose follies and bigotry he wished to ridicule, while he strove to

reform the new.

  We have already seen that previous to his publishing his church-laws, he

created one of his fools pope, and celebrated the feast of the sham conclave.

This fool, whose name was Jotof, was between eighty and ninety. The czar

took it into his head to make him marry an old widow of his own age, and to

have  their  nuptials  publicly  solemnized;  he  caused  the  invitation  to  the

marriage  guests  to  be  made  by  four  persons  who  were  remarkable  for

stammering. The bride was conducted to church by decrepit old men, four of

the most bulky men that could be found in Russia acted as running footmen.

The music were seated in a waggon drawn by bears, whom they every now

and then pricked with goads of iron, and who, by their roaring, formed a full

base,  perfectly  agreeable  to  the  concert  in  the  cart.  The  married  couple

received the benediction in the cathedral from the hands of a deaf and blind

priest, who, to appear more ridiculous, wore a large pair of spectacles on his

nose. The procession, the wedding, the marriage-feast, the undressing and

putting to bed of the bride and bridegroom, were all of a piece with the rest of

this burlesque ceremony.

  We  may  perhaps  be  apt  to  look  upon  this  as  a  trivial  and  ridiculous

entertainment for a great prince; but is it more so than our carnival? or to see

five or six hundred persons with masks on their faces, and dressed in the most

ridiculous manner, skipping and jumping about together, for a whole night in

a large room, without speaking a word to each other?

  In fine, were the ancient feasts of the fools and the ass, and the abbot of

the cuckolds, which were formerly celebrated in our churches, much superior,

or did our comedies of the foolish mother exhibit marks of a greater genius?


  CHAPTER XXXIV.

  The congress of Aland or Oeland. Death of Charles XII., &c. The treaty of

Nystadt.


  These immense labours, this minute review of the whole Russian empire,and the melancholy proceedings against his unhappy son, were not the only

objects which demanded the attention of the czar; it was necessary to secure

himself  without  doors,  at  the  same  time  that  he  was  settling  order  and

tranquillity within. The war with Sweden was still carried on, though faintly,

in hopes of approaching peace.

  It is a known fact, that in the year 1717, cardinal Alberoni, prime minister

to Philip V. of Spain, and baron Gortz, who had gained an entire ascendant

over the mind of Charles XII. had concerted a project to change the face of

affairs in Europe, by effecting a reconciliation between this last prince and

the czar, driving George I. from the English throne, and replacing Stanislaus

on that of Poland, while cardinal Alberoni was to procure the regency of

France for his master Philip. Gortz, as has been already observed, had opened

his mind on this head to the czar himself. Alberoni had begun a negotiation

with prince Kourakin, the czar's ambassador at the Hague, by means of the

Spanish ambassador, Baretti Landi, a native of Mantua, who had, like the

cardinal, quitted his own country to live in Spain.

  Thus a set of foreigners were about to overturn the general system, for

masters under whose dominion they were not born, or rather for themselves.

Charles XII. gave into all these projects, and the czar contented himself with

examining them in private. Since the year 1716 he had made only feeble

efforts against Sweden, and those rather with a view to oblige that kingdom

to purchase peace by restoring those places it had taken in the course of the

war, than with an intent to crush it altogether.

  The  baron  Gortz,  ever  active  and  indefatigable  in  his  projects,  had

prevailed on the czar to send plenipotentiaries to the island of Oeland to set

on  foot  a  treaty  of  peace.  Bruce,  a  Scotchman,  and  grand  master  of  the

ordnance in Russia, and the famous Osterman, who was afterwards at the

head of affairs, arrived at the place appointed for the congress exactly at the

time  that  the  czarowitz  was  put  under  arrest  at  Moscow.  Gortz  and

Gillembourg were already there on the part of Charles XII. both impatient to

bring about a reconciliation between that prince and Peter, and to revenge

themselves on the king of England. It was an extraordinary circumstance that

there should be a congress, and no cessation of arms. The czar's fleet still

continued  cruising  on  the  coasts  of  Sweden,  and  taking  the  ships  of  that

nation. Peter thought by keeping up hostilities to hasten the conclusion of apeace, of which he knew the Swedes stood greatly in need, and which must

prove highly glorious to the conqueror.

    Notwithstanding  the  little  hostilities  which  still  continued,  every  thing

bespoke the speedy approach of peace. The preliminaries began by mutual

acts of generosity, which produce stronger effects than many hand-writings.

The czar sent back without ransom marshal Erenschild, whom he had taken

prisoner  with  his  own  hands,  and  Charles  in  return  did  the  same  by

Trubetskoy and Gallowin, who had continued prisoners in Sweden ever since

the battle of Narva.

  The negotiations now advanced apace, and a total change was going to be

made in the affairs of the North. Gortz proposed to the czar to put the duchy

of Mecklenburg into his hands. Duke Charles, its sovereign, who had married

a  daughter  of  czar  John,  Peter's  elder  brother,  was  at  variance  with  the

nobility of the country, who had taken arms against him. And Peter, who

looked upon that prince as his brother-in-law, had an army in Mecklenburg

ready to espouse his cause. The king of England, elector of Hanover, declared

on the side of the nobles. Here was another opportunity of mortifying the

king of England, by putting Peter in possession of Mecklenburg, who, being

already master of Livonia, would by this means, in a short time, become

more powerful in Germany than any of its electors. The duchy of Courland

was to be given to the duke of Mecklenburg, as an equivalent for his own,

together with a part of Prussia at the expense of Poland, who was to have

Stanislaus again for her king. Bremen and Verden were to revert to Sweden;

but these provinces could not be wrested out of the hands of the king of

England but by force of arms; accordingly Gortz's project was (as we have

already said) to effect a firm union between Peter and Charles XII., and that

not only by the bands of peace, but by an offensive alliance, in which case

they were jointly to send an army into Scotland. Charles XII. after having

made himself master of Norway, was to make a descent on Great Britain, and

he fondly imagined he should be able to set a new sovereign on the throne of

those kingdoms, after having replaced one of his own choosing on that of

Poland. Cardinal Alberoni promised both Peter and Charles to furnish them

with subsidies. The fall of the king of England would, it was supposed, draw

with it that of his ally, the regent of France, who being thus deprived of all

support,  was  to  fall  a  victim  to  the  victorious  arms  of  Spain,  and  thediscontent of the French nation.

  Alberoni and Gortz now thought themselves secure of totally overturning

the system of Europe, when a cannon ball from the bastions of Frederickshal

in Norway confounded all their mighty projects. Charles XII. was killed, the

Spanish fleet was beaten by that of England, the conspiracy which had been

formed in France was discovered and quelled, Alberoni was driven out of

Spain,  and  Gortz  was  beheaded  at  Stockholm;  and  of  all  this  formidable

league, so lately made, the czar alone retained his credit, who by not having

put himself in the power of any one, gave law to all his neighbours.

  At  the  death  of  Charles  XII.  there  was  a  total  change  of  measures  in

Sweden. Charles had governed with a despotic power, and his sister Ulrica

was elected Queen on express condition of renouncing arbitrary government.

Charles intended to form an alliance with the czar against England and its

allies, and the new government of Sweden now joined those allies against the

czar.

  The congress at Oeland, however, was not broken up; but the Swedes,

now in league with the English, flattered themselves that the fleets of that

nation sent into the Baltic would procure them a more advantageous peace. A

body  of  Hanoverian  troops  entered  the  dominions  of  the  duke  of

Mecklenburg (Feb. 1716.), but were soon driven from thence by the czar's

forces.

  Peter likewise had a body of troops in Poland, which kept in awe both the

party of Augustus, and that of Stanislaus; and as to Sweden, he had a fleet

always  ready,  either  to  make  a  descent  on  their  coasts,  or  to  oblige  the

Swedish government to hasten matters in the congress. This fleet consisted of

twelve large ships of the line, and several lesser ones, besides frigates and

galleys.  The  czar  served  on  board  this  fleet  as  vice-admiral,  under  the

command of admiral Apraxin.

  A part of this fleet signalized itself in the beginning against a Swedish

squadron, and, after an obstinate engagement, took one ship of the line, and

two frigates. Peter, who constantly endeavoured, by every possible means, to

encourage and improve the navy he had been at so much pains to establish,

gave, on this occasion, sixty thousand French livres[111] in money among

the officers of this squadron, with several gold medals, besides conferringmarks of honour on those who principally distinguished themselves.

  About this time also the English fleet under admiral Norris came up the

Baltic, in order to favour the Swedes. Peter, who well knew how far he could

depend on his new navy, was not to be frightened by the English, but boldly

kept the sea, and sent to know of the English admiral if he was come only as

a friend to the Swedes, or as an enemy to Russia? The admiral returned for

answer, that he had not as yet any positive orders from his court on that head:

however Peter, notwithstanding this equivocal reply, continued to keep the

sea with his fleet.

  The English fleet, which in fact was come thither only to shew itself, and

thereby induce the czar to grant more favourable conditions of peace to the

Swedes, went to Copenhagen, and the Russians made some descents on the

Swedish coast, and even in the neighbourhood of Copenhagen, (July 1719.)

where  they  destroyed  some  copper  mines,  burnt  about  fifteen  thousand

houses, and did mischief enough to make the Swedes heartily wish for a

speedy conclusion of the peace.

  Accordingly  the  new  queen  of  Sweden  pressed  a  renewal  of  the

negotiations; Osterman himself was sent to Stockholm, and matters continued

in this situation during the whole of the year 1719.

  The following year the prince of Hesse, husband to the queen of Sweden,

and now become king, in virtue of her having yielded up the sovereign power

in his favour, began his reign by sending a minister to the court of Petersburg,

in order to hasten the so much desired peace; but the war was still carried on

in the midst of these negotiations.

  The English fleet joined that of the Swedes, but did not yet commit any

hostilities, as there was no open rupture between the courts of Russia and

England,  and  admiral  Norris  even  offered  his  master's  mediation  towards

bringing about a peace; but as this offer was made with arms in hand, it rather

retarded than facilitated the negotiations. The coasts of Sweden, and those of

the new Russian provinces in the Baltic, are so situated, that the former lay

open to every insult, while the latter are secured by their difficult access. This

was clearly seen when admiral Norris, after having thrown off the mask,

(June 1720.) made a descent in conjunction with the Swedish fleet on a little

island in the province of Esthonia, called Narguen, which belonged to theczar, where they only burnt a peasant's house; but the Russians at the same

time made a descent near Wasa, and burnt forty-one villages, and upwards of

one thousand houses, and did an infinite deal of damage to the country round

about.  Prince  Galitzin  boarded  and  took  four  Swedish  frigates,  and  the

English admiral seemed to have come only to be spectator of that pitch of

glory to which the czar had raised his infant navy; for he had but just shewn

himself in those seas, when the Swedish frigates were carried in triumph into

the harbour of Cronslot before Petersburg.[112] On this occasions methinks

the English did too much if they came only as mediators, and too little if as

enemies.

  Nov. 1720.] At length, the new king of Sweden demanded a cessation of

arms; and as he found the menaces of the English had stood him in no stead,

he had recourse to the duke of Orleans, the French regent; and this prince, at

once  an  ally  of  Russia  and  Sweden,  had  the  honour  of  effecting  a

reconciliation  between  them.  (Feb.  1721.)  He  sent  Campredon,  his

plenipotentiary,  to  the  court  of  Petersburg,  and  from  thence  to  that  of

Stockholm. A congress was opened at Nystadt,[113] but the czar would not

agree to a cessation of arms till matters were on the point of being concluded

and the plenipotentiaries ready to sign. He had an army in Finland ready to

subdue the rest of that province, and his fleets were continually threatening

the Swedish coasts, so that he seemed absolute master of dictating the terms

of peace; accordingly they subscribed to whatever he thought fit to demand.

By this treaty he was to remain in perpetual possession of all that his arms

had conquered, from the borders of Courland to the extremity of the gulf of

Finland,  and  from  thence  again  of  the  whole  extent  of  the  country  of

Kexholm,  and  that  narrow  slip  of  Finland  which  stretches  out  to  the

northward of the neighbourhood of Kexholm; so that he remained master of

all Livonia, Esthonia, Ingria, Carelia, with the country of Wybourg, and the

neighbouring  isles,  which  secured  to  him  the  sovereignty  of  the  sea,  as

likewise of the isles of Oessel, Dago, Mona, and several others: the whole

forming an extent of three thousand leagues of country, of unequal breadth,

and which altogether made a large kingdom, that proved the reward of twenty

years' immense pains and labour.

  The peace was signed at Nystadt the 10th September, 1721, N. S. by the

Russian minister Osterman, and general Bruce.  Peter  was  the  more  rejoiced  at  that  event,  as  it  freed  him  from  the

necessity of keeping such large armies on the frontiers of Sweden, as also

from any apprehensions on the part of England, or of the neighbouring states,

and left him at full liberty to exert his whole attention to the modelling of his

empire,  in  which  he  had  already  made  so  successful  a  beginning,  and  to

cherish arts and commerce, which he had introduced among his subjects, at

the expense of infinite labour and industry.

  In the first transports of his satisfaction, we find him writing in these terms

to his plenipotentiaries; 'You have drawn up the treaty as if we ourself had

dictated and sent it to you to offer the Swedes to sign. This glorious event

shall be ever present to our remembrance.'

  All degrees of people, throughout the Russian empire, gave proofs of their

satisfaction, by the most extraordinary rejoicings of all kinds, and particularly

at Petersburg. The triumphal festivals, with which the czar had entertained his

people  during  the  course  of  the  war,  were  nothing  to  compare  to  these

rejoicings for the peace, which every one hailed with unutterable satisfaction.

The peace itself was the most glorious of all his triumphs; and what pleased

more than all the pompous shows on the occasion, was a free pardon and

general release granted to all prisoners, and a general remission of all sums

due to the royal treasury for taxes throughout the whole empire, to the day of

the publication of the peace. In consequence of which a multitude of unhappy

wretches, who had been confined in prison, were set at liberty, excepting only

those guilty of highway-robbery, murder, or treason.[114]

  It  was  at  this  time  that  the  senate  decreed  Peter  the  titles  of  Great,

Emperor, and Father of his Country. Count Golofkin, the high chancellor,

made a speech to the czar in the great cathedral, in the name of all the orders

of the state, the senators crying aloud, Long live our emperor and father! in

which acclamations they were joined by the united voice of all the people

present. The ministers of France, Germany, Poland, Denmark, and the states-

general,  waited  on  him,  with  their  congratulations,  on  the  titles  lately

bestowed on him, and formally acknowledged for emperor him who had been

always  publicly  known  in  Holland  by  that  title,  ever  since  the  battle  of

Pultowa. The names of Father, and of Great, were glorious epithets, which no

one in Europe could dispute him; that of Emperor was only a honorary title,

given  by  custom  to  the  sovereigns  of  Germany,  as  titular  kings  of  theRomans; and it requires time before such appellations come to be formally

adopted by those courts where forms of state and real glory are different

things. But Peter was in a short time after acknowledged emperor by all the

states of Europe, excepting only that of Poland, which was still divided by

factions, and the pope, whose suffrage was become of very little significance,

since the court of Rome had lost its credit in proportion as other nations

became more enlightened.


  CHAPTER XXXV.

  Conquests in Persia.


  The  situation  of  Russia  is  such,  as  necessarily  obliges  her  to  keep  up

certain connexions with all the nations that lie in the fifth degree of north

latitude. When under a bad administration, she was a prey by turns to the

Tartars, the Swedes, and the Poles; but when governed by a resolute and

vigorous prince, she became formidable to all her neighbours. Peter began his

reign by an advantageous treaty with the Chinese. He had waged war at one

and the same time against the Swedes and the Turks, and now prepared to

lead his victorious armies into Persia.

  At this time Persia began to fall into that deplorable state, in which we

now behold her. Let us figure to ourselves the thirty years' war in Germany,

the times of the league, those of the massacre of St. Bartholomew, and the

reigns of Charles VI. and of king John in France, the civil wars in England,

the long and horrible ravages of the whole Russian empire by the Tartars, or

their invasion of China; and then we shall have some slight conception of the

miseries under which the Persian empire has so long groaned.

  A weak and indolent prince, and a powerful and enterprising subject, are

sufficient to plunge a whole nation into such an abyss of disasters. Hussein,

sha, shaic, or sophi of Persia, a descendant of the great sha Abbas, who sat at

this time on the throne of Persia, had given himself wholly up to luxury and

effeminacy: his prime minister committed acts of the greatest violence and

injustice, which this great prince winked at, and this gave rise to forty years'

desolation and bloodshed.

  Persia,  like  Turkey,  has  several  provinces,  all  governed  in  a  differentmanner; she has subjects immediately under her dominion, vassals, tributary

princes, and even nations, to whom the court was wont to pay a tribute, under

the name of subsidies; for instance, the people of Daghestan, who inhabit the

branches of mount Caucasus, to the westward of the Caspian Sea, which was

formerly a part of the ancient Albania; for all nations have changed their

appellation  and  their  limits.  These  are  now  called  Lesgians,  and  are

mountaineers,  who  are  rather  under  the  protection,  than  the  dominion,  of

Persia; to these the government paid subsidies for defending the frontiers.

  At the other extremity of the empire, towards the Indies, was the prince of

Candahar, who commanded a kind of martial militia, called Aghwans. This

prince of Candahar was a vassal of the Persian, as the hospodars of Walachia

and Moldavia are of the Turkish empire: this vassalage was not hereditary,

but exactly the same with the ancient feudal tenures established throughout

Europe,  by  that  race  of  Tartars  who  overthrew  the  Roman  empire.  The

Aghwan militia, of which the prince of Candahar was the head, was the same

with the Albanians on the coasts of the Caspian Sea, in the neighbourhood of

Daghestan,  and  a  mixture  of  Circassians  and  Georgians,  like  the  ancient

Mamelucks  who  enslaved  Egypt.  The  name  of  Aghwans  is  a  corruption;

Timur, whom we call Tamerlane, had led these people into India, and they

remained settled in the province of Candahar, which sometimes belonged to

the Mogul empire, and sometimes to that of Persia. It was these Aghwans and

Lesgians who began the revolution.

  Mir-Weis, or Meriwitz, intendant of the province, whose office was only

to collect the tributes, assassinated the prince of Candahar, armed the militia,

and continued master of the province till his death, which happened in 1717.

His brother came quietly to the succession, by paying a slight tribute to the

Persian court. But the son of Mir-Weis, who inherited the ambition of his

father, assassinated his uncle, and began to erect himself into a conqueror.

This young man was called Mir-Mahmoud, but he was known in Europe only

by the name of his father, who had begun the rebellion. Mahmoud reinforced

his Aghwans, by adding to them all the Guebres he could get together. These

Guebres were an ancient race of Persians, who had been dispersed by the

caliph Omar, and who still continued attached to the religion of the Magi

(formerly flourished in the reign of Cyrus), and were always secret enemies

to the new Persians. Having assembled his forces, Mahmoud marched intothe heart of Persia, at the head of a hundred thousand men.

  At  the  same  time  the  Lesgians  or  Albanians,  who,  on  account  of  the

troublesome times, had not received their subsidies from the court of Persia,

came down from their mountains with an armed force, so that the flames of

civil war were lighted up at both ends of the empire, and extended themselves

even to the capital.

  These Lesgians ravaged all that country which stretches along the western

borders of the Caspian Sea, as far as Derbent, or the Iron Gate. In this country

is situated the city of Shamache, about fifteen leagues distant from the sea,

and is said to have been the ancient residence of Cyrus, and by the Greeks

called Cyropolis, for we know nothing of the situation or names of these

countries, but what we have from the Greeks; but as the Persians never had a

prince called Cyrus, much less had they any city called Cyropolis. It is much

in the same manner that the Jews, who commenced authors when they were

settled in Alexandria, framed a notion of a city called Scythopolis, which,

said they, was built by the Scythians in the neighbourhood of Judea, as if

either  Scythians  or  ancient  Jews  could  have  given  Greek  names  to  their

towns.

  The city of Shamache was very rich. The Armenians, who inhabit in the

neighbourhood of this part of the Persian empire, carried on an immense

traffic  there,  and  Peter  had  lately  established  a  company  of  Russian

merchants at his own expense, which company became very flourishing. The

Lesgians made themselves masters of this city by surprise, plundered it, and

put to death all the Russians who traded there under the protection of shah

Hussein, after having stripped all their warehouses. The loss on this occasion

was said to amount to four millions of rubles.

  Peter upon this sent to demand satisfaction of the emperor Hussein, who

was then disputing the throne with the rebel Mahmoud, who had usurped it,

and likewise of Mahmoud himself. The former of these was willing to do the

czar justice, the other refused it; Peter therefore resolved to right himself, and

take advantage of the distractions in the Persian empire.

    Mir-Mahmoud still pushed his conquests in Persia. The sophi hearing that

the emperor of Russia was preparing to enter the Caspian Sea, in order to

revenge the murder of his subjects at Shamache, made private application tohim,  by  means  of  an  Armenian,  to  take  upon  him  at  the  same  time  the

defence of Persia.

  Peter had for a considerable time formed a project to make himself master

of the Caspian Sea, by means of a powerful naval force, and to turn the tide

of commerce from Persia and a part of India through his own dominions. He

had caused several parts of this sea to be sounded, the coasts to be surveyed,

and exact charts made of the whole. He then set sail for the coast of Persia the

15th day of May, 1722. Catherine accompanied him in this voyage, as she

had done in the former. They sailed down the Wolga as far as the city of

Astracan. From thence he hastened to forward the canals which were to join

the Caspian, the Baltic, and the Euxine seas, a work which has been since

executed in part under the reign of his grandson.

  While  he  was  directing  these  works,  the  necessary  provisions  for  his

expedition were arrived in the Caspian Sea. He was to take with him twenty-

two thousand foot, nine thousand dragoons, fifteen thousand Cossacks, and

three thousand seamen, who were to work the ships, and occasionally assist

the soldiery in making descents on the coast. The horse were to march over

land through deserts where there was frequently no water to be had, and

afterwards to pass over the mountains of Caucasus, where three hundred men

are  sufficient  to  stop  the  progress  of  a  whole  army;  but  the  distracted

condition  in  which  Persia  then  was,  warranted  the  most  hazardous

enterprises.

  The czar sailed about a hundred leagues to the southward of Astracan, till

he came to the little town of Andrewhoff. It may appear extraordinary to hear

of  the  name  of  Andrew  on  the  coasts  of  the  Hyrcanian  Sea;  but  some

Georgians, who were formerly a sect of Christians, had built this town, which

the Persians afterwards fortified; but it fell an easy prey to the czar's arms.

From thence he continued advancing by land into the province of Daghestan,

and caused manifestoes to be circulated in the Turkish and Persian languages.

[115] It was necessary to keep fair with the Ottoman Porte, who reckoned

among its subjects, not only the Circassians and Georgians, who border upon

this  country,  but  also  several  powerful  vassals,  who  had  of  late  put

themselves under the protection of the grand seignior.

  Among others there was one very powerful, named Mahmoud d'Utmich,who took the title of sultan, and had the courage to attack the czar's troops, by

which he was totally defeated, and the story says, that his whole country was

made a bonfire on the occasion.

  Sept. 14, 1722.] In a short time afterwards Peter arrived at the city of

Derbent, by the Persians and Turks called Demir Capi, that is, the Iron Gate,

and so named from having formerly had an iron gate at the south entrance.

The city is long and narrow, its upper part joins to a rocky branch of Mount

Caucasus, and the walls of the lower part are washed by the sea, which in

violent storms make a breach over them. These walls might pass for one of

the  wonders  of  antiquity,  being  forty  feet  in  height,  and  six  in  breadth,

defended with square towers at the distance of every fifty feet. The whole

work seems one uniform piece, and is built of a sort of brown free-stone

mixed with pounded shells, which served as mortar, so that the whole forms a

mass harder than marble. The city lies open from the sea, but part of it next

the land appears impregnable. There are still some ruins of an old wall like

that of China, which must have been built in the earliest times of antiquity,

and stretched from the borders of the Caspian Sea to the Pontus Euxinus; and

this was probably a rampart raised by the ancient kings of Persia against

those swarms of barbarians which dwelt between those two seas.

  According to the Persian tradition, the city of Derbent was partly repaired

and fortified by Alexander the Great. Arrian and Quintus Curtius tell us, that

Alexander absolutely rebuilt this city. They say indeed that it was on the

banks of the Tanais or Don, but then in their time the Greeks gave the name

of  Tanais  to  the  river  Cyrus,  which  runs  by  the  city.  It  would  be  a

contradiction to suppose that Alexander should build a harbour in the Caspian

Sea, on a river that opens into the Black Sea.

  There  were  formerly  three  or  four  other  ports  in  different  parts  of  the

Caspian  Sea,  all  which  were  probably  built  with  the  same  view;  for  the

several nations inhabiting to the west, east, and north of that sea, have in all

times been barbarians, who had rendered themselves formidable to the rest of

the world, and from hence principally issued those swarms of conquerors

who subjugated Asia and Europe.

  And here I must beg leave to remark, how much pleasure authors in all

ages have taken to impose upon mankind, and how much they have preferreda vain show of eloquence to matter of fact. Quintus Curtius puts into the

mouths of Scythians an admirable speech full of moderation and philosophy,

as  if  the  Tartars  of  those  regions  had  been  all  so  many  sages,  and  that

Alexander had not been the general nominated by the Greeks against the king

of Persia, sovereign of the greatest part of southern Scythia and the Indies.

Other rhetoricians, thinking to imitate Quintus Curtius, have studied to make

us look upon those savages of Caucacus and its dreary deserts, who lived

wholly  upon  rapine  and  bloodshed,  as  the  people  in  the  world  most

remarkable for austere virtue and justice, and have painted Alexander, the

avenger of Greece, and the conqueror of those who would have enslaved him

and  his  country,  as  a  public  robber,  who  had  ravaged  the  world  without

justice or reason.

  Such writers do not consider, that these Tartars were never other than

destroyers, and that Alexander built towns in the very country which they

inhabited; and in this respect I may venture to compare Peter the Great to

Alexander; like him he was assiduous and indefatigable in his pursuits, a

lover and friend of the useful arts; he surpassed him as a lawgiver, and like

him endeavoured to change the tide of commerce in the world, and built and

repaired at least as many towns as that celebrated hero of antiquity.

  On the approach of the Russian army, the governor of Derbent resolved

not to sustain a siege, whether he thought he was not able to defend the place,

or  that  he  preferred  the  czar's  protection  to  that  of  the  tyrant  Mahmoud;

brought the keys of the town and citadel (which were silver) and presented

them to Peter, whose army peaceably entered the city, and then encamped on

the sea-shore.

  The usurper, Mahmoud, already master of great part of Persia, in vain

endeavoured to prevent the czar from taking possession of Derbent: he stirred

up  the  neighbouring  Tartars,  and  marched  into  Persia  to  the  relief  of  the

place; but, too late, for Derbent was already in the hands of the conqueror.

  Peter however was not in a condition to push his successes any further at

this time. The vessels which were bringing him a fresh supply of provisions,

horses, and recruits, had been cast away near Astracan, and the season was

far  spent.  He  therefore  returned  to  Moscow,  Jan.  5.  which  he  entered  in

triumph; and after his arrival (according to custom) gave a strict account ofhis  expedition  to  the  vice-czar  Romadanowski,  thus  keeping  up  this

extraordinary farce, which, says his eulogium, pronounced in the academy of

sciences at Paris, ought to have been performed before all the monarchs of

the earth.

  The empire of Persia continued to be divided between Hussein and the

usurper Mahmoud. The first of these thought to find a protector in the czar,

and the other dreaded him as an avenger, who was come to snatch the fruits

of his rebellion out of his hands. Mahmoud exerted all his endeavours to stir

up the Ottoman Porte against Peter, and for this purpose sent an embassy to

Constantinople,  while  the  princes  of  Daghestan,  who  were  under  the

protection of the grand seignior, and had been stript of their territories by the

victorious  army  of  Peter,  cried  aloud  for  vengeance.  The  divan  was  now

alarmed for the safety of Georgia, which the Turks reckon in the number of

their dominions.

  The grand seignior was on the point of declaring war against the czar, but

was prevented by the courts of Vienna and Paris. The emperor of Germany at

the same time declared, that if Russia should be attacked by the Turks, he

must be obliged to defend it. The marquis de Bonac, the French ambassador

at Constantinople, made a dextrous use of the menaces of the imperial court,

and at the same time insinuated, that it was contrary to the true interest of the

Turkish  empire,  to  suffer  a  rebel  and  an  usurper  to  set  the  example  of

dethroning sovereigns, and that the czar had done no more than what the

grand seignior himself ought to have done.

  During these delicate negotiations, Mir Mahmoud was advanced to the

gates of Derbent, and had laid waste all the neighbouring country in order to

cut off all means of subsistence from the Russian army. That part of ancient

Hyrcania, now called Ghilan, was reduced to a desert, and the inhabitants

threw themselves under the protection of the Russians, whom they looked

upon as their deliverers.

  In this they followed the example of the sophi himself. That unfortunate

prince sent a formal embassy to Peter the Great, to request his assistance; but

the ambassador was hardly departed, when the rebel, Mir Mahmoud, seized

on Ispahan and the person of his master.

  Thamaseb, the son of the dethroned sophi, who was taken prisoner, foundmeans to escape out of the tyrant's hands, and got together a body of troops,

with which he gave the usurper battle. He seconded his father's entreaties to

Peter  the  Great  for  his  protection,  and  sent  to  the  ambassador  the  same

instructions which Shah Hussein had given him.

  This  ambassador,  whose  name  was  Ishmael  Beg,  found  that  his

negotiations had proved successful, even before he arrived in person; for, on

landing at Astracan, he learnt that general Matufkin was going to set out with

fresh recruits to reinforce the army in Daghestan. The dey of Baku or Bachu,

which with the Persians gives to the Caspian Sea the name of the Sea of

Bacou, was not yet taken. The ambassador therefore gave the Russian general

a letter for the inhabitants, in which he exhorted them in his master's name to

submit  to  the  emperor  of  Russia.  The  ambassador  then  proceeded  to

Petersburg, and general Matufkin departed to lay siege to the city of Bachu.

(Aug. 1723.) The Persian ambassador arrived at the czar's court the very day

that tidings were brought of the reduction of that city.

  Baku is situate near Shamache, but is neither so well peopled, nor so rich

as the latter. It is chiefly remarkable for the naptha, with which it furnishes all

Persia. Never was treaty so speedily concluded as that of Ishmael Beg. (Sept.

1723.) Czar Peter promised to march with his forces into Persia, in order to

revenge  the  death  of  his  subjects,  and  to  succour  Thamaseb  against  the

usurper of his crown, and the new sophi in return was to cede to him, not

only the towns of Bachu and Derbent, but likewise the provinces of Ghilan,

Mazanderan, and Asterabath.

  Ghilan  is,  as  we  have  already  observed,  the  ancient  South  Hyrcania;

Mazanderan, which joins to it, is the country of the Mardi, or Mardians; and

Asterabath  borders  upon  Mazanderan.  These  were  the  three  principal

provinces of the ancient Median kings; so that Peter beheld himself, by the

means of arms and treaties, in possession of the original kingdom of Cyrus.

  It may not be foreign to our subject to observe, that by the articles of this

convention, the prices of necessaries to be furnished to the army were settled.

A camel was to cost only sixty franks (about twelve rubles) a pound of bread

no more than five farthings, the same weight of beef about six. These prices

furnish a convincing proof of the plenty he found in these countries, that

possessions in land are of the most intrinsic value, and that money, which isonly of nominal worth, was at that time very scarce.

  Such was the deplorable state to which Persia was then reduced, that the

unfortunate  sophi  Thamaseb,  a  wanderer  in  his  own  kingdom,  and  flying

before the face of the rebel, Mahmoud, who had dipt his hands in the blood of

his father and his brothers, was necessitated to entreat the court of Russia and

the Turkish divan to accept of one part of his dominions to preserve for him

the rest.

  It was agreed then, between czar Peter, sultan Achmet III. and the sophi

Thamaseb,  that  the  first  of  these  should  keep  the  three  provinces  above-

named, and that the Porte should have Casbin, Tauris, and Erivan, besides

what she had already taken from the usurper. Thus was this noble kingdom

dismembered  at  once  by  the  Russians,  the  Turks,  and  the  Persians

themselves.

  And now the emperor Peter might be said to extend his dominions from

the furthest part of the Baltic Sea, beyond the southern limits of the Caspian.

Persia still continued a prey to violations and devastations, and its natives, till

then opulent and polite, were now sunk in poverty and barbarism, while the

Russian people had arisen from indigence and ignorance to a state of riches

and  learning.  One  single  man,  by  a  resolute  and  enterprising  genius,  had

brought  his  country  out  of  obscurity;  and  another,  by  his  weakness  and

indolence, had brought destruction upon his.

  Hitherto we know very little of the private calamities which for so long a

time spread desolation over the face of the Persian empire. It is said, that shah

Hussein was so pusillanimous as to place with his own hands the tiara or

crown  of  Persia  on  the  head  of  the  usurper  Mahmoud,  and  also  that  this

Mahmoud afterwards went mad. Thus the lives of so many thousands of men

depend on the caprice of a madman or a fool. They add furthermore, that

Mahmoud, in one of his fits of frenzy, put to death with his own hand all the

sons and nephews of the shah Hussein to the number of a hundred; and that

he caused the gospel of St. John to be read upon his head, in order to purify

himself, and to receive a cure for his disorder. These and such like Persian

fables have been circulated by our monks, and afterwards printed in Paris.

  The tyrant, after having murdered his uncle, was in his turn put to death by

his  nephew  Eshreff,  who  was  as  cruel  and  bloody  a  tyrant  as  Mahmoudhimself.

  Shah Thamaseb still continued imploring the assistance of Russia. This

Thamaseb  or  shah  Thomas,  was  assisted  and  afterwards  replaced  on  the

throne by the famous Kouli Khan, and was again dethroned by the same

Kouli Khan.

  The  revolutions  and  wars  which  Russia  had  afterwards  to  encounter

against the Turks, and in which she proved victorious, the evacuating the

three provinces in Persia, which cost Russia more to keep than they were

worth,  are  events  which  do  not  concern  Peter  the  Great,  as  they  did  not

happen till several years after his death; it may suffice to observe, that he

finished his military career by adding three provinces to his empire on the

part next to Persia, after having just before added the same number on that

side next to Sweden.


  CHAPTER XXXVI.

  Of the Coronation of the Empress Catherine I. and the Death of Peter the

Great.


  Peter, at his return from his Persian expedition, found himself in a better

condition than ever to be the arbiter of the North. He now openly declared

himself the protector of Charles XII. whose professed enemy he had been for

eighteen years. He sent for the duke of Holstein, nephew to that monarch, to

his court, promised him his eldest daughter in marriage, and began to make

preparations  for  supporting  him  in  his  claims  on  the  duchy  of  Holstein

Sleswick, and even engaged himself so to do by a treaty of alliance, (Feb.

1724.) which he concluded with the crown of Sweden.

  He continued the works he had begun all over his empire, to the further

extremity of Kamtshatka, and for the better direction of them, established an

academy of sciences at Petersburg. The arts began now to flourish on every

side: manufactures were encouraged, the navy was augmented, the army well

provided, and the laws properly enforced. He now enjoyed his glory in full

repose;  but  was  desirous  of  sharing  it  in  a  new  manner  with  her  who,

according to his own declaration, by remedying the disaster of the campaign

of Pruth, had been in some measure the instrument of his acquiring that glory.  Accordingly, the coronation of his consort Catherine was performed at

Moscow,  in  presence  of  the  duchess  of  Courland,  his  eldest  brother's

daughter, and the duke of Holstein, his intended son-in-law. (May 28, 1724.)

The  declaration  which  he  published  on  this  occasion  merits  attention:  he

therein cites the examples of several Christian princes who had placed the

crown  on  the  heads  of  their  consorts,  as  likewise  those  of  the  heathen

emperors,  Basilides,  Justinian,  Heraclius,  and  Leo,  the  philosopher.  He

enumerates the services Catherine had done to the state, and in particular in

the  war  against  the  Turks,-'Where  my  army,'  says  he,  'which  had  been

reduced to 22,000 men, had to encounter an army above 200,000 strong.' He

does not say, in this declaration, that the empress was to succeed to the crown

after his death; but this ceremony, which was altogether new and unusual in

the Russian empire, was one of those means by which he prepared the minds

of his subjects for such an event. Another circumstance that might perhaps

furnish a stronger reason to believe that he destined Catherine to succeed him

on the throne, was, that he himself marched on foot before her the day of her

coronation, as captain of a new company, which he had created under the

name of the knights of the empress.

  When they arrived at the cathedral, Peter himself placed the crown on her

head; and when she would have fallen down and embraced his knees, he

prevented her; and, at their return from the church, caused the sceptre and

globe  to  be  carried  before  her.  The  ceremony  was  altogether  worthy  an

emperor;  for  on  every  public  occasion  Peter  shewed  as  much  pomp  and

magnificence  as  he  did  plainness  and  simplicity  in  his  private  manner  of

living.

  Having thus crowned his spouse, he at length determined to give his eldest

daughter, Anna Petrowna, in marriage to the duke of Holstein. This princess

greatly resembled her father in the face, was very majestic, and of a singular

beauty. She was betrothed to the duke of Holstein on the 24th of November,

1724, but with very little ceremony. Peter having for some time past found

his health greatly impaired, and this, together with some family uneasiness,

that perhaps rather increased his disorder, which in a short time proved fatal,

permitted him to have but very little relish for feasts or public diversions in

this latter part of his life. [116] The empress Catherine had at that time a

young man for the chamberlain of her household, whose name was Moens dela Croix, a native of Russia, but of Flemish parents, remarkably handsome

and genteel. His sister, madame de Balc, was bed-chamber-woman to the

empress, and these two had entirely the management of her household. Being

both  accused  of  having  taken  presents,  they  were  sent  to  prison,  and

afterwards brought to their trial by express order of the czar; who, by an edict

in  the  year  1714,  had  forbidden  any  one  holding  a  place  about  court  to

receive any present or other gratuity, on pain of being declared infamous, and

suffering death; and this prohibition had been several times renewed.

  The brother and sister were found guilty, and received sentence, and all

those who had either purchased their services or given them any gratuity in

return for the same, were included therein, except the duke of Holstein and

his minister count Bassewitz: as it is probable that the presents made by that

prince, to those who had a share in bringing about his marriage with the czar's

daughter, were not looked upon in a criminal light.

  Moens  was  condemned  to  be  beheaded,  and  his  sister  (who  was  the

empress's favourite) to receive eleven strokes of the knout. The two sons of

this lady, one of whom was an officer in the household, and the other a page,

were degraded, and sent to serve as private soldiers in the army in Persia.

  These severities, though they shock our manners, were perhaps necessary

in a country where the observance of the laws is to be enforced only by the

most terrifying rigour. The empress solicited her favourite's pardon; but the

czar, offended at her application, peremptorily refused her, and, in the heat of

his passion, seeing a fine looking-glass in the apartment, he, with one blow of

his fist, broke it into a thousand pieces; and, turning to the empress, 'Thus,'

said he, 'thou seest I can, with one stroke of my hand, reduce this glass to its

original dust.' Catherine, in a melting accent, replied, 'It is true, you have

destroyed one of the greatest ornaments of your palace, but do you think that

palace is the more charming for its loss?' This answer appeased the emperor's

wrath; but all the favour that Catherine could obtain for her bed-chamber-

woman was, that she should receive only five strokes of the knout instead of

eleven.

  I should not have related this anecdote, had it not been attested by a public

minister, who was eye-witness of the whole transaction, and who, by having

made presents to the unfortunate brother and sister, was perhaps himself oneof the principal causes of their disgrace and sufferings. It was this affair that

emboldened those who judge of every thing in the worst light, to spread the

report  that  Catherine  hastened  the  death  of  her  husband,  whose  choleric

disposition filled her with apprehensions that overweighed the gratitude she

owed him for the many favours he had heaped upon her.

  These cruel suspicions were confirmed by Catherine's recalling to court

her woman of the bed-chamber immediately upon the death of the czar, and

reinstating her in her former influence. It is the duty of an historian to relate

the public reports which have been circulated in all times in states, on the

decease of princes who have been snatched away by a premature death, as if

nature was not alone sufficient to put a period to the existence of a crowned

head as well as that of a beggar; but it is likewise the duty of an historian to

shew how far such reports were rashly or unjustly formed.

  There is an immense distance between the momentary discontent which

may  arise  from  the  morose  or  harsh  behaviour  of  a  husband,  and  the

desperate resolution of poisoning that husband, who is at the same time our

sovereign and benefactor in the highest degree. The danger attending such a

design would have been as great as it was criminal. Catherine had at that time

a  powerful  party  against  her,  who  epoused  the  cause  of  the  son  of  the

deceased czarowitz. Nevertheless, neither that faction, nor any one person

about the court, once suspected the czarina; and the vague rumours which

were  spread  on  this  head  were  founded  only  on  the  mistaken  notions  of

foreigners, who were very imperfectly acquainted with the affair, and who

chose to indulge the wretched pleasure of accusing of heinous crimes those

whom they thought interested to commit them. But it was even very doubtful

whether this was at all the case with Catherine. It was far from being certain

that she was to succeed her husband. She had been crowned indeed, but only

in the character of wife to the reigning sovereign, and not as one who was to

enjoy the sovereign authority after his death.

  Peter, in his declaration, had only ordered this coronation as a matter of

ceremony, and not as conferring a right of governing. He therein only cited

the examples of emperors, who had caused their consorts to be crowned, but

not of those who had conferred on them the royal authority. In fine, at the

very time of Peter's illness, several persons believed that the princess Anna

Petrowna would succeed him jointly with her husband the duke of Holstein,or that the czar would nominate his grandson for his successor; therefore, so

far from Catherine's being interested in the death of the emperor, she rather

seemed concerned in the preservation of his life.

  It is undeniable, that Peter had, for a considerable time, been troubled with

an abscess in the bladder, and a stoppage of urine. The mineral waters of

Olnitz, and some others, which he had been advised to use, had proved of

very little service to him, and he had found himself growing sensibly weaker,

ever since the beginning of the year 1724. His labours, from which he would

not allow himself any respite, increased his disorder, and hastened his end:

(Jan.  1723.)  his  malady  became  now  more  and  more  desperate,  he  felt

burning  pains,  which  threw  him  into  an  almost  constant  delirium,[117]

whenever he had a moment's interval, he endeavoured to write, but he could

only scrawl a few lines that were wholly unintelligible; and it was with the

greatest difficulty that the following words, in the Russian language, could be

distinguished:-'Let every thing be given to '

  He then called for the princess Anna Petrowna, in order to dictate to her,

but by that time she could come to his bed-side, he had lost his speech, and

fell into a fit, which lasted sixteen hours. The empress Catherine did not quit

his bed-side for three nights together. At length, he breathed his last in her

arms, on the 28th of Jan. 1725. about four o'clock in the morning.

  His body was conveyed into the great hall of the palace, accompanied by

all the imperial family, the senate, all the principal personages of state, and an

innumerable concourse of people. It was there exposed on a bed of state, and

every one was permitted to approach and kiss his hand, till the day of his

interment, which was on the 10-21st of March, 1725.[118]

  It has been thought, and it has been asserted in print, that he had appointed

his wife Catherine to succeed him in the empire, by his last will, but the truth

is, that he never made any will, or at least none that ever appeared; a most

astonishing negligence in so great a legislator, and a proof that he did not

think his disorder mortal.

  No one knew, at the time of his death, who was to succeed him: he left

behind him his grandson Peter, son of the unfortunate Alexis, and his eldest

daughter Anna, married to the duke of Holstein. There was a considerable

faction in favour of young Peter; but prince Menzikoff, who had never hadany  other  interests  than  those  of  the  empress  Catherine,  took  care  to  be

beforehand with all parties, and their designs; and accordingly, when the czar

was upon the point of giving up the ghost, he caused the empress to remove

into another apartment of the palace, where all their friends were assembled

ready: he had the royal treasures conveyed into the citadel, and secured the

guards in his interest, as likewise the archbishop of Novogorod; and then they

held  a  private  council,  in  presence  of  the  empress  Catherine,  and  one

Macarof,  a  secretary,  in  whom  they  could  confide,  at  which  the  duke  of

Holstein's minister assisted.

  At the breaking up of this council, the empress returned to the czar's bed-

side, who soon after yielded up the ghost in her arms. As soon as his death

was made known, the principal senators and general officers repaired to the

palace, where the empress made a speech to them, which prince Menzikoff

answered in the name of all present. The empress being withdrawn, they

proceeded to consider the proper forms to be observed on the occasion, when

Theophanes, archbishop of Pleskow, told the assembly, that, on the eve of the

coronation of the empress Catherine, the deceased czar had declared to him,

that his sole reason for placing the crown on her head, was, that she might

wear it after his death; upon which the assembly unanimously signed the

proclamation, and Catherine succeeded her husband on the throne the very

day of his death.

  Peter the Great was regretted by all those whom he had formed, and the

descendants of those who had been sticklers for the ancient customs soon

began to look on him as their father: foreign nations, who have beheld the

duration of his establishments, have always expressed the highest admiration

for his memory, acknowledging that he was actuated by a more than common

prudence and wisdom, and not by a vain desire of doing extraordinary things.

All Europe knows that though he was fond of fame, he coveted it only for

noble principles; that though he had faults, they never obscured his noble

qualities, and that, though, as a man, he was liable to errors, as a monarch he

was always great: he every way forced nature, in his subjects, in himself, by

sea and land: but he forced her only to render her more pleasing and noble.

The arts, which he transplanted with his own hands, into countries, till then in

a  manner  savage,  have  flourished,  and  produced  fruits  which  are  lasting

testimonies of his genius, and will render his memory immortal, since theynow appear as natives of those places to which he introduced them. The civil,

political,  and  military  government,  trade,  manufactures,  the  arts  and  the

sciences, have all been carried on, according to his plan, and by an event not

to be paralleled in history: we have seen four women successively ascend the

throne after him, who have maintained, in full vigour, all the great designs he

accomplished, and have completed those which he had begun.

  The court has undergone some revolutions since his death, but the empire

has not suffered one. Its splendour was increased by Catherine I. It triumphed

over the Turks and the Swedes under Anna Petrowna; and under Elizabeth it

conquered  Prussia,  and  a  part  of  Pomerania;  and  lastly,  it  has  tasted  the

sweets of peace, and has seen the arts flourish in fulness and security in the

reign of Catherine the Second.[119]

  Let the historians of that nation enter into the minutest circumstances of

the new creation, the wars and undertakings of Peter the Great: let them rouse

the emulation of their countrymen, by celebrating those heroes who assisted

this monarch in his labours, in the field, and in the cabinet. It is sufficient for

a stranger, a disinterested admirer of merit, to have endeavoured to set to

view that great man, who learned of Charles XII. to conquer him, who twice

quitted his dominions, in order to govern them the better, who worked with

his own hands, in almost all the useful and necessary arts, to set an example

of instruction to his people, and who was the founder and the father of his

empire.[120]

  Princes, who reign over states long since civilized, may say to themselves,

'If a man, assisted only by his own genius, has been capable of doing such

great  things  in  the  frozen  climes  of  ancient  Scythia,  what  may  not  be

expected from us, in kingdoms where the accumulated labours of many ages

have rendered the way so easy?'


  ORIGINAL PIECES

  RELATIVE  TO  THIS  HISTORY,  AGREEABLE  TO  THE

TRANSLATIONS MADE AT THEIR FIRST PUBLICATION, BY ORDER

OF CZAR PETER I.

  SENTENCE  Pronounced against the Czarowitz Alexis, June 24th, 1718.

  By  virtue  of  an  express  ordinance  issued  by  his  czarish  majesty,  and

signed  by  his  own  hand,  on  the  13th  of  June,  for  the  judgment  of  the

czarowitz  Alexis  Petrowitz,  in  relation  to  his  crimes  and  transgressions

against  his  father  and  sovereign;  the  undernamed  ministers  and  senators,

estates military and civil, after having assembled several times in the regency

chamber  of  the  senate  of  Petersburg,  and  having  heard  read  the  original

writings and testimonies given against the czarowitz, as also his majesty's

admonitory letters to that prince, and his answers to them in his own writing,

and other acts relating to the process, and likewise the criminal informations,

declarations and confessions of the czarowitz, partly written with his own

hand, and partly delivered by word of mouth to his father and sovereign,

before the several persons undernamed, constituted by his czarish majesty's

authority to the effect of the present judgment, do acknowledge and declare,

that though according to the laws of the Russian empire, it belongs not to

them, the natural subjects of his czarish majesty's sovereign dominions, to

take cognizance of an affair of this nature, which for its importance depends

solely on the absolute will of the sovereign, whose power, unlimited by any

law, is derived from God alone; yet, in submission to his ordinance who hath

given them this liberty, and after mature reflection, observing the dictates of

their consciences without fear, flattery, or respect of persons, having nothing

before their eyes but the divine laws applicable to the present case, the canons

and rules of councils, the authority of the holy fathers and doctors of the

church, and taking also for their rule the instruction of the archbishops and

clergy assembled at Petersburg on this occasion, and conforming themselves

to the laws and constitutions of this empire, which are agreeable to those of

other  nations,  especially  the  Greeks  and  the  Romans,  and  other  Christian

princes;  they  unanimously  agreed  and  pronounced  the  czarowitz  Alexis

Petrowitz  to  be  worthy  of  death,  for  the  aforesaid  crimes  and  capital

transgressions against his sovereign and father, he being his czarish majesty's

son and subject; and that, notwithstanding the promise given by his czarish

majesty  to  the  czarowitz,  in  a  letter  sent  by  M.  Tolstoy  and  captain

Romanzoff,  dated  from  Spaw,  the  10th  of  July,  1717,  to  pardon  his

elopement if he voluntarily returned, as the czarowitz himself acknowledges

with gratitude, in his answer to that letter, dated from Naples, the 4th ofOctober, 1717, wherein he returns thanks to his majesty for the pardon he had

promised him solely on condition of his speedy and voluntary return; yet he

hath forfeited and rendered himself unworthy of that pardon, by renewing

and continuing his former transgressions, as is fully set forth in his majesty's

manifesto of the 3d of February, in this present year, and for not returning

voluntarily and of his own accord.

  And  although  his  majesty  did,  upon  the  arrival  of  the  czarowitz  at

Moscow, and his humbly confessing in writing his crimes, and asking pardon

for them, take pity on him, as is natural for every father to act towards a son,

and at the audience, held in the great hall of the castle, dated the said 3d day

of  February,  did  promise  him  full  pardon  for  all  his  crimes  and

transgressions,  it  was  only  on  condition  that  he  would  declare,  without

reserve  or  restriction,  all  his  designs,  and  who  were  his  counsellors  and

abettors therein, but that if he concealed any one person or thing, that in such

case  the  promised  pardon  should  be  null  and  void,  which  conditions  the

czarowitz did at that time accept and receive, with all outward tokens of

gratitude and obedience, solemnly swearing on the holy cross and the blessed

evangelists, and in the presence of all those assembled at that time and for

that purpose in the cathedral church, that he would faithfully, and without

reserve, declare the whole truth.

  His majesty did also the next day confirm to the czarowitz in writing the

said promise, in the interrogatories which hereafter follow, and which his

majesty caused to be delivered to him, having first written at the begining

what follows:

  'As you did yesterday receive your pardon, on condition that you would

confess all the circumstances of your flight, and whatever relates thereto; but

if you concealed any part thereof, you should answer for it with your life;

and, as you have already made some confessions, it is expected of you, for

our  more  full  satisfaction,  and  your  own  safety,  to  commit  the  same  to

writing, in such order as shall in the course of your examination be pointed

out to you.'

  And at the end, under the seventh question, there was again written, with

his czarish majesty's own hand:

  'Declare  to  us,  and  discover  whatever  hath  any  relation  to  this  affair,though it be not here expressed, and clear yourself as if it were at confession;

for if you conceal any thing that shall by any other means be afterwards

discovered, do not impute the consequence to us, since you have been already

told, that in such case the pardon granted you should be null and void.'

    Notwithstanding all which, the answers and confessions of the czarowitz

were delivered without any sincerity; he not only concealing many of his

accomplices,  but  also  the  capital  circumstances  relating  to  his  own

transgressions, particularly his rebellious design in usurping the throne even

in  the  life-time  of  his  father,  flattering  himself  that  the  populace  would

declare  in  his  favour;  all  which  hath  since  been  fully  discovered  in  the

criminal process, after he had refused to make a discovery himself, as hath

appeared by the above presents.

  Thus it hath appeared by the whole conduct of the czarowitz, as well as by

the confessions which he both delivered in writing, and by word of mouth,

particularly, that he was not disposed to wait for the succession in the manner

in which his father had left it to him after his death, according to equity, and

the order of nature which God has established; but intended to take the crown

off the head of his father, while living, and set it upon his own, not only by a

civil  insurrection,  but  by  the  assistance  of  a  foreign  force,  which  he  had

actually requested.

  The czarowitz has hereby rendered himself unworthy of the clemency and

pardon, promised him by the emperor his father; and since the laws divine

and ecclesiastical, civil and military, condemn to death, without mercy, not

only  those  whose  attempts  against  their  father  and  sovereign  have  been

proved by testimonies and writings; but even such as have been convicted of

an  intention  to  rebel,  and  of  having  formed  a  base  design  to  kill  their

sovereign, and usurp the throne; what shall we think of a rebellious design,

almost unparalleled in history, joined to that of a horrid parricide, against him

who  was  his  father  in  a  double  capacity;  a  father  of  great  lenity  and

indulgence, who brought up the czarowitz from the cradle with more than

paternal care and tenderness; who earnestly endeavoured to form him for

government,  and  with  incredible  pains,  and  indefatigable  application,  to

instruct him in the military art, and qualify him to succeed to so great an

empire? with how much stronger reason does such a design deserve to be

punished with death?  It is therefore with hearts full of affliction, and eyes streaming with tears,

that we, as subjects and servants, pronounce this sentence; considering that it

belongs not to us to give judgment in a case of so great importance, and

especially to pronounce against the son of our most precious sovereign lord

the  czar.  Nevertheless,  it  being  his  pleasure  that  we  should  act  in  this

capacity, we, by these presents, declare our real opinion, and pronounce this

sentence of condemnation with a pure and Christian conscience, as we hope

to  be  able  to  answer  for  it  at  the  just,  awful,  and  impartial  tribunal  of

Almighty God.

  We submit, however, this sentence, which we now pass, to the sovereign

power, the will, and merciful revisal of his czarish majesty, our most gracious

sovereign.


  THE PEACE OF NYSTADT.


  In the name of the Most Holy and undivided Trinity.

  Be it known by these presents, that whereas a bloody, long, and expensive

war has arisen and subsisted for several years past, between his late majesty

king Charles XII. of glorious memory, king of Sweden, of the Goths, and

Vandals, &c. &c. his successors to the throne of Sweden, the lady Ulrica

queen  of  Sweden,  of  the  Goths  and  Vandals,  &c.  and  the  kingdom  of

Sweden, on the one part; and between his czarish majesty Peter the First,

emperor of all the Russias, &c. and the empire of Russia, on the other part;

the two powers have thought proper to exert their endeavours to find out

means to put a period to those troubles, and prevent the further effusion of so

much innocent blood; and it has pleased the Almighty to dispose the hearts of

both powers, to appoint a meeting of their ministers plenipotentiary, to treat

of, and conclude a firm, sincere and lasting peace, and perpetual friendship

between  the  two  powers,  their  dominions,  provinces,  countries,  vassals,

subjects,  and  inhabitants;  namely,  Mr.  John  Liliensted,  one  of  the  most

honourable privy-council to his majesty the king of Sweden, his kingdom and

chancery, and baron Otto Reinhold Stroemfeld, intendant of the copper mines

and fiefs of Dalders, on the part of his said majesty; and on the part of his

czarish majesty, count Jacob Daniel Bruce, his general adjutant, president ofthe  colleges  of  mines  and  manufactories,  and  knight  of  the  order  of  St.

Andrew and the White Eagle, and Mr. Henry John Frederic Osterman, one of

his said majesty's privy-counsellors in his chancery: which plenipotentiary

ministers,  being  assembled  at  Nystadt,  and  having  communicated  to  each

other their respective commissions, and imploring the divine assistance, did

enter upon this important and salutary enterprise, and have, by the grace and

blessing  of  God,  concluded  the  following  peace  between  the  crown  of

Sweden and his czarish majesty.

  Art. 1. There shall be now and henceforward a perpetual and inviolable

peace,  sincere  union,  and  indissoluble  friendship,  between  his  majesty

Frederic the First, king of Sweden, of the Goths and Vandals, his successors

to the crown and kingdom of Sweden, his dominions, provinces, countries,

villages, vassals, subjects, and inhabitants, as well within the Roman empire

as out of said empire, on the one side; and his czarish majesty Peter the First,

emperor of all the Russias, &c. his successors to the throne of Russia, and all

his countries, villages, vassals, subjects, and inhabitants, on the other side; in

such  wise,  that  for  the  future,  neither  of  the  two  reconciled  powers  shall

commit, or suffer to be committed, any hostility, either privately or publicly,

directly or indirectly, nor shall in any wise assist the enemies of each other,

on any pretext whatever, not contract any alliance with them, that may be

contrary  to  this  peace,  but  shall  always  maintain  and  preserve  a  sincere

friendship towards each other, and as much as in them lies, support their

mutual honour, advantage and safety; as likewise prevent, to the utmost of

their power, any injury or vexation with which either of the reconciled parties

may be threatened by any other power.

  Art. 2. It is further mutually agreed upon betwixt the two parties, that a

general pardon and act of oblivion for all hostilities committed during the

war, either by arms or otherwise, shall be strictly observed, so far as that

neither party shall ever henceforth either call to mind, or take vengeance for

the same, particularly in regard to persons of state, and subjects who have

entered into the service of either of the two parties during the war, and have

thereby become enemies to the other, except only the Russian Cossacks, who

enlisted in the service of the king of Sweden, and whom his czarish majesty

will not consent to have included in the said general pardon, notwithstanding

the intercession made for them by the king of Sweden.  Art. 3. All hostilities, both by sea and land, shall cease both here and in the

grand duchy of Finland in fifteen days, or sooner, if possible, after the regular

exchange of the ratifications; and to this intent the conclusion of the peace

shall be published without delay. And in case that, after the expiration of the

said term, any hostilities should be committed by either party, either by sea or

land, in any manner whatsoever, through ignorance of the conclusion of the

peace, such offence shall by no means prejudice the conclusion of said peace;

on  the  contrary,  each  shall  make  a  reciprocal  exchange  of  both  men  and

effects that may be taken after the said term.

  Art. 4. His majesty the king of Sweden does, by the present treaty, as well

for himself as for his successors to the throne and kingdom of Sweden, cede

to  his  czarish  majesty,  and  his  successors  to  the  Russian  empire,  in  full,

irrevocable and everlasting possession, the provinces which have been taken

by his czarish majesty's arms from the crown of Sweden during this war, viz.

Livonia, Esthonia, Ingria, and a part of Carelia, as likewise the district of the

fiefs of Wybourg specified hereafter in the article for regulating the limits;

the towns and fortresses of Riga, Dunamund, Pernau, Revel, Dorpt, Nerva,

Wybourg,  Kexholm,  and  the  other  towns,  fortresses,  harbours,  countries,

districts, rivers, and coasts, belonging to the provinces: as likewise the islands

of  Oesel,  Dagoe,  Moen,  and  all  the  other  islands  from  the  frontiers  of

Courland, towards the coasts of Livonia, Esthonia, and Ingria, and on the east

side of Revel, and in the road of Wybourg, towards the south-east, with all

the present inhabitants of those islands, and of the aforesaid provinces, towns,

and  countries;  and  in  general,  all  their  appurtenances,  dependencies,

prerogatives, rights, and advantages, without exception, in like manner as the

crown of Sweden possessed them.

  To which purpose, his majesty the king of Sweden renounces for ever, in

the most solemn manner, as well for his own part, as for his successors, and

for the whole kingdom of Sweden, all pretensions which they have hitherto

had, or could have, to the said provinces, islands, countries, and towns; and

all the inhabitants thereof shall, by virtue of these presents, be discharged

from the oath of allegiance, which they have taken to the crown of Sweden,

in such wise as that his Swedish majesty, and the kingdom of Sweden, shall

never hereafter either claim or demand the same, on any pretence whatsoever;

but, on the contrary, they shall be and remain incorporated for ever into theempire  of  Russia.  Moreover,  his  Swedish  majesty,  and  the  kingdom  of

Sweden, promise by these presents to assist and support from henceforth his

czarish majesty, and his successors to the empire of Russia, in the peaceable

possession of the said provinces, islands, countries, and towns; and that they

will find out and deliver up to the persons authorized by his czarish majesty

for that purpose, all the records and papers principally belonging to those

places which have been taken away and carried into Sweden during the war.

  Art 5. His czarish majesty, in return, promises to evacuate and restore to

his Swedish majesty, and the kingdom of Sweden, within the space of four

weeks  after  the  exchange  of  the  ratifications  of  this  treaty,  or  sooner  if

possible, the grand duchy of Finland, except only that part thereof which has

been reserved by the following regulation of the limits which shall belong to

his czarish majesty, so that his said czarish majesty, and his successors, never

shall have or bring the least claim or demand on the said duchy, on any

pretence whatever. His czarish majesty further declares and promises, that

certain and prompt payment of two millions of crowns shall be made without

any discount to the deputies of the king of Sweden, on condition that they

produce and give sufficient receipts, as agreed upon; and the said payment

shall be made in such coin as shall be agreed upon by a separate article,

which shall be of equal force as if inserted in the body of this treaty.

  Art. 6. His majesty the king of Sweden does further reserve to himself, in

regard  to  trade,  the  liberty  of  buying  corn  yearly  at  Riga,  Revel,  and

Arensbourg,  to  the  amount  of  fifty  thousand  rubles,  which  corn  shall  be

transported from thence into Sweden, without paying duty or any other taxes,

on producing a certificate, shewing that such corn has been purchased for the

use  of  his  Swedish  majesty,  or  by  his  subjects,  charged  with  the  care  of

making this purchase by his said majesty; and such right shall not be subject

to,  or  depend  on  any  exigency,  wherein  his  czarish  majesty  may  find  it

necessary,  either  on  account  of  a  bad  harvest,  or  some  other  important

reasons, to prohibit in general the exportation of corn to any other nation.

  Art. 7. His czarish majesty does also promise, in the most solemn manner,

that he will in no wise interfere with the private affairs of the kingdom of

Sweden, nor with the form of government, which has been regulated and

established by the oath of allegiance, and unanimous consent of the states of

said  kingdom;  neither  will  he  assist  therein  any  person  whatever,  in  anymanner, directly or indirectly; but, on the contrary, will endeavour to hinder

and  prevent  any  disturbance  happening,  provided  his  czarish  majesty  has

timely notice of the same, who will on all such occasions act as a sincere

friend and good neighbour to the crown of Sweden.

  Art. 8. And as they mutually intend to establish a firm sincere and lasting

peace, to which purpose it is very necessary to regulate the limits so, that

neither of the parties can harbour any jealousy, but that each shall peaceably

possess whatever has been surrendered to him by this treaty of peace, they

have thought proper to declare, that the two empires shall from henceforth

and for ever have the following limits, beginning on the northern coast of the

Bothnic gulf, near Wickolax, from whence they shall extend to within half a

league of the sea-coast inland, and from the distance of half a league from the

sea as far as opposite to Willayoki, and from thence further inland; so that

from the sea-side, and opposite to Rohel, there shall be a distance of about

three-quarters  of  a  league,  in  a  direct  line,  to  the  road  which  leads  from

Wibourg to Lapstrand, at three leagues distance from Wibourg, and which

proceeds the same distance of three leagues towards the north by Wibourg, in

a direct line to the former limits between Russia and Sweden, even before the

reduction of the district of Kexholm under the government of the king of

Sweden. Those ancient limits extend eight leagues towards the north, from

thence they run in a direct line through the district of Kexholm, to the place

where the harbour of Porogerai, which begins near the town of Kudumagube,

joins to the ancient limits, between Russia and Sweden, so that his majesty

the king and kingdom of Sweden, shall henceforth possess all that part lying

west and north beyond the above specified limits, and his czarish majesty and

the empire of Russia all that part which is situated east and south of the said

limits. And as his czarish majesty surrenders from henceforth to his Swedish

majesty and the kingdom of Sweden, a part of the district of Kexholm, which

belonged heretofore to the empire of Russia, he promises, in the most solemn

manner, in regard to himself and successors to the throne of Russia, that he

never will make any future claim to this said district of Kexholm, on any

account  whatever;  but  the  said  district  shall  hereafter  be  and  remain

incorporated into the kingdom of Sweden. As to the limits in the country of

Lamparque, they shall remain on the same footing as they were before the

beginning of this war between the two empires. It is further agreed upon, thatcommissaries  shall  be  appointed  by  each  party,  immediately  after  the

ratification of this treaty to regulate the limits as aforesaid.

  Art. 9. His czarish majesty further promises to maintain all the inhabitants

of the provinces of Livonia, Esthonia, and Oesel, as well nobles as plebeians,

and the towns, magistrates, companies, and trades, in the full enjoyment of

the said privileges, customs and prerogatives, which they have enjoyed under

the dominion of his Swedish majesty.

  Art.  10.  There  shall  not  hereafter  be  any  violence  offered  to  the

consciences of the inhabitants of the ceded countries; on the contrary, his

czarish majesty engages on his side to preserve and maintain the evangelical

(Lutheran) religion on the same footing as under the Swedish government,

provided there is likewise a free liberty of conscience allowed to those of the

Greek religion.

  Art. 11. In regard to the reductions and liquidations made in the reign of

the late king of Sweden in Livonia, Esthonia, and Oesel, to the great injury of

the subjects and inhabitants of those countries, which, conformable to the

justice of the affair in question, obliged his late majesty the king of Sweden,

of glorious memory, to promise, by an ordinance (which was published the

13th day of April, 1700, that if any one of his subjects could fairly prove, that

the goods which had been confiscated were their property justice should be

done them, whereby several subjects of the said countries have had such their

confiscated  effects  restored  to  them)  his  czarish  majesty  engages  and

promises, that justice shall be done to every person, whether residing or not,

who has a just claim or pretension to any lands in Livonia, Esthonia, or the

province of Oesel, and can make full proof thereof, and that such person shall

be reinstated in the possession of his lands and effects.

  Art. 12. There shall likewise be immediate restitution made, conformable

to the general amnesty regulated and agreed by the second article, to such of

the inhabitants of Livonia, Esthonia, and the island of Oesel, who may during

this war have joined the king of Sweden, together with all their effects, lands,

and houses, which have been confiscated and given to others, as well in the

towns of these provinces, as in those of Narva and Wibourg, notwithstanding

they may have passed during the said war by inheritance or otherwise into

other  hands,  with  any  exception  or  restraint,  even  though  the  proprietorsshould  be  actually  in  Sweden,  either  as  prisoners  or  otherwise;  and  such

restitution shall take place so soon as each person is re-naturalized by his

respective government, and produces his documents relating to his right; on

the other hand, these proprietors shall by no means lay claim to, or pretend to

any part of, the revenues, which may have been received by those who were

in  possession  in  consequence  of  the  confiscation,  nor  to  any  other

compensation for their losses in the war or otherwise. And all persons, who

are thus put in re-possession of their effects and lands, shall be obliged to do

homage to his czarish majesty, their present sovereign, and further to behave

themselves as faithful vassals and subjects; and when they have taken the

usual oath of allegiance, they shall be at liberty to leave their own country to

go and live in any other, which is in alliance and friendship with the Russian

empire, as also to enter into the service of neutral powers, or to continue

therein, if already engaged, as they shall think proper. On the other hand, in

regard to those, who do not choose to do homage to his czarish majesty, they

shall be allowed the space of three years from the publication of the peace, to

sell or dispose of their effects, lands, and all belonging to them, to the best

advantage,  without  paying  any  more  than  is  paid  by  every  other  person,

agreeably to the laws and statutes of the country. And if hereafter, it should

happen that an inheritance should devolve to any person according to the

laws of the country, and that such person shall not as yet have taken the oath

of allegiance to his czarish majesty, he shall in such case be obliged to take

the  same  at  the  time  of  entering  on  the  possession  of  his  inheritance,

otherwise to sell off all his effects in the space of one year.

  Also those who have advanced money on lands in Livonia, Esthonia, and

the island of Oesel, and have lawful security for the same, shall enjoy their

mortgages peaceably, until both capital and interest are discharged; on the

other hand, the mortgages shall not claim any interest, which expired during

the war, and which have not been demanded or paid; but those who in either

of these cases have the administration of the said effects, shall be obliged to

do homage to his czarish majesty. This likewise extends to all those who

remain  in  his  czarish  majesty's  dominions,  and  who  shall  have  the  same

liberty to dispose of their effects in Sweden, and in those countries which

have been surrendered to that crown by this peace. Moreover, the subjects of

each of the reconciled powers shall be mutually supported in all their lawfulclaims  and  demands,  whether  on  the  public,  or  on  individuals  within  the

dominions of the two powers, and immediate justice shall be done them, so

that every person may be reinstated in the possession of what justly belongs

to him.

  Art. 13. All contributions in money shall from the signing of this treaty

cease in the grand duchy of Finland, which his czarish majesty by the fifth

article  of  this  treaty  cedes  to  his  Swedish  majesty  and  the  kingdom  of

Sweden; on the other hand the duchy of Finland shall furnish his czarish

majesty's troops with the necessary provisions and forage gratis, until they

shall have entirely evacuated the said duchy, on the said footing as has been

practised heretofore; and his czarish majesty shall prohibit and forbid, under

the severest penalties, the dislodging any ministers or peasants of the Finnish

nation, contrary to their inclinations, or that the least injury be done to them.

In consideration of which, and as it will be permitted his czarish majesty,

upon evacuating the said countries and towns, to take with him his great and

small  cannon,  with  their  carriages  and  other  appurtenances,  and  the

magazines and other warlike stores which he shall think fit. The inhabitants

shall furnish a sufficient number of horse and waggons as far as the frontiers;

and also, if the whole of this cannot be executed according to the stipulated

terms, and that any part of such artillery, &c. is necessitated to be left behind,

then, and in such cases, that which is so left shall be properly taken care of,

and afterwards delivered to his czarish majesty's deputies, whenever it shall

be agreeable to them, and likewise be transported to the frontiers in manner

as above. If his czarish majesty's troops shall have found and sent out of the

country any deeds or papers belonging to the grand duchy of Finland, strict

search shall be made for the same, and all of them that can be found shall be

faithfully restored to deputies of his Swedish majesty.

  Art. 14. All the prisoners on each side, of whatsoever nation, rank, and

condition,  shall  be  set  at  liberty  immediately  after  the  ratification  of  this

treaty, without any ransom, at the same time every prisoner shall either pay or

give sufficient security for the payment of all debts by them contracted. The

prisoners  on  each  side  shall  be  furnished  with  the  necessary  horses  and

waggons gratis during the time allotted for their return home, in proportion to

the distance from the frontiers. In regard to such prisoners, who shall have

sided  with  one  or  the  other  party,  or  who  shall  choose  to  settle  in  thedominions of either of the two powers, they shall have full liberty so to do

without restriction: and this liberty shall likewise extend to all those who

have been compelled to serve either party during the war, who may in like

manner  remain  where  they  are,  or  return  home;  except  such  who  have

voluntarily  embraced  the  Greek  religion,  in  compliance  to  his  czarish

majesty; for which purpose each party shall order that the edicts be published

and made known in their respective dominions.

  Art. 15. His majesty the king, and the republic of Poland, as allies to his

czarish majesty, are expressly comprehended in this treaty of peace, and have

equal right thereto, as if the treaty of peace between them and the crown of

Sweden had been inserted here at full length: to which purpose all hostilities

whatsoever shall cease in general throughout all the kingdoms, countries, and

patrimonies belonging to the two reconciled parties, whether situated within

or out of the Roman empire, and there shall be a solid and lasting peace

established between the two aforesaid powers. And as no plenipotentiary on

the part of his Polish majesty and the republic of Poland has assisted at this

treaty of peace, held at Nystadt, and that consequently they could not at one

and the same time renew the peace by a solemn treaty between his majesty

the king of Poland and the crown of Sweden, his majesty the king of Sweden

does therefore engage and promise, that he will send plenipotentiaries to open

the conferences, so soon as a place shall be appointed for the said meeting, in

order to conclude, through the mediation of his czarish majesty, a lasting

peace between the two crowns, provided nothing is therein contained which

may be prejudicial to the treaty of perpetual peace made with his czarish

majesty.

  Art. 16. A free trade shall be regulated and established as soon as possible,

which  shall  subsist  both  by  sea  and  land  between  the  two  powers,  their

dominions, subjects, and inhabitants, by means of a separate treaty on this

head, to the good and advantage of their respective dominions; and in the

mean time the subjects of Russia and Sweden shall have leave to trade freely

in the empire of Russia and kingdom of Sweden, so soon as the treaty of

peace  is  ratified,  after  paying  the  usual  duties  on  the  several  kinds  of

merchandise; so that, the subjects of Russia and Sweden shall reciprocally

enjoy  the  same  privileges  and  prerogatives  as  are  enjoyed  by  the  closest

friends of either of the said states.  Art. 17. Restitution shall be made on both sides, after the ratification of the

peace, not only of the magazines which were before the commencement of

the war established in certain trading towns belonging to the two powers, but

also liberty shall be reciprocally granted to the subjects of his czarish majesty

and the king of Sweden to establish magazines in the towns, harbours, and

other places subject to both or either of the said powers.

  Art. 18. If any Swedish ships of war or merchant vessels shall have the

misfortune to be wrecked, or cast away by stress of weather, or any other

accident, on the coasts and harbours of Russia, his czarish majesty's subjects

shall be obliged to give them all aid and assistance in their power to save

their rigging and effects, and faithfully to restore whatever may be drove on

shore, if demanded, provided they are properly rewarded. And the subjects of

his majesty the king of Sweden shall do the same in regard to such Russian

ships and effects as may have the misfortune to be wrecked or otherwise lost

on the coasts of Sweden; for which purpose, and to prevent all ill treatment,

robbing,  and  plundering,  which  commonly  happens  on  such  melancholy

occasions, his czarish majesty and the king of Sweden will cause a most

rigorous prohibition to be issued, and all who shall be found transgressing in

this point shall be punished on the spot.

  Art. 19. And to prevent all possible cause or occasion of misunderstanding

between the two parties, in relation to sea affairs, they have concluded and

determined, that any Swedish ships of war, of whatever number or size, that

shall hereafter pass by any of his czarish majesty's forts or castles, shall salute

the same with their cannon, which compliment shall be directly returned in

the same manner by the Russian fort or castle; and, vice versa, any Russian

ships of war, of whatever number or size, that shall hereafter pass by any fort

or  castle  belonging  to  his  Swedish  majesty,  shall  salute  the  same  with  a

discharge of their cannon, which compliment shall be instantly returned in

the same manner by the Swedish fort; and in case any one or more Swedish

and Russian ships shall meet at sea, or in any harbour or elsewhere, they shall

salute each other with a common discharge, as is usually practised on such

occasions between the ships of Sweden and Denmark.

  Art. 20. It is mutually agreed between the two powers, no longer to defray

the expenses of the ministers of the two powers, as have been done hitherto;

but  their  representative  ministers,  plenipotentiaries,  and  envoys,  shallhereafter defray their own expenses and those of their own attendants, as well

on their journey as during their stay, and back to their respective place of

residence. On the other hand, either of the two parties, on receiving timely

notice of the arrival of an envoy, shall order that their subjects give them all

the assistance that may be necessary to escort them safe on their journey.

  Art. 21. His majesty the king of Sweden does on his part comprehend his

majesty the king of Great Britain in this treaty of peace, reserving only the

differences  subsisting  between  their  czarish  and  his  Britannic  majesties,

which they shall immediately endeavour to terminate in a friendly manner;

and such other powers, who shall be named by the two reconciled parties

within the space of three months, shall likewise be included in this treaty of

peace.

  Art. 22. In case any misunderstanding shall hereafter arise between the

states and subjects of Sweden and Russia, it shall by no means prejudice this

treaty of perpetual peace; which shall nevertheless always be and remain in

full force agreeable to its intent, and commissaries shall without delay be

appointed on each side to inquire into and adjust all disputes.

  Art. 23. All those who have been guilty of high treason, murder, theft, and

other  crimes,  and  those  who  deserted  from  Sweden  to  Russia,  and  from

Russia to Sweden, either singly or with their wives and children, shall be

immediately sent back, provided the complaining party of the country from

whence they made their escape, shall think fit to recal them, let them be of

what nation soever, and in the same condition as they were at their arrival,

together with their wives and children, as likewise with all they had stolen,

plundered, or taken away with them in their flight.

  Art. 24. The exchange of the ratification of this treaty of peace, shall be

reciprocally made at Nystadt within the space of three weeks, after the day of

signing the same, or sooner, if possible. In witness whereof, two copies of

this treaty, exactly corresponding with each other, have been drawn up, and

confirmed  by  the  plenipotentiary  ministers  on  each  side,  in  virtue  of  the

authority they have received from their respective sovereigns; which copies

they have signed with their own hands, and sealed with their own seals. Done

at Nystadt, this 30th day of August, in the year of our Lord 1721. O. S.  Jean Liliensted.

  Otto Reinhold Stroemfeld.

  Jacob Daniel Bruce.

    Henry-John-Frederic Osterman.

  Ordinance  of  the  Emperor  Peter  I.  for  the  crowning  of  the  Empress

Catherine.

  We, Peter the First, emperor and autocrator of all the Russias, &c. to all

our officers ecclesiastical, civil, and military, and all others of the Russian

nation, our faithful subjects.

  No one can be ignorant that it has been a constant and invariable custom

among  the  monarchs  of  all  Christian  states,  to  cause  their  consorts  to  be

crowned, and that the same is at present practised, and hath frequently been

in former times by those emperors who professed the holy faith of the Greek

church; to wit, by the emperor Basilides, who caused his wife Zenobia to be

crowned; the emperor Justinian, his wife Lucipina; the emperor Heraclius, his

wife Martina: the emperor Leo, the philosopher, his wife Mary; and many

others, who have in like manner placed the imperial crown on the head of

their consorts, and whom it would be too tedious here to enumerate.

  It is also well known to every one how much we have exposed our person,

and faced the greatest dangers, for the good of our country during the one and

twenty years' course of the late war, which we have by the assistance of God

terminated in so honourable and advantageous a manner, that Russia hath

never beheld such a peace, nor ever acquired so great glory as in the late war.

Now  the  empress  Catherine,  our  dearly  beloved  wife,  having  greatly

comforted and assisted us during the said war, and also in several other our

expeditions, wherein she voluntarily and cheerfully accompanied us, assisting

us  with  her  counsel  and  advice  in  every  exigence,  notwithstanding  the

weakness of her sex, particularly in the battle against the Turks, on the banks

of the river Pruth, wherein our army was reduced to twenty thousand men,

while that of the Turks amounted to two hundred and seventy thousand, and

on which desperate occasion she signalized herself in a particular manner, by

a courage and presence of mind superior to her sex, which is well known to

all our army, and to the whole Russian empire: therefore, for these reasons,and in virtue of the power which God has given us, we have resolved to

honour our said consort Catherine with the imperial crown, as a reward for

her painful services; and we propose, God willing, that this ceremony shall be

performed the ensuing winter at Moscow. And we do hereby give notice of

this our resolution to all who are faithful subjects, in favour of whom our

imperial affection is unalterable.


  THE END.


  S. Johnson & Son, Printers, Livesey St., Manchester.


  FOOTNOTES:


  [1] A French league contains three English miles.

  [2] The Boristhenes, or Dnieper, is one of the largest rivers in Europe; it

rises in the Walchonske Forest, runs through Lithuania, the country of the

Zoporag Cossacks, and that of the Nagisch Tartars, and falls into the Black

Sea near Oczakow. It has thirteen cataracts within a small distance.

  [3] The reader will easily perceive, that the whole of this paragraph relates

only to the French language, for in English we make no such distinctions in

the name of these people, but always call them Russians.

  [4]  A  collection  of  water  lying  between  the  gulf  of  Finland  and  lake

Onega; it is the largest, and said to contain a greater number of fish than any

other in Europe.

  [5] We must not confound this river with another of the same name that

runs through Lithuania in Poland, and dividing Livonia and Courland, falls

into the Baltic at Dunamunder fort, below Riga.

  [6] This was by the ancients reckoned among the most famous rivers in

the world, and the boundary between Asia and Europe. It issues from St.

John's Lake, not far from Tula, and after a long course, divides itself into

three arms, and falls into the sea below Azoph.

  [7] A promontory of the island of Maggero in the north of Norway, and isthe most northern point in Europe.

  [8] Grod, or gorod, signifies city in the Russian language.

  [9] Memoirs of Strahlemberg, confirmed by those sent me from Russia.

  [10] Memoirs sent from Petersburg.

  [11] Memoirs sent from Petersburg.

  [12] Called also the Ob. This large river issues from the lake Altin in

Calmuck Tartary, in Asia, from whence running north it forms the boundary

between  Europe  and  Asia,  and  after  traversing  a  vast  tract  of  above  two

thousand miles, it falls into a bay of the Frozen Sea.

  [13] In the Russian language Irtish. This river runs from N. to S. through

all  Russia,  and  falling  into  the  former  river,  forms  part  of  the  boundary

between Asia and Europe.

  [14] In the Russian language Tobolsky.

  [15] His name was Sowastowslaw.

  [16] This anecdote is taken from a private MS. entitled 'The Ecclesiastical

Government of Russia,' which is like wise deposited in the public library.

  [17] See page 35.

  [18] Thus the Russians call this young man; but in all French authors we

find Romano, that language having no such letter as the W; others again call

him Romanoff.

  [19] Or Chotsin, a town of Upper Moldavia in European Turkey, well

fortified both by nature and art, situated on the Dniester, and subject to the

Turks, from whom it was taken by the Russians in 1739.

  [20] This must certainly be a mistake of M. de Voltaire, or an error in the

press; for the lady here spoken of was the daughter of Matthias Apraxim, a

person on whom Theodore had lately conferred nobility.

  [21]  Extracted  wholly  from  the  memoirs  sent  from  Moscow  and

Petersburg.

  [22] Here M. de Voltaire seems to have greatly mistaken the sense of this

word.  Raspop  not  being  a  proper  name,  in  which  sense  he  takes  it,  but

signifies a degraded priest.  [23] We suppose the author means Moscow.

  [24] Or Cossano, a small town and abbey in the Milanese. On the Adda,

near  this  place,  an  obstinate  battle  was  fought  between  the  Germans  and

French, in 1705, when prince Eugene defeated the duke of Vendome.

  [25] A town and abbey on the borders of Westphalia, in Germany; the

abbot of which is a sovereign prince, and has a seat in the imperial diet.

  [26] Or Fuld, a town and abbey of Hesse, in Germany; situate on a river of

the same name. It is governed by an abbot, who is a prince of the empire.

  [27] An imperial city of Suabia, in Germany, situate on the Ifar.

  [28] How are we to reconcile this with what the author tells us in the latter

part of the third chapter, where he says, that this princess, perceiving that her

brother Theodore was near his end, declined retiring to a convent, as was the

usual custom of the princesses of the imperial family.

  [29] We find, in the memoirs of count Strahlemberg, a Swedish officer,

who was taken prisoner at the battle of Pultowa, and continued many years at

the  court  of  czar  Peter,  the  following  account  of  the  true  cause  of  this

extraordinary kind of hydrophobia. When Peter was about five years of age,

his mother took him with her in a coach for an airing, and having to pass a

dam, where there was a great fall of water the child, who was then sleeping in

his nurse's lap, was so terrified by the rushing of the water (the noise of

which waked him suddenly out of his sleep), that he was seized with a violent

fever, and, after his recovery, he retained such a dread of that element, that he

could not bear the sight even of any standing water, much less to hear a

running stream.

  [30] Memoirs of Petersburg and Moscow.

  [31] This should certainly be four years; as we can hardly suppose a boy

of fourteen years and a half, would be received into the military service of

any country, and much less by the Dutch at that period of time, when they

stood in need of able and experienced soldiers, to withstand the attacks of the

French, who breathed nothing less than the utter subversion of their state.

  [32] General Le Fort's MSS.

  [33] General Le Fort's MSS.  [34] Extracted from memoirs sent from China; also from Petersburg, and

from letters published in Du Halde's History of China.

  [35] A famous and considerable river of the Asiatic part of the empire of

Russia, which falls into the eastern ocean. It was formerly called Charan

Muran, but at present the Chinese and Mauschurs give it the name of Sagalin

Ula. It also bears the several appellations of Jamur, Onon, Helong, Kiang,

and Skilka. It is formed by the junction of the rivers Sckilk and Argun, and is

navigable to the sea.

  [36] Busching, the famous geographer, says, that its whole length is no

more than four hundred miles, so that there must be a very great error in one

or other of these authors.

  [37] Memoirs of the jesuits Pereira and Gerbillon.

  [38] 1689, Sept. 8, new style. Memoirs of China.

  [39] The present reigning empress Catharine seems even to exceed her

aunt in lenity, which together with the superior qualifications of this princess,

affords her people the most happy presage of a glorious reign; and it is not

without reason, that the most sensible amongst them flatter themselves with

the hope, that under this august princess, the Russian empire will arrive at its

highest pinnacle of glory.

  [40] Le Fort's Memoirs.

  [41] It is in consequence of this glorious and equitable distinction, that at

this day we find nobility gives no precedence in the court of Russia; nor can

the  son  of  a  prince  appear  there  in  any  other  rank,  than  that  which  his

situation in the army gives him; while a private citizen, who by his merit has

raised himself above his condition, receives all the honours due to his post; or

more  properly  speaking,  to  the  merit  which  obtained  him  that  post.  A

reputation of this kind would, methinks, be attended with great advantages,

both in England and France, as it would be a means to raise in the youth of all

ranks, a virtuous and noble emulation.

  [42] General Le Fort's MSS.

  [43] The Petersburg Memoirs, and Memoirs of Le Fort.

  [44] Le Fort's MS. memoirs.  [45] Precop, or Perekop, once a fortress on the Isthmus, which joins the

peninsula of Crim Tartary to the main land of little Tartary, in European

Turkey, and thence considered as the key to that country. It has its name from

the ditches cut across for the defence of the peninsula.

  [46] These were two scholars from Christ Church Hospital, commonly

called blue coat boys.

  [47] The czar was particularly fond of this nobleman, because he was a

great lover of maritime affairs, frequently rowed and sailed with him upon

the water, and gave him what information he could concerning shipping.

  [48] Le Fort's MSS. and those of Petersburg.

  [49] Le Fort's MSS.

  [50]  A  most  extraordinary  instance  of  the  obstinate  attachment  of  the

Russians to their old customs, happened in the time of the czar Bassilowitz,

and undoubtedly influenced him not a little in the severity with which he

treated his people. The king of Poland, Stephen Battori, having recovered

Livonia,  went  himself  into  that  province  to  establish  a  new  form  of

government. According to the constant custom there, when any peasant, all of

whom were treated as slaves, had committed a fault, he was whipped with a

rod till the blood came. The king was willing to commute this barbarous

punishment for one that was more moderate; but the peasants, insensible of

the favour designed them, threw themselves at his feet, and intreated him not

to  make  any  alterations  in  their  ancient  customs,  because  they  had

experienced, that all innovations, far from procuring them the least redress,

had always made their burthens sit the heavier on them.

  [51] Memoirs of captain Perry, the engineer, employed by Peter the Great,

in Russia, and MSS. of Le Fort.

  [52] Captain Perry, in p. 184 of his memoirs, says, that these executions

being performed in the depth of winter, their bodies were immediately frozen;

those who were beheaded, were ordered to be left in the same posture as

when executed, in ranks upon the ground, with their heads lying by them: and

those who were hanged round the three walls of the city, were left hanging

the whole winter, to the view of the people, till the warm weather began to

come on in the spring, when they were taken down and buried together in apit,  to  prevent  infection.  This  author  adds,  that  there  were  other  gibbets

placed  on  all  the  public  roads  leading  to  Moscow,  where  others  of  these

rebels were hanged.

  [53] MSS. of Le Fort.

  [54] Somewhat like those of our blue coat boys in England.

  [55] 20th Sept. 1698. It is to be observed, that I always follow the new

style in my dates.

  [56] Norberg, chaplain and confessor to Charles XII. says, in his history,

'That  he  had  the  insolence  to  complain  of  oppressions,  and  that  he  was

condemned to lose his honour and life.' This is speaking like the high-priest

of despotism. He should have observed, that no one can deprive a citizen of

his honour for doing his duty.

  [57] See the History of Charles XII.

  [58] A town on the river Lycus, in the province of Assyria, now called

Curdestan, where Alexander the Great fought his third and decisive battle,

with Darius, king of Persia.

  [59] Vol. I. p. 439, of the 4to. edition, printed at the Hague.

  [60] The chaplain Norberg, pretends, that, immediately after the battle of

Narva, the Grand Seignior wrote a letter of congratulation to the king of

Sweden, in these terms. 'The sultan Basha, by the grace of God, to Charles

XII. &c.' The letter was dated from the æra of the creation of the world.

  [61] See History of Charles XII.

  [62] This chapter and the following, are taken entirely from the journal of

Peter the Great, sent me from Petersburg.

  [63] We must beg leave to remark in this place, that a king of England has

the power of doing good in virtue of his own authority, and may do evil if so

disposed, by having a majority in a corrupt parliament; whereas, a king of

Poland can neither do good nor evil, not having it in his power to dispose

even of a pair of colours.

  [64] This seems a mistake; our author probably meant to say Kercholme,

because Wibourg is not on the lake Ladoga, but on the gulf of Finland.  [65] Taken from the journal of Peter the Great.

  [66] Some writers call it Nyenschantz.

  [67] Petersburg was founded on Whitsunday, the 27th May, 1703.

  [68] About sixty thousand pounds sterling.

  [69] All the foregoing chapters, and likewise those which follow, are taken

from the journals of Peter the Great, and the papers sent me from Petersburg,

carefully compared with other memoirs.

  [70] Menzikoff's parents were vassals of the monastery of Cosmopoly: at

the age of thirteen, he went to Moscow, and was taken into the service of a

pastry-cook. His employment was singing ballads, and crying puffs and cakes

about the streets. One day, as he was following this occupation, the czar

happening to hear him, and to be diverted with one of his songs, sent for him,

and asked him if he would sell his pies and his basket? The boy answered,

that his business was to sell his pies, but he must ask his master's leave to sell

his basket; yet as every thing belonged to his prince, his majesty had only to

lay his commands upon him. The czar was so pleased with this answer, that

he immediately ordered him to court, where he gave him at first a mean

employment; but being every day more pleased with his wit, he thought fit to

place him about his person, and to make him groom of his bed-chamber, from

whence he gradually raised him to the highest preferments. He was tall and

well shaped. At his first coming into the czar's service, he inlisted in Le Fort's

company,  and  acquired,  under  that  general's  instruction,  such  a  degree  of

knowledge and skill, as enabled him to command armies, and to become one

of the bravest and most successful generals in Russia.

  [71] M. de Voltaire calls this city Wibourg, in this and some other places

of his history. The French are not always very attentive to the right names of

places, but here it is of some consequence. Wibourg is the capital of Jutland

in Denmark. Wiburn, the city here meant, is the capital of Carelia in Russian

Finland.

  [72] The czar's manifesto in the Ukraine, 1709.

  [73] The impartiality of an historian obliges us in this place to advertise

our readers, that it was not the fault of Augustus, that Patkul was delivered up

to  the  king  of  Sweden;  Augustus  having  privately  sent  orders  to  thecommandant of the fort of Konigstein, where Patkul was then confined, to

suffer his prisoner to make his escape in time. But the avarice of this officer

proved fatal to the life of the unhappy captive, and to the character of his own

prince; for while he was endeavouring to make the best bargain he could for

himself,  the  time  slipped  inconceivably  away;  and  while  they  were  yet

debating  upon  the  price  of  the  proposed  releasement,  the  guards  sent  by

Charles  came  and  demanded  Patkul  in  the  name  of  their  sovereign.  The

commandant was forced to obey, and the unhappy victim was delivered up,

contrary to the intentions of Augustus.

  [74] What would those Swedes say, were they living, to see the pitiful

figure their descendants have made in this war.

  [75] In the Russian language, Soeza.

  [76] This is acknowledged by Norberg himself, vol. ii. p. 263.

  [77] Vol. II. page 279.

  [78]  The  Memoirs  of  Peter  the  Great,  by  the  pretended  boyard  Iwan

Nestesuranoy, printed at Amsterdam, in 1730, say, that the king of Sweden,

before he passed the Boristhenes, sent a general officer with proposals of

peace to the czar. The four volumes of these Memoirs are either a collection

of untruths and absurdities, or compilations from common newspapers.

  [79] This fact is likewise found in a letter, printed before the Anecdotes of

Russia, p. 23.

  [80] La Motraye, in the relation of his travels, quotes a letter from Charles

XII. to the grand vizier; but this letter is false, as are most of the relations of

that mercenary writer; and Norberg himself acknowledges that the king of

Sweden never could be prevailed on to write to the grand vizier.

  [81] The czar, says the preface to lord Whitworth's account of Russia, who

had been absolute enough to civilize savages, had no idea, could conceive

none, of the privileges of a nation civilized in the only rational manner by

laws and liberties. He demanded immediate and severe punishment of the

offenders: he demanded it of a princess, whom he thought interested, to assert

the sacredness of the persons of monarchs, even in their representatives; and

he  demanded  it  with  threats  of  wreaking  his  vengeance  on  all  English

merchants and subjects established in his dominions. In this light the menaceswere  formidable;  otherwise,  happily,  the  rights  of  the  whole  people  were

more sacred here than the persons of foreign ministers. The czar's memorials

urged the queen with the satisfaction which she herself had extorted, when

only the boat and servants of the earl of Manchester had been insulted at

Venice. That state had broken through the fundamental laws, to content the

queen of Great Britain. How noble a picture of government, when a monarch,

that can force another nation to infringe its constitution, dare not violate his

own? One may imagine with what difficulty our secretaries of state must

have laboured through all the ambages of phrase in English, French, German,

and Russ, to explain to Muscovite ears and Muscovite understandings, the

meaning of indictments, pleadings, precedents, juries, and verdicts; and how

impatiently Peter must have listened to promises of a hearing next term? With

what astonishment must he have beheld a great queen, engaging to endeavour

to prevail on her parliament to pass an act to prevent any such outrage for the

future? What honour does it not reflect on the memory of that princess to

own to an arbitrary emperor, that even to appease him she dare not put the

meanest of her subjects to death uncondemned by law!-There are, says she, in

one  of  her  dispatches  to  him,  insuperable  difficulties,  with  respect  to  the

ancient and fundamental laws of the government of our people; which we

fear do not permit so severe and rigorous a sentence to be given, as your

imperial  majesty  at  first  seemed  to  expect  in  this  case;  and  we  persuade

ourself, that your imperial majesty, who are a prince famous for clemency

and exact justice, will not require us, who are the guardian and protectress of

the laws, to inflict a punishment upon our subjects, which the law does not

impower us to do. Words so venerable and heroic, that this broil ought to

become history, and be exempted from the oblivion due to the silly squabbles

of ambassadors and their privileges. If Anne deserved praise for her conduct

on this occasion, it reflects still greater glory on Peter, that this ferocious man

should listen to these details, and had moderation and justice enough to be

persuaded by the reason of them.

  [82] Afterwards created lord Whitworth, by king George I.

  [83] The account this chaplain gives of the demands of the grand seignior

is equally false and puerile. He says, that sultan Achmet, previous to his

declaring war against the czar, sent to that prince a paper, containing the

conditions on which he was willing to grant him peace. These conditions,Norberg tells us, were as follows: 'That Peter should renounce his alliance

with Augustus, reinstate Stanislaus in the possession of the crown of Poland,

restore all Livonia to Charles XII., and pay that prince the value in ready

money of what he had taken from him at the battle of Pultowa; and, lastly,

that the czar should demolish his newly-built city of Petersburg.' This piece

was forged by one Brazey, a half-starved pamphleteer, and author of a work

entitled,  Memoirs,  Satirical,  Historical,  and  Entertaining.  It  was  from  this

fountain Norberg drew his intelligence; and however he may have been the

confessor  of  Charles  XII.  he  certainly  does  not  appear  to  have  been  his

confidant.

  [84] The new vizier embraced every opportunity of affronting the czar, in

the person of his envoy, and particularly in giving the French ambassador the

preference. It was customary, on the promotion of the grand vizier, for all the

foreign ministers to request an audience of congratulation. Count Tolstoy was

the first who demanded that audience; but was answered-That the precedence

had  always  been  given  to  the  ambassador  of  France:  whereupon  Tolstoy

informed the vizier-That he must be deprived of the pleasure of waiting on

him at all: which, being maliciously represented, as expressing the utmost

contempt  of  his  person,  and  the  khan  of  Tartary  being  at  the  same  time

instigated  to  make  several  heavy  complaints  against  the  conduct  of  the

Russians on the frontiers, count Tolstoy was immediately committed to the

castle of the Seven Towers.

  [85] It is very strange that so many writers always confound Walachia and

Moldavia together.

  [86] This duke of Holstein, at the time he married the daughter of Peter I.

was a prince of very inconsiderable power, though of one of the most ancient

houses in Germany. His ancestors had been stripped of great part of their

dominions by the kings of Denmark; so that, at the time of this marriage, he

found himself greatly circumscribed in point of possessions; but, from this

epoch of his alliance with the czar of Muscovy, we may date the rise of the

ducal branch of Holstein, which now fills the thrones of Russia and Sweden,

and  is  likewise  in  possession  of  the  bishopric  of  Lubec,  which,  in  all

probability, will fall to this house, notwithstanding the late election, which at

present is the subject of litigation, the issue of which will, to all appearance,

terminate  in  favour  of  the  prince,  son  to  the  present  bishop,  through  theprotection of the courts of Vienna and Petersburg. The empress Catherine,

who now sits on the throne of Russia is herself descended from this august

house, by the side of her mother, who was sister to the king of Sweden, to the

prince-bishop of Lubec, and to the famous prince George of Holstein, whose

achievements made so much noise during the war. This princess, whose name

was Elizabeth, married the reigning prince of Anbak Zerbst, whose house

was indisputably the most ancient; and, in former times, the most powerful in

all Germany, since they can trace their pedigree from the dukes of Ascania,

who  were  formerly  masters  of  the  two  electorates  of  Saxony  and

Brandenburg, as appears by their armorial bearings, which are, quarterly, the

arms of Saxony and Brandenburg. Of this branch of Zerbst there is remaining

only the present reigning prince, brother to the empress Catherine, who, in

case he should die without issue, will succeed to the principality of Yevern,

in  East  Friesland;  from  all  which  it  appears  already,  that  the  family  of

Holstein is at present the most powerful in Europe, as being in possession of

three crowns in the North.-[Since the above was written important changes

have taken place.]

  [87] This same count Poniatowsky, who was at that time in the service of

Charles XII., died afterwards castellan of Cracovia, and first senator of the

republic of Poland, after having enjoyed all the dignities to which a nobleman

of  that  country  can  attain.  His  connexions  with  Charles  XII.  during  that

prince's retirement at Bender, first made him taken notice of; and, it is to be

wished, for the honour of his memory, that he had waited till the conclusion

of a peace between Sweden and Poland, to be reconciled to king Augustus;

but following the dictates of ambition, rather than those of strict honour, he

sacrificed the interests of both Charles and Stanislaus, to the care of his own

fortune; and, while he appeared the most zealous in their cause, he secretly

did them all the ill services he could at the Ottoman Porte: to this double

dealing he owed the immense fortune of which he was afterwards possessed.

He married the princess Czartoriski, daughter of the castellan of Vilna, a

lady, for her heroic spirit, worthy to have been born in the times of ancient

Rome: when her eldest son, the present grand chamberlain of the crown, had

that famous dispute with Count Tarlo, palatine of Lublin; a dispute which

made so much noise in all the public papers in the year 1742, this lady, after

having made him shoot at a mark every day, for three weeks, in order to beexpert at firing, said to him, as he was mounting his horse, to go to meet his

adversary-'Go, my son; but, if you do not acquit yourself with honour in this

affair, never appear before me again.' This anecdote may serve as a specimen

of the character of our heroine. The family of Czartoriski is descended from

the ancient Jagellins, who were, for several ages, in lineal possession of the

crown of Poland; and is, at this day, extremely rich and powerful, by the

alliances  it  has  contracted,  but  they  have  never  been  able  to  acquire

popularity; and so long as count Tarlo (who was killed in a duel with the

young count Poniatowsky) lived, had no influence in the dictines, or lesser

assembly of the states, because Tarlo, who was the idol of the nobles, and a

sworn enemy to the Czartoriski family, carried every thing before him, and

nothing was done but according to his pleasure.

  [88] About seventy pounds sterling.

  [89] French money, which is always counted by livres and makes about

three millions sterling.

  [90] A town in Bohemia famous for its mineral springs.

  [91] About fifty thousand pounds sterling.

  [92] Private memoirs of Bassowitz, Jan. 21, 1712.

  [93] A town of Sleswic, in Denmark, situated on the river Eyder, fourteen

miles from the German Ocean, having a very commodious harbour.

  [94] About twelve hundred pounds sterling.

  [95] In the preamble to this institution, the czar declared, that it was to

perpetuate the memory of her love in his distressed condition on the banks of

the river Pruth. He invested her with full power to bestow it on such of her

own sex as she should think proper. The ensigns of this order are, a broad

white riband, and wore over the right shoulder, with a medal of St. Catherine,

adorned with precious stones, and the motto, 'Out of love and fidelity.'

  [96] Inhabitants of a small town of Hungarian Dalmatia, with a harbour,

from whence the neighbouring sea takes the name of Golfo di Bickariga.

  [97]  The  conspiracy  carried  on  in  France  by  cardinal  Alberoni,  was

discovered in a very singular manner. The Spanish ambassador's secretary,

who used frequently to go to the house of one La Follon, a famous procuressof Paris, to amuse himself for an hour or two after the fatigues of business,

had appointed a young nymph, whom he was fond of, to meet him there at

nine o'clock in the evening, but did not come to her till near two o'clock in

the morning. The lady, as may be supposed, reproached him with the little

regard he paid to her charms, or his own promise; but he excused himself, by

saying, that he had been obliged to stay to finish a long dispatch in ciphers,

which was to be sent away that very night by a courier to Spain: so saying, he

undressed and threw himself into bed, where he quietly fell asleep. In pulling

off his clothes, he had, by accident, dropped a paper out of his pocket, which,

by its bulk, raised in the nymph that curiosity so natural to her sex. She

picked it up, and read it partly over, when the nature of its contents made her

resolve to communicate them to La Follon: accordingly, she framed some

excuse for leaving the room, and immediately went to the apartment of the

old lady, and opened her budget. La Follon, who was a woman of superior

understanding to most in her sphere, immediately saw the whole consequence

of the affair; and, after having recommended to the girl, to amuse her gallant

as long as possible, she immediately went to waken the regent, to whom she

had access at all hours, for matters of a very different nature to the present.

This  prince,  whose  presence  of  mind  was  equal  to  every  exigency,

immediately dispatched different couriers to the frontiers; in consequence of

which, the Spanish ambassador's messenger was stopped at Bayonne, and his

dispatches  taken  from  him;  upon  deciphering  of  which,  they  were  found

exactly to agree with the original delivered to the regent by La Follon: upon

this the prince of Cellamar, the Spanish ambassador was put under an arrest,

and all his papers seized; after which he was sent under a strong guard to the

frontiers, where they left him to make the best of his way to his own country.

Thus an event, which would have brought the kingdom of France to the verge

of destruction, was frustrated by a votary of Venus, and a priestess of the

temple of pleasure.

  [98] As these letters and answers afford the most striking evidence of the

czar's prudence, and the prince's insincerity, and will convey to the reader a

clear idea of the grounds and motives of this extraordinary transaction, we

have inserted the following translation of them. The first letter from the czar

to his son, is dated the 27th of October, 1715, and displays a noble spirit of

religion,  with  the  most  ardent  desire  of  leaving  a  successor  who  shouldperpetuate his name and glory to future ages.


  'Son,' says the czar to him, 'you cannot be ignorant of what is known to all

the  world,  that  our  people  groaned  under  the  oppression  of  the  Swedes,

before the beginning of this present war. By the usurped possession of many

of our maritime ports, so necessary to our state, they cut us off from all

commerce with the rest of mankind; and we saw, with deep regret, that they

had even cast a mist over the eyes of persons of the greatest discernment,

who tamely brooked their slavery, and made no complaints to us. You know

how  much  it  cost  us  at  the  beginning  of  this  war,  to  make  ourselves

thoroughly experienced, and to stand our ground in spite of all the advantages

which our irreconcileable enemies gained over us. The Almighty alone has

conducted  us  by  his  hand,  and  conducts  us  still.  We  submitted  to  that

probationary state with resignation to the will of God, not doubting but it was

he who made us pass through it: he has accepted our submission; and the

same enemy, before whom we were wont to tremble, now trembles before us.

These are effects, which, under God's assistance, we owe to our labour, and

those of our faithful and affectionate sons, and Russian subjects. But while I

survey the successes with which God has blessed our arms, if I turn my eyes

on the posterity that is to succeed me, my soul is pierced with anguish; and I

have no enjoyment of my present happiness, when I carry my views into

futurity. All my felicity vanishes away like a dream, since you, my son, reject

all means of rendering yourself capable of governing well after me. Your

incapacity is voluntary; for you cannot excuse yourself from want of genius:

it is inclination alone you want. Far less can you plead the want of bodily

strength,  as  if  God  had  not  furnished  you  sufficiently  in  that  respect:  for

though your constitution be none the strongest, it cannot be reckoned weak.

Yet you will not so much as hear of warlike exercises; though it is by those

means we are risen from that obscurity in which we were buried, and have

made ourselves known to the nations about us, whose esteem we now enjoy. I

am far from desiring you to cherish in yourself a disposition to make war for

its own sake, and without just reasons: all I demand of you is, that you would

apply yourself to learn the military art; because, without understanding the

rules of war, it is impossible to be qualified for government. I might set

before your eyes many examples of what I propose to you; but shall onlymention the Greeks, with whom we are united by the same profession of

faith. Whence came the declension of their empire, but from the neglect of

arms? Sloth and inaction have subjected them to tyrants, and that slavery

under which they have groaned. You are much mistaken if you imagine it is

enough for a prince that he have good generals to act under his orders: no, my

son, it is upon the chief himself that the eyes of the world are fixed; they

study his inclinations, and easily slide into the imitation of his manners. My

brother,  during  his  reign,  loved  magnificence  in  dress,  and  splendid

equipages, and horses richly caparisoned; the taste of this country was not

much formed that way; but the pleasures of the prince soon became those of

the subjects, who are readily led to imitate him both in the objects of his love

and disgust. If people are so easily disengaged from things that are only for

pleasure, will they not be still more prone to forget, and in process of time

wholly to lay aside the use of arms, the exercise of which grows the more

irksome the less they are habituated to them? You have no inclination to learn

the profession of war; you do not apply yourself to it; and consequently will

never know it. How then will you be able to command others, and to judge of

the  rewards  which  those  subjects  deserve  who  do  their  duty,  or  of  the

punishment due to such as fall short of obedience? You must judge only by

other people's eyes; and will be considered as a young bird, which reaching

out its beak, is as ready to receive poison as proper nourishment. You say, the

infirm state of your health makes you unfit to bear the fatigues of war; but

that is a frivolous excuse. I desire you not to undergo the fatigues of that

profession, though it is there that all great captains are begun; but I wish you

had an inclination to the military art; and reason may give it you, if you have

it  not  from  nature.  Had  you  once  this  inclination,  it  would  occupy  your

thoughts  at  all  times,  even  in  your  hours  of  sickness.  Ask  those  who

remember my brother's reign: his state of health was much more infirm than

your's;  he  could  not  manage  a  horse  of  never  so  little  mettle,  nor  hardly

mount  him:  yet  he  loved  horses,  and  perhaps  there  never  will  be  in  the

country finer stables than his. Hence you see, that success does not always

depend upon personal labour, but upon the inclination. If you think that there

are princes, whose affairs fail not to succeed, though they go not to war in

person, you are in the right; but if they go not to the field of battle, they have,

however, an inclination to go, and are acquainted with the military art. For

instance, the late king of France did not always take the field himself; but weknow  to  what  a  degree  he  was  a  lover  of  war,  and  how  many  glorious

exploits  he  performed  therein;  which  made  his  campaigns  be  called  the

theatre and school of the world. The bent of that prince's mind was not turned

to  military  affairs  only,  he  had  also  a  taste  for  the  polite  arts,  for

manufactures,  and  other  institutions,  which  have  made  his  kingdom  more

flourishing than any other. After all these remonstrances which I have laid

before you, I return to my first subject, which immediately concerns yourself.

I am a man, and consequently must die: to whom shall I leave the care of

finishing what, by God's grace, I have begun, and of preserving what I have

in part recovered? To a son who, like that slothful servant in the gospel,

buries  his  talent  in  the  earth,  and  neglects  to  improve  what  God  has

committed to his trust? How often have I reproached you for your sullenness

and indocility? I have been obliged to chastise you on that account. For these

several years past I have hardly spoke to you, because I almost despair of

bringing  you  back  to  the  right  way;  discouraged  and  disheartened  by  the

fruitlessness  of  all  my  endeavours.  You  loiter  on  in  supine  indolence;

abandoning yourself to shameful pleasures, without extending your foresight

to the dangerous consequences which such a conduct must produce both to

yourself and the whole state: you confine yourself to the government of your

own house, and in that station you acquit yourself very ill; St. Paul has told

us, 'he that knows not how to govern his own house, how shall he be able to

rule the church of God?' In like manner I say to you, since you know not how

to manage your domestic affairs, how can you be able to govern a kingdom? I

am determined, at last, to signify to you my final purpose; being willing,

however,  to  defer  the  execution  of  it  for  a  short  time,  to  see  if  you  will

reform: if not, know that I am resolved to deprive you of the succession, as I

would lop off a useless branch. Do not imagine, that because I have no other

child but you,[99] I mean by this only to intimidate you: I will most certainly

execute my resolution; and God requires it of me: for, since I spare not my

own life for the sake of my country, and the welfare of my people, why

should I allow an effeminate prince to ascend the throne after me, who would

sacrifice the interest of the subject to his pleasures? and should he be obliged

to expose his life in their behalf, would leave them to perish, rather than

redress their grievances. I will call in a mere stranger to the crown, if he be

but worthy of that honour, sooner than my own son, if he is unworthy.  'PETER.' 


  To this letter the czarowitz replied: 'Most gracious sovereign and father, I

have read the letter which your majesty sent me of the 27th of October, 1715,

after the interment of my wife; and all the answer I can make to it is, that if

your majesty is determined to deprive me of the succession to the crown of

Russia, on account of my inability, your will be done. I even request it of you

very earnestly; because I judge not myself fit for government. My memory is

greatly  impaired;  and  without  memory  there  is  no  managing  affairs.  The

powers both of my body and mind are much weakened by the diseases to

which I have been incident, and I am thereby incapacitated for the rule of so

great a people. Such a charge requires a man far more vigorous than I am. For

these  reasons  I  am  not  ambitious  to  succeed  you  (whom  God  preserve

through a length of years) in the crown of Russia, even though I had no

brother, as I have one at present, whom God long preserve. As little will I for

the future set up any claim to the succession: to the truth of which I solemnly

swear, taking God to be my witness; and in testimony thereof I write and sign

these presents. I put my children into your hands: and for myself I ask no

more of you than a bare maintenance during my life, leaving the whole to

your pleasure.


  'Your humble servant and son,

  'ALEXIS.' 


  Peter  soon  penetrated  through  the  disguise  his  son  had  assumed,  and

therefore wrote him the above letter, dated January 19, 1716, and which he

called his 'Last Admonition.'

  [99]  This  letter  was  written  about  eight  days  before  the  birth  of  Peter

Patrowitz, the czar's second son.

  [100]  This  letter  was  couched  in  the  following  terms:-'Most  gracious

sovereign and father, yesterday morning I received your letter, of the 19th of

this month: my indisposition hinders me from writing to you at large, but I

am willing to embrace the monastic state, and I beg your gracious consentthereto.


  'Your servant, and unworthy son,

  'ALEXIS.' 


  [101] The prince's renunciation was couched in the following terms:-'I, the

undernamed, declare upon the holy gospel, that on account of the crimes I

have committed against his czarish majesty, my father and sovereign, as set

forth in his manifesto, I am, through my own fault, excluded from the throne

of Russia. Therefore I confess and acknowledge that exclusion to be just, as

having merited it by my own fault and unworthiness; and I hereby oblige

myself, and swear in the presence of Almighty God, in unity of nature, and

trinity of persons, as my supreme Judge, to submit in all things to my father's

will, never to set up a claim or pretension to the succession, or accept of it

under any pretext whatever, acknowledging my brother Peter Petrowitz as

lawful successor to the crown. In testimony whereof, I kiss the holy cross,

and sign these presents with my own hand.


  'ALEXIS.'

  [102] As this extraordinary piece cannot fail of being interesting to most

part of our readers, we have ventured to subjoin the whole of it in a note, our

author having only given some few extracts.


  The Czar's Declaration.

  Peter  I.  by  the  grace  of  God,  czar,  emperor  of  Russia,  &c.  to  all  our

faithful  subjects,  ecclesiastical,  military,  and  civil,  of  all  the  states  of  the

Russian nation. It is notorious, and well known to the greatest part of our

faithful subjects, and chiefly to those who live in the places of our residence,

or  who  are  in  our  service,  with  how  much  care  and  application  we  have

caused our eldest son Alexis to be brought up and educated; having given

him  for  that  purpose,  from  his  infancy,  tutors  to  teach  him  the  Russian

tongue, and foreign languages, and to instruct him in all arts and sciences, in

order not only to bring him up in our Christian orthodox faith of the Greekprofession, but also in the knowledge of political and military affairs, and

likewise in the constitution of foreign countries, their customs and languages;

through the reading of history, and other books, in all manner of sciences,

becoming  a  prince  of  his  high  rank,  he  might  acquire  the  qualifications

worthy of a successor to our throne of Great Russia. Nevertheless, we have

seen with grief, that all attention and care, for the education and instruction of

our son, proved ineffectual and useless, seeing he always swerved from his

filial obedience, shewing no application for what was becoming a worthy

successor, and slighting the precepts of the masters we had appointed for

him;  but,  on  the  contrary,  frequenting  disorderly  persons,  from  whom  he

could learn nothing good, or that would be advantageous and useful to him.

We have not neglected often to endeavour to reclaim, and bring him back to

his duty, sometimes by caresses and gentle means, sometimes by reprimands,

sometimes by paternal corrections. We have more than once taken him with

us into our army and the field, that he might be instructed in the art of war, as

one of the chief sciences for the defence of his country; guarding him, at the

same time, from all hazard of the succession, though we exposed ourself to

manifest perils and dangers. We have at other times left him at Moscow,

putting into his hands a sort of regency in the empire, in order to form him in

the art of government, and that he might learn how to reign after us. We have

likewise  sent  him  into  foreign  countries,  in  hopes  and  expectation,  that

seeing, in his travels, governments so well regulated, this would excite in him

some emulation and an inclination to apply himself to do well. But all our

care has been fruitless, and like the seed of the doctrine fallen upon a rock;

for he has not only refused to follow that which is good, but even is come to

hate it, without shewing any inclination, or disposition, either for military or

political affairs; hourly and continually conversing with base and disorderly

persons, whose morals are rude and abominable. As we were resolved to

endeavour,  by  all  imaginable  means,  to  reclaim  him  from  that  disorderly

course, and to inspire him with an inclination to converse with persons of

virtue and honour; we exhorted him to choose a consort among the chief

foreign houses, as is usual in other countries, and hath been practised by our

ancestors, the czars of Russia, who have contracted alliances by marriages

with other sovereign houses, and we have left him at liberty to make a choice.

He declared his inclination for the princess, grand-daughter of the duke of

Wolfenbuttle, then reigning, sister-in-law to his imperial majesty the emperorof the Romans, now reigning, and cousin to the king of Great Britain; and

having desired us to procure him that alliance, and permit him to marry that

princess,  we  readily  consented  thereunto,  without  any  regard  to  the  great

expense which was necessarily occasioned by that marriage: but, after its

consummation, we found ourselves disappointed of the hopes we had, that

the change in the condition of our son would produce good fruits, and change

his bad inclinations; for, notwithstanding his spouse was, as far as we have

been able to observe, a wise, sprightly princess, and of a virtuous conduct,

and that he himself had chosen her, he nevertheless lived with her in the

greatest disunion, while he redoubled his affection for lewd people, bringing

thereby a disgrace upon our house in the eyes of foreign powers to whom that

princess was related, which drew upon us many complaints and reproaches.

Our frequent advices and exhortations to him, to reform his conduct, proved

ineffectual, and he at last violated the conjugal faith, and gave his affection to

a  prostitute  of  the  most  servile  and  low  condition,  living  publicly  in  that

crime with her, to the great contempt of his lawful spouse, who soon after

died; and it was believed that her grief, occasioned by the disorderly life of

her husband, hastened the end of her days. When we saw his resolution to

persevere in his vicious courses, we declared to him, at the funeral of his

consort,  that  if  he  did  not  for  the  future  conform  to  our  will,  and  apply

himself to things becoming a prince, presumptive heir to so great an empire,

we would deprive him of the succession, without any regard to his being our

only son (our second son was not then born) and that he ought not to rely

upon his being such, because we would rather choose for our successor a

stranger worthy thereof, than an unworthy son; that we would not leave our

empire to such a successor, who would ruin and destroy what we have, by

God's assistance, established, and tarnish the glory and honour of the Russian

nation, for the acquiring of which we had sacrificed our ease and our health,

and willingly exposed our life on several occasions; besides, that the fear of

God's judgment would not permit us to leave the government of such vast

territories in the hands of one whose insufficiency and unworthiness we were

not ignorant of. In short, we exhorted him in the most pressing terms we

could make use of, to behave himself with discretion, and gave him time to

repent and return to his duty. His answer to these remonstrances was, that he

acknowledged himself guilty in all these points; but alleged the weakness of

his  parts  and  genius,  which  did  not  permit  him  to  apply  himself  to  thesciences,  and  other  functions  recommended  to  him:  he  owned  himself

incapable of our succession, and desired us to discharge him from the same.

Nevertheless,  we  continued  to  exhort  him  with  a  paternal  affection,  and

joining menaces to our exhortations; we forgot nothing to bring him back to

the  right  way.  The  operations  of  the  war  having  obliged  us  to  repair  to

Denmark, we left him at Petersburg, to give him time to return to his duty,

and amend his ways; and, afterwards, upon the repeated advices we received

of the continuance of his disorderly life, we sent him orders to come to us at

Copenhagen, to make the campaign, that he might thereby the better form

himself. But, forgetting the fear and commandments of God, who enjoins

obedience even to private parents, and much more to those who are at the

same time sovereigns, our paternal cares had no other return than unheard-of

ingratitude; for, instead of coming to us as we ordered, he withdrew, with

large sums of money, and his infamous concubine, with whom he continued

to  live  in  a  criminal  course,  and  put  himself  under  the  protection  of  the

emperor, raising against us, his father and his lord, numberless calumnies and

false reports, as if we did persecute him, and intended, without cause, to

deprive him of the succession; alleging, moreover, that even his life was not

safe if he continued with us, and desired the emperor not only to give him

refuge in his dominions, but also to protect him against us by force of arms.

Every one may judge, what shame and dishonour this conduct of our son hath

drawn  upon  us  and  our  empire,  in  the  face  of  the  whole  world;  the  like

instance is hardly to be found in history. The emperor, though informed of his

excesses, and how he had lived with his consort, sister-in-law to his imperial

majesty, thought fit, however, upon these pressing instances, to appoint him a

place  where  he  might  reside;  and  he  desired  farther,  that  he  might  be  so

private there, that we might not come to the knowledge of it. Meanwhile his

long stay having made us fear, out of a tender and fatherly affection for him,

that some misfortune had befallen him, we sent persons several ways to get

intelligence  of  him,  and,  after  a  great  deal  of  trouble,  we  were  at  last

informed by the captain of our guard, Alexander Romanzoff, that he was

privately kept in an imperial fortress at Tyrol; whereupon we wrote a letter,

with our own hand, to the emperor, to desire that he might be sent back to us:

but,  notwithstanding  the  emperor  acquainted  him  with  our  demands,  and

exhorted him to return to us, and submit to our will, as being his father and

lord; yet he alleged, with a great many calumnies against us, that he ought notto be delivered into our hands, as if we had been his enemy, and a tyrant,

from whom he had nothing to expect but death. In short, he persuaded his

imperial majesty, instead of sending him back at that time to us, to remove

him to some remote place in his dominions, namely, Naples in Italy, and keep

him there secretly in the castle, under a borrowed name. Nevertheless, we

having  notice  of  the  place  where  he  was,  did  thereupon  dispatch  to  the

emperor our privy-counsellor, Peter Tolstoy, and the captain of our guard,

aforesaid, with a most pressing letter, representing how unjust it would be to

detain our son, contrary to all laws, divine and human, according to which

private parents, and with much more reason those who are besides invested

with a sovereign authority as we are, have an unlimited power over their

children, independently of any other judge; and we set forth on one side, the

just and affectionate manner with which we had always used our son, and, on

the  other,  his  disobedience;  representing,  in  the  conclusion,  the  ill

consequences and animosities which the refusal of delivering up our son to us

might occasion, because we would not leave this affair in that condition. We,

at  the  same  time,  ordered  those  we  sent  with  that  letter,  to  make  verbal

remonstrances even in more pressing terms, and to declare that we should be

obliged  to  revenge,  by  all  possible  methods,  such  detaining  our  son.  We

wrote likewise a letter to him with our own hand, to represent to him the

horror and impiety of his conduct, and the enormity of the crime he had

committed  against  us  his  father,  and  how  God  threatened  in  his  laws  to

punish  disobedient  children  with  eternal  death:  we  threatened  him,  as  a

father, with our curses, and, as his lord, to declare him a traitor to his country,

unless he returned, and obeyed our commands; and gave him assurance, that

if  he  did  as  we  desired,  and  returned,  we  would  pardon  his  crime.  Our

envoys, after many solicitations, and the above representation, made by us in

writing, at last obtained leave of the emperor to go and speak to our son, in

order to dispose him to return home. The imperial minister gave them at the

same time to understand, that our son had informed the emperor that we

persecuted him, and that his life was not safe with us, whereby he moved the

emperor's compassion, and induced him to take him into his protection; but

that  the  emperor,  taking  now  into  his  consideration  our  true  and  solid

representations,  promised  to  use  his  utmost  endeavour  to  dispose  him  to

return to us; and would, moreover, declare to him, that he could not in justice

and equity refuse to deliver him to his father, or have any difference with uson that account. Our envoys, upon their arrival at Naples, having desired to

deliver to him our letter, written with our hand, sent us word, that he did

refuse to admit them; but that the emperor's viceroy had found means, by

inviting him to his house, to present them to him afterwards, much against his

will.  He  did  then,  indeed,  receive  our  letter,  containing  our  paternal

exhortation,  and  threatening  our  curse,  but  without  shewing  the  least

inclination  to  return;  alleging  still  a  great  many  falsities  and  calumnies

against us, as if, by reason of several dangers he had to apprehend from us, he

could not, nor would not return; and boasting, that the emperor had not only

promised to defend and protect him against us, but even to set him upon the

throne of Russia against our will, by force of arms. Our envoys perceiving

this evil disposition, tried all imaginable ways to prevail with him to return,

they intreated him, they expatiated by turns upon the graciousness of our

assurances towards him, and upon our threats in case of disobedience, and

that we would even bring him away by force of arms; they declared to him

that the emperor would not enter into a war with us on his account, and many

other such-like representations did they make to him. But he paid no regard

to  all  this,  nor  shewed  any  inclination  to  return  to  us,  until  the  imperial

viceroy, convinced at last of his obstinacy, told him in the emperor's name,

that he ought to return; for that his imperial majesty could not by any law

keep him from us, nor, during the present war with Turkey, and also in Italy

with Spain, embroil himself with us upon his account. When he saw how the

case stood, fearing he should be delivered up to us, whether he would or not,

he at length resolved to return home; and declared his mind to our envoys,

and  to  the  imperial  viceroy:  he  likewise  wrote  the  same  thing  to  us,

acknowledging himself to be a criminal, and blameworthy. Now although our

son, by so long a course of criminal disobedience against us, his father and

lord, for many years, and particularly for the dishonour he hath cast upon us

in  the  face  of  the  world,  by  withdrawing  himself,  and  raising  calumnies

against us, as if we were an unnatural father, and for opposing his sovereign,

hath deserved to be punished with death; yet our paternal affection inclines us

to have mercy upon him, and we therefore pardon his crimes, and exempt

him from all punishment for the same. But considering his unworthiness, we

cannot  in  conscience,  leave  him  after  us  the  succession  to  the  throne  of

Russia; foreseeing that, by his vicious courses, he would entirely destroy the

glory of our nation and the safety of our dominions, which, through God'sassistance, we have acquired and established by incessant application; for it is

notorious and known to every one, how much it hath cost us, and with what

efforts  we  have  not  only  recovered  the  provinces  which  the  enemy  had

usurped from our empire, but also conquered several considerable towns and

countries, and with what care we have caused our people to be instructed in

all sorts of civil and military sciences, to the glory and advantage of the

nation and empire. Now, as we should pity our states and faithful subjects, if,

by such a successor, we should throw them back into a much worse condition

than ever they were yet; so, by the paternal authority, in virtue of which, by

the laws of our empire, any of our subjects may disinherit a son, and give his

succession  to  such  other  of  his  sons,  as  he  pleases;  and,  in  quality  of

sovereign  prince,  in  consideration  of  the  safety  of  our  dominions,  we  do

deprive  our  said  son  Alexis,  for  his  crimes  and  unworthiness,  of  the

succession after us to the throne of Russia, even though there should not

remain one single person of our family after us. And we do constitute and

declare successor to the said throne after us, our second son Peter, though yet

very young, having no successor that is older. We lay upon our said son

Alexis our paternal curse, if ever at any time he pretends to, or reclaims, the

said succession; and we desire our faithful subjects, whether ecclesiastics or

seculars,  of  all  ranks  and  conditions,  and  the  whole  Russian  nation,  in

conformity to this constitution and our will, to acknowledge and consider our

said son Peter, appointed by our constitution, to confirm the whole by oath,

before the holy altar, upon the holy gospel, kissing the cross; and all those

who shall ever, at any time, oppose this our will, and who, from this day

forward, shall dare to consider our son Alexis, as successor, or to assist him

for that purpose, declare them traitors to us and their country. And we have

ordered that these presents shall be every where published and promulgated,

to the end that no person may pretend ignorance.-Given at Moscow, the third

of February, 1718. Signed with our hand, and sealed with our seal.


  'PETER.'

  [103] This was the son of the empress Catherine, who died April 15, 1719.

  [104] At the same time confirming it by an oath, the form of which was as

follows:  'I  swear  before  Almighty  God,  and  upon  his  holy  gospel,  that

whereas our most gracious sovereign, the czar Peter Alexiowitz, has causedcircular  letters  to  be  published  through  his  empire,  to  notify  that  he  has

thought fit to exclude his son, prince Alexis Petrowitz, from the throne of

Russia, and to appoint for his successor to the crown his second son, the

prince  royal  Peter  Petrowitz;  I  do  acknowledge  this  order  and  regulation

made by his majesty in favour of the said prince Peter Petrowitz, to be just

and lawful, and entirely conform and submit myself to the same; promising

always to acknowledge the said prince royal Peter Petrowitz for his lawful

successor, and to stand by him on all occasions, even to the loss of my life,

against all such as shall presume to oppose the said succession; and that I

never will, on any pretence whatsoever assist the prince Alexis Petrowitz, nor

in any manner whatsoever contribute to procure him the succession. And this

I solemnly promise by my oath on the holy gospel, kissing the holy cross

thereupon.'

  [105] His declaration to the clergy concluded in this manner:-'Though this

affair  does  not  fall  within  the  verge  of  the  spiritual,  but  of  the  civil

jurisdiction, and we have this day referred it to the imperial decision of the

secular  court,  but  remembering  that  passage  in  the  word  of  God,  which

requires us on such occasions to consult the priests and elders of the church,

in order to know the will of Heaven, and being desirous of receiving all

possible instructions in a matter of such importance, we desire of you, the

archbishops, and the whole ecclesiastical state, as teachers of the word of

God, not to pronounce judgment in this case, but to examine and give us your

opinion concerning it, according to the sacred oracles, from whom we may be

best informed what punishment my son deserves, and that you will give it us

in writing under your hands, that being properly instructed herein, we may

lay no burthen on our conscience. We therefore repose our confidence in you,

that, as guardians of the divine laws, as faithful pastors of the Christian flock,

and  as  well  affected  towards  your  country,  you  will  act  suitable  to  your

dignity, conjuring you by that dignity, and the holiness of your function, to

proceed without fear or dissimulation.

  [106] Besides the particular passages in holy writ cited on this occasion,

which were, Levit. xx. 1, 9. Deut. xxxi. Matt. xx. 1. Mark vii. 9. Rom. i. 28.

Ephes vi. 1. those from the constitutions of the empire were as follows: 'If

any person, by any ill design, forms any attempt against the health of the

czar, or does any thing to his prejudice, and is found inclined to execute hispernicious designs, let him be put to death, after he is convicted thereof.' Stat.

1. 'In like manner, if any one, during the reign of his czarian majesty, through

a desire to reign in the empire of Russia, and put the czar to death, shall begin

to raise troops with this pernicious view; or if any one shall form an alliance

with the enemies of his czarian majesty, or hold a correspondence with them,

or assist them to arrive at the government, or raise any other disorder; if any

one declare it, and the truth be found out upon such declaration, let the traitor

suffer death upon conviction of the treason.' Stat. 2. From the military laws

the following citations were made; chap. 3. art. 19. 'If any subject raises men,

and  takes  up  arms  against  the  czarian  majesty;  or  if  any  person  forms  a

design  of  taking  his  majesty  prisoner,  or  killing  him;  or  if  he  offers  any

violence to him; he and all his abettors and adherents shall be quartered, as

guilty of treason, and their goods confiscated.' To which article the following

explanation was added: 'They also shall suffer the same punishment, who,

though they have not been able to execute their crime, shall be convicted of

inclination and desire to commit it; and likewise, those who shall not have

discovered it when it came to their knowledge,' chap. 26. art. 37. 'He who

forms a design of committing any treason, or any other matter of the like

nature, shall be punished with the same capital punishments as if he had

actually executed his design.'

  [107] M. de Voltaire is mistaken in this point; for, by our laws, no peer of

the realm can absent himself from the service of the parliament during its

session, without the liberty of the king or the house.

  [108] This is another mistake; for it is death by our law to compass or

imagine the death of the sovereign.

  [109] Or Nions, the capital of Montauban, in Dauphine, in France, situate

on the river Aigues, over which is a bridge, said to be a Roman work.

  [110] At twenty-four to the pound sterling.

  [111] About three thousand pounds sterling.

  [112] The czar celebrated this victory by a naval triumph at Petersburg,

caused  a  gold  medal  to  be  struck  to  perpetuate  the  glory  of  the  action,

presented prince Galitzin with a sword set with diamonds, and distributed a

large sum of money among the officers and sailors who had given such signal

proofs of their valour.  [113] A little town of the Bothnick gulf in North Finland.

  [114] Notwithstanding the great rejoicings made on this occasion, Peter

was  noways  inattentive  to  the  affairs  of  state;  but  held  frequent  councils

thereon: and being desirous, as his son Peter Petrowitz was dead, to settle the

succession on a prince who would follow his maxims, and prosecute the great

designs  which  he  had  begun  for  civilizing  his  people,  he  ordered  public

notice to be given, on the 23d of February, to all his subjects inhabiting the

city of Moscow, to repair the next day to Castle-church; which they having

done, printed papers were delivered to them all, signifying, 'That it was his

imperial majesty's pleasure, that every man should swear, and give under his

hand, that he would not only approve the choice his majesty would make of a

successor, but acknowledge the person he should appoint as emperor and

sovereign.' An order was likewise published a few days after at Petersburg,

requiring the magistrates and all persons to subscribe the same declaration;

and all the grandees of the empire were commanded, on pain of death and

confiscation, to repair to Moscow by the latter end of March for that purpose,

except  those  inhabiting  Astracan  and  Siberia,  who,  living  at  too  great  a

distance, were excused from giving their personal attendance, and permitted

to subscribe before their respective governors. This oath was readily taken by

all ranks and degrees of the people, who were well assured that their emperor

would make choice of one who was every way worthy of the succession, and

capable of supporting the dignity intended for him: but they were still in the

dark as to the identical person, though it was generally believed to be prince

Nariskin, who was nearly related to the emperor, and allowed to have all the

qualities requisite for his successor: but a little time shewed them, that this

conjecture was groundless.

  [115] These he published and distributed along the borders of the Caspian

Sea, therein declaring-That he came not upon the frontiers of Persia, with an

intention of reducing any of the provinces of that kingdom to his obedience,

but only to maintain the lawful possessor of them on his throne, and to defend

him powerfully, together with his faithful subjects, against the tyranny of Mir

Mahmoud,  and  to  obtain  satisfaction  from  him  and  his  Tartars,  for  the

robberies and mischiefs which they had committed in the Russian empire.

  [116] Memoirs of Bassewitz.  [117] MS. memoirs of count de Bassewitz.

  [118] Catherine paid the last duties to her husband's ashes, with a pomp

becoming the greatest monarch that Russia, or perhaps any other country, had

ever known; and though there is no court of Europe where splendour and

magnificence is carried to a greater height on these occasions than in that of

Russia, yet it may with great truth be said, that she even surpassed herself in

the funeral honours paid to her great Peter. She purchased the most precious

kinds of marble, and employed some of the ablest sculptors of Italy to erect a

mausoleum to this hero, which might, if possible, transmit the remembrance

of  his  great  actions  to  the  most  distant  ages.  Not  satisfied  with  this,  she

caused  a  medal  to  be  struck,  worthy  of  the  ancients.  On  one  side  was

represented the bust of the late emperor, with these words-'Peter the Great,

Emperor and Sovereign of all Russia, born May 30, 1672. On the reverse was

the empress sitting, with the crown on her head, the globe and sceptre by her

side on a table, and before her were a sphere, sea charts, plans, mathematical

instruments, arms, and a caduceus. At distances, in three different places,

were represented an edifice on the sea coast, with a platform before it, a ship

and galley at sea, and the late emperor in the clouds, supported by eternity,

looking on the empress, and shewing her with his right hand all the treasures

he  had  left  her,  with  these  words,  'Behold  what  I  have  left  you.'  In  the

exergue, 'Deceased 28 January, 1725.' Several of these medals she ordered to

be struck in gold, to the weight of fifty ducats and distributed among the

foreign ministers, and all the grandees of the empire, as a testimony of her

respect and gratitude to the memory of her late husband, to whose generosity

she  took  a  pleasure  in  owning  herself  indebted  for  her  present  elevated

station.


  Mottley gives us the following, as the czar's epitaph:

  Here lieth,

  All that could die of a man immortal,

  PETER ALEXIOWITZ:

  It is almost superfluous to add,

  Great Emperor of Russia!  A title,

  Which, instead of adding to his glory,

  Became glorious by his wearing it.

  Let antiquity be dumb,

  Nor boast her Alexander, or her Cæsar.

  How easy was victory

  To leaders who were followed by heroes!

  And whose soldiers felt a noble disdain

  At being thought less vigilant than their generals!

  But he,

  Who in this place first knew rest,

  Found subjects base and inactive,

  Unwarlike, unlearned, untractable;

  Neither covetous of fame, nor fearless of danger;

  Creatures with the names of men,

  But with qualities rather brutal than rational!

  Yet, even these

  He polished from their native ruggedness;

  And, breaking out like a new sun,

  To illuminate the minds of a people,

  Dispelled their night of hereditary darkness;

  And, by force of his invincible influence,

  Taught them to conquer

  Even the conquerors of Germany.

  Other princes have commanded victorious armies;

  This commander created them.

  Blush, O Art! at a hero who owed thee nothing  Exult, O Nature! for thine was this prodigy.

  [119] The distinguished regard which this princess shews for the arts and

sciences, and her endeavours to attract the great geniuses of all nations to

reside  in  her  dominions,  by  every  possible  encouragement,  affords  the

strongest presumptions, that in her reign we shall see a second age of Louis

XIV. and of this we have had a recent proof, in the obliging letter which this

august princess wrote with her own hand to M. d'Alembert, and the choice

she has since made of M. Duplex, a member of the royal academy of sciences

at  Paris,  when  the  beforementioned  gentleman  thought  fit  to  decline  the

gracious offers she made him. In which choice she has shewn that it is not

birth nor rank, but true merit and virtue, which she considers as the essential

qualifications in a person to whom she would confide the most sacred of all

trusts, that of the education of the grand duke, her son. What then may not be

expected  from  the  administration  of  a  sovereign  so  superior  to  vulgar

prejudice? And especially when assisted by a Woronzoff and a Galitzin, both

the professed friends and patrons of literature and the fine arts, which they

themselves have not disdained to cultivate, when business and the weighty

affairs of state have allowed them a few moments leisure.

  [120]  The  following  anecdote,  communicated  by  a  nobleman  of  the

strictest probity, who was himself an eye-witness of the fact, will give us a

clear insight into the character and disposition of Peter I. In one of the many

plots which was formed against the life and government of this monarch,

there was among the number of those seized a soldier, belonging to his own

regiment of guards. Peter being told by his officers that this man had always

behaved extremely well, had a curiosity to see him, and learn from his own

mouth what might have been his inducement to be concerned in a plot against

him; and to this purpose he dressed himself in a plain garb, and so as not to

be known by the man again, and went to the prison where he was confined,

when, after some conversation, 'I should be glad to know, friend,' said Peter,

'what  were  your  reasons  for  being  concerned  in  an  attempt  against  the

emperor your master, as I am certain that he never did you any injury, but on

the contrary, has a regard for you, as being a brave soldier, and one who have

always done your duty in the field; and therefore, if you were to shew the

least remorse for what you have done, I am persuaded that the emperor would

forgive you: but before I interest myself in your behalf, you must tell mewhat motives you had to join the mutineers; and repeat to you again, that the

emperor is naturally so good and compassionate, that I am certain he will

give you your pardon.'


  'I know little or nothing of the emperor,' replied the soldier, 'for I never

saw him but at a distance; but he caused my father's head to be cut off some

time ago, for being concerned in a former rebellion, and it is the duty of a son

to revenge the death of his father, by that of the person who took away his

life.  If  then  the  emperor  is  really  so  good  and  merciful  as  you  have

represented him, counsel him, for his own safety not to pardon me; for were

he to restore me my liberty, the first use I should make of it would be, to

engage in some new attempt against his life, nor should I ever rest till I had

accomplished my design; therefore the securest method he can take, will be

to order my head to be struck off immediately, without which his own life is

not in safety.' The czar in vain used all the arguments he could think of, to set

before  this  desperado  the  folly  and  injustice  of  such  sentiments;  he  still

persisted in what he had declared, and Peter departed, greatly chagrined at the

bad success of his visit, and gave orders for the execution of this man and the

rest of his accomplices.The Origin of Trades

 

  Voltaire

  The Origin of Trades

  Published in 1901

Translated by William F. Fleming 


  WHEN with a skilful hand Prometheus made

  A statue that the human form displayed,

  Pandora, his own work, to wed he chose,

  And from those two the human race arose.

  When first to know herself the fair began,

  She played her smile's enchantment upon man;

  By softness and alluring speech she gained

  The ascendant, and her master soon enchained;

  Her beauty on Prometheus' sense ne'er palled,

  And the first husband was the first enthralled.

  The god of war soon saw the new-formed fair;

  His manly beauty and his martial air,

  His golden casque and all his glittering arms

  Pandora pleased, and he enjoyed her charms.

  When the sea's ruler in his humid court

  Had heard of this intrigue from fame's report,

  The fair he sought, a like reception found,

  Could Neptune fail where Mars a triumph found?

  Day's light-haired god from his resplendent height

  Their pleasures saw, and hoped the same delight;  She could not to refuse him have the heart,

  Who o'er the day presides and every art.

  Mercury with eloquence declared his flame,

  And in his turn he triumphed o'er the dame.

  Squalid and sooty from his forge, at first

  Vulcan was ill-received, and gave disgust;

  But he by importunity obtained

  What other gods with so much ease had gained.

  Pandora's prime thus winged with pleasure flew,

  Then she in languor lived, nor wherefore knew.

  She that devotes to love her life's first spring,

  As years increase can do no other thing;

  For e'en to gods inconstancy is known,

  And those who dwell in heaven to change are prone.

  Pandora of her favors had been free

  To gods who left her; happening then to see

  A satyr who through plains and meadows strayed,

  Smit with his mien, she love-advances made.

  To these amours our race existence owes,

  From such amusements all mankind arose;

  Hence those varieties in talents spring,

  In genius, passions, business, everything:

  To Vulcan one, to Mars one owes his birth,

  This to a satyr; very few on earth

  Claim any kindred with the god of day,

  Few that celestial origin display.

  From parents each his taste and turn derives:  But most of all trades now Pandora's thrives;

  The most delightful, though least rare it seems,

  And is the trade all Paris most esteems.The Padlock

 

  Voltaire

  The Padlock

  Published in 1901

Translated by William F. Fleming


  I TRIUMPHED, love's victorious power

  Prevailed, and near approached the hour

  Which should have crowned our mutual flame,

  Just then your tyrant husband came.

  That hoary Jailer was too hard,

  To love he all access has barred,

  And all our wishes to defeat,

  Secures the key of pleasure's seat;

  For such strange matters to account,

  Our tale to ancient days should mount;

  Ceres must to you sure be known,

  Ceres one daughter had alone,

  Who much resembled you in face,

  Beauteous, adorned with every grace,

  To the soft passion much inclined,

  And guided by a Cupid blind.

  Hymen, a god as blind as he,

  Treated him as he treated thee;

  Pluto, the rich and old, in hell

  Made her his wife, and forced to dwell;  But she the jealous miser scorned,

  And Pluto, though a god, was horned;

  Pirithous, his rival bright,

  Young, handsome, generous, and polite,

  Found means to get to hell ere dead,

  And clapped huge horns upon his head.

  This as a fable you'll deride,

  But love a man to hell may guide;

  In hell, as here, by some strange spite,

  Intrigues are always brought to light;

  In a hot hole a spy concealed,

  Saw all, and all he saw revealed;

  And added, that the royal dame,

  With half the damned had done the same.

  The horned god on this report

  Convokes at his infernal court,

  Each odious, black, and cursed soul,

  Sainted below for actions foul,

  Each cuckold's soul, who during life

  Did all he could to plague his wife.

  Then thus declared a Florentine,

  "Most mighty monarch, I'd opine

  For death, for once a wife is dead,

  She can't defile the marriage bed;

  But ah, sir, an immortal wife

  Can never be deprived of life;

  A padlock, therefore, I'd invent,  Which should such accidents prevent;

  She must be virtuous, of course,

  When under the restraint of force;

  Not to be come at by her elf,

  You're sure to have her to yourself;

  Would I had thought before I died,

  Such a convenience to provide."

  This sage advice a loud applause

  From all the damned assembly draws;

  And straight by order of the state,

  Was registered on brass by fate.

  That moment in the shades below,

  They anvils beat, and bellows blow;

  Tisiphone the blacksmith's trade

  Well understood, the locks she made.

  Proserpina, from Pluto's hand

  Receiving, wore it by command.

  Sometimes the hardest hearts relent,

  Even Pluto's self some pity felt,

  When spouse's virtue he made fast,

  And said, "you'll now perforce be chaste."

  This lock which hell could frame alone,

  Soon to the human race was known;

  In Venice, Rome, and all about it,

  No gentleman or cit's without it;

  'Tis always thought a method sure,

  All female honor to secure.  There husbands, though some sneerers mock,

  Keep virtue safe and under lock.

  But now to bring the matter home,

  Your spouse, you know, lived long at Rome;

  With bad men few infection 'scape,

  He has learned the Roman modes to ape.

  But all his jealous care is vain,

  Love always knows his ends to gain;

  That god will sure espouse our cause,

  He still protects who keeps his laws;

  For you have given me your heart,

  And can't refuse me any part.Thelema and Macareus

 

  Voltaire

  Thelema and Macareus

  Published in 1901

Translated by William F. Fleming 


  THELEMA'S lively, all admire

  Her charms, but she's too full of fire;

  Impatience ever racks her breast,

  Her heart a stranger is to rest.

  A jocund youth of bulky size

  This nymph beheld with tender eyes,

  From hers his humor differed quite,

  Black does not differ more from white.

  On his broad face and open mien

  There dwelt tranquility serene;

  His converse is from languor free

  And boisterous vivacity.

  His sleep was sound and sweet at night,

  Active he was at morn like light;

  As day advanced he pleased still more,

  Macareus was the name he bore.

  His mistress void of thought as fair

  Tormented him with too much care:

  She adoration thought her due,

  And into fierce reproaches flew;  Her Macareus with laughter left,

  And of all hopes of bliss bereft.

  From clime to clime like mad she ran

  To seek the dear, the faithless man:

  From him she could not live content,

  So first of all to court she went.

  There she of every one inquired,

  "Is Macareus with you retired?"

  Hearing that name the witlings there

  To laugh and smile could scarce forbear.

  "Madam," said they, "who is this squire

  Macareus, for whom you inquire?

  Madam, his character display,

  Or else we shan't know what to say."

  "He is a man," returned the fair,

  "Possessed of each endowment rare,

  A man of virtue so refined,

  He hated none of human kind;

  To whom no man e'er owed a spite,

  Who always knew to reason right,

  Who void of care lived still at ease,

  And knew all human kind to please."

  The courtiers answered with a sneer,

  "You are not like to find him here,

  Mortals with such endowments rare

  But seldom to the court repair."

  The fair then to the city bent  Her way, and stopped a convent.

  She thought that in that calm retreat

  She might her tranquil lover meet.

  "Madam," then said the under-prior,

  The man for whom you thus inquire

  We long have waited for in vain,

  To visit us he ne'er did deign.

  But such a loss to compensate,

  We've idle time and vigils late;

  We have our stated days of fasting

  With discord and divisions lasting."

  A short monk then with crown shaved o'er,

  Said, "Madam, seek this man no more;

  For I'm by false reports misled,

  Or else your lover's long since dead."

  What the monk insolently said

  Made Thelema with rage grow red:

  "Brother," said she, "I'd have you know

  The man who has caused all my woe

  Was made for me, and me alone,

  He's in this world on which I'm thrown;

  With me he'll live and die content,

  I'm propery his element:

  Who aught else told you, on my word,

  Has said a thing that's most absurd."

  This said, away the fair one ran,

  Resolved to find the inconstant man.  "At Paris, where the wits abound,

  Perhaps," said she, "he may be found,

  The wits speak of him as a sage;"

  On of them said: "You by our page,

  Madam, perhaps have been misled;

  When there of Macareus you read,

  We spoke of one we never knew."

  Then near she to the law-court drew,

  Shutting her eyes, quick passed the fair,

  "My love," she cried, "can't sure be there;

  There's some attraction in the Court,

  But who'd to this vile place resort?

  Themis' black followers needs must prove

  Eternal foes to him I love."

  Fair Thelema at Rameau's shrine,

  Where the muse utters strains divine,

  The man who her so much neglected

  There to meet, was what she expected.

  At those feasts oft she was a guest,

  Where meet gay people richly dressed;

  Such people as we all agree

  To call the best of company.

  People of an address polite,

  She looked upon at the first sight

  As perfect copies of her lover;

  But she soon after could discover,

  That striving most to appear the same,  They still were widest of their aim.

  At last the fair one in despair,

  Finding how vain was all her care,

  And grown of her inquiries tired,

  To her retreat would have retired:

  The object which she there first spied

  Was Macareus by her bedside;

  He waited there, hid from her eyes,

  That he the fair one might surprise:

    "Henceforward," said he, "live with me,

  From all inquietude be free,

  Do not, like vain and haughty dames,

  Be too assuming in your claims;

  And if you would henceforth possess

  My person and my tenderness,

  Never more make demands more high

  Than suits me with them to comply."

  Who's understood by either name,

  Both of the lover and the dame,

  The folks who are profound in Greek

  Cannot be very far to seek.

  Taught by this emblem they'll relate

  What's to be every mortal's fate,

  Thee, Macareus, though all men choose,

  Though much they love thee, oft they lose;

  And I'm persuaded that you dwell

  With me, though this I fear to tell.  Who boasts that with thee he is blessed,

  By envy oft is dispossessed;

  A man should know, to make thee sure,

  How to live happy while obscure.To a Lady Very Well Known to the Whole Town

 

  Voltaire

  To a Lady Very Well Known to the Whole Town

  Published in 1901 

Translated by William F. Fleming 


  PHILLIS, how much the times are changed,

  Since in a hack the town you ranged,

  Since without finery or train you shone,

  Conspicuous for your charms alone;

  When though you supped on sorry fare,

  You nectar seemed with gods to share.

  You foolishly to one consigned

  Beauty which might charm all mankind:

  A desperate lover, who for life

  Engaged you when he made his wife.

  You then no treasure did inherit,

  Your beauty was your only merit,

  Your bosom charms divine displayed;

  There Cupid still an ambush laid;

  Your heart was tender, and your mind

  To youthful frolics much inclined.

  With so many charms endued,

  What woman e'er could be a prude?

  That fault, oh! beauty all divine,

  Was very far from being thine;  Because of favors you were free,

  You were the better liked by me.

  How differently you live, grown great,

  Your life is but the farce of state;

  The hoary porter, who still plies

  At your own door, and tells such lies,

  Is a just emblem of the age,

  His very looks ill-luck presage;

  He thinks the duty of his place is

  To drive away the loves and graces.

  The tender swain's abashed, afraid

  Your pompous palace to invade.

  When you were young, to my amazement

  I've seen them enter at the casement;

  I've seen them enter every day,

  And in your chamber nimbly play.

  Not all your carpets, and your plate,

  Not all your proud parade of state,

  Those goblets which so brightly shine,

  Graved by Germain with art divine;

  Those closets nobly furnished, where

  Martin's exceeds the China ware,

  Your vases of Japan, and all

  The brittle wonders of your hall;

  Your diamond pendants which appear

  With such bright lustre at each ear;

  Your solitaires so dazzling bright,  Your pomp which strikes the gazer's sight,

  Are worth one quarter of that bliss,

  Which once you imparted by a kiss.To Her Royal Highness, the Princess of 

 

  Voltaire

  To Her Royal Highness, the Princess of

  Published in 1901

Translated by William F. Fleming 


  A BEAUTEOUS princess often may

  Languish in pleasure's season gay;

  The empty forms of haughty state

  Oft make life tedious to the great.


  It must the greatest king confound,

  With all his courtiers circled round,

  Amidst a splendid court to find,

  That grandeur can't give peace of mind.


  Some think that play can give delight,

  But soon it grows insipid quite;

  And monarchs have been often seen,

  While gaming, tortured with the spleen.


  A king oft feasts with heavy heart,

  Pleasures to him no joy impart;

  While the dull vulgar contemplate,

  Like gazing idiots, pomp and state,


  And fondly think who is possessed  Of them with bliss supreme is blessed.

  Soon as the sun's refulgent rays,

  Spread o'er the hemisphere their blaze;


  The king begins another day,

  Yet knows not where to take his way:

  Tired of himself he straight repairs

  To company, to soothe his cares.


  But pleasure flies from his embrace,

  It rises not from change of place;

  This day's insipid as the last,

  At night he knows not how it passed.


  Time's loss is not to be repaired,

  Life's to an instant well compared;

  What, when life posts away so fast,

  Can days appear so long at last?


  Princess, whose worth above thy age,

  All hearts at two courts can engage;

  You usefully that time employ,

  By youth consumed in rapid joy.


  The genius given by heaven benign,

  You strive to polish and refine,

  By studies which at once unite

  Instructions solid, with delight.  'Tis best the mind should be employed,

  Indolence leaves a craving void;

  The soul is like a subtle fire,

  Which if not fed must soon expire.To the Queen of Hungary

 

  Voltaire

  To the Queen of Hungary

  Published in 1901

Translated by William F. Fleming 


  PRINCESS, descended from that noble race

  Which still in danger held the imperial throne,

  Who human nature and thy sex dost grace,

  Whose virtues even thy foes are forced to own.


  The generous French, as fierce as they're polite,

  Who to true glory constantly aspire;

  Whilst obstinately they against thee fight,

  Thy virtue and great qualities admire.


  The French and Germans leagued by wondrous ties,

  Make Christendom one dismal scene of woe;

  And from their friendship greater ills arise,

  Than e'er did from their longest quarrels flow.


  Thus from the equator and the frozen pole,

  The impetuous winds drive on with headlong force

  Two clouds, which as they on each other roll,

  Forth from their sable skirts the thunder force.


  Do virtuous kings such ruin then ordain?  A calm they promise, but excite a storm:

  Felicity we hope for from their reign,

  Whilst they with slaughter dire the earth deform.


  Oh! Fleury, wise and venerable sage,

  Whom good ne'er dazzles, danger ne'er alarms;

  Who dost exceed the ancient Nestor's age:

  Must Europe never cease to be in arms?


  Would thou couldst hold with prudent, steady hand,

  Europa's balance, shut up Janus' shrine;

  Make feuds and discords cease at thy command,

  And bring from heaven Astrea, maid divine.


  Would France's treasures were dispersed no more,

  But prudently within the realm applied;

  Opulence to our cities to restore,

  And make them flourishing on every side.


  You arts from heaven, and from the muses sprung,

  Whom Louis brought triumphant into France;

  Too long your hands are idle, lyres unstrung,

  'Tis time to start from so profound a trance.


  Your labors are of lasting glory sure,

  Whilst warlike pomps, the triumphs of a day,

  Blaze for a moment, never long endure,

  But soon like fleeting shadows pass away.Voltaire's Philosophical Dictionary

 

  Voltaire

  Voltaire's Philosophical Dictionary

  Published in 1824


  New York

  CARLTON HOUSE MANUFACTURED

  IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


  TABLE

  PREFACE BY VOLTAIRE

  ADULTERY

  ADVOCATE

  ANCIENTS AND MODERNS

  ANIMALS

  ANTIQUITY

  ARTS

  ASTROLOGY

  ATHEISM

  AUTHORITY

  AUTHORS

  BANISHMENT

    BANKRUPTCY

  BEAUTY

  BISHOP

  BOOKS  BOULEVERD

  BOURGES

    BRAHMINS

  CHARACTER

  CHARLATAN

  CIVIL LAWS

  CLIMATE

  COMMON SENSE

    CONCATENATION OF EVENTS

    CONTRADICTIONS

  CORN

  CROMWELL

  CUSTOMS

    DEMOCRACY

  DESTINY

  DEVOUT

  ECCLESIASTICAL MINISTRY

  EMBLEM

  ENGLISH THEATRE, ON THE

  ENVY

  EQUALITY

  EXPIATION

  EXTREME

    EZOURVEIDAM

  FAITH

  FALSE MINDS

  FATHERLAND  FINAL CAUSES

  FRAUD

    FREE-WILL

  FRENCH

  FRIENDSHIP

  GOD

  HELVETIA

  HISTORY

    IGNORANCE

  IMPIOUS

  JOAN OF ARC

  KISSING

  LANGUAGES

  LAWS

  LIBERTY

  LIBRARY

  LIMITS OF THE HUMAN MIND

  LOCAL CRIMES

  LOVE

  LUXURY

  MAN

  MAN IN THE IRON MASK

  MARRIAGE

  MASTER

  MEN OF LETTERS

    METAMORPHOSIS

  MILTON, ON THE REPROACH OF PLAGIARISM AGAINST    MOHAMMEDANS

  MOUNTAIN

    NAKEDNESS

  NATURAL LAW

  NATURE

  NECESSARY

  NEW NOVELTIES

    PHILOSOPHER

  POWER, OMNIPOTENCE

  PRAYERS

  PRÉCIS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY

  PREJUDICES

  RARE

  REASON

  RELIGION

  SECT

  SELF-ESTEEM

  SOUL

  STATES, GOVERNMENTS

  SUPERSTITION

  TEARS

  THEIST

    TOLERANCE

  TRUTH

  TYRANNY

  VIRTUE

  WHY?  DECLARATION OF ADMIRERS, QUESTIONERS AND DOUBTERS


  PREFACE


  This book does not demand continuous reading; but at whatever place one

opens it, one will find matter for reflection. The most useful books are those

of which readers themselves compose half; they extend the thoughts of which

the germ is presented to them; they correct what seems defective to them, and

they fortify by their reflections what seems to them weak.

  It is only really by enlightened people that this book can be read; the

ordinary man is not made for such knowledge; philosophy will never be his

lot.  Those  who  say  that  there  are  truths  which  must  be  hidden  from  the

people, need not be alarmed; the people do not read; they work six days of

the week, and on the seventh go to the inn. In a word, philosophical works

are  made  only  for  philosophers,  and  every  honest  man  must  try  to  be  a

philosopher, without pluming himself on being one.

  This alphabet is extracted from the most estimable works which are not

commonly within the reach of the many; and if the author does not always

mention the sources of his information, as being well enough known to the

learned, he must not be suspected of wishing to take the credit for other

people's work, because he himself preserves anonymity, according to this

word of the Gospel: "Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth."


  ADULTERY


  Note on a Magistrate Written about 1764

  A senior magistrate of a French town had the misfortune to have a wife

who was debauched by a priest before her marriage, and who since covered

herself with disgrace by public scandals: he was so moderate as to leave her

without noise. This man, about forty years old, vigorous and of agreeable

appearance, needs a woman; he is too scrupulous to seek to seduce another

man's wife, he fears intercourse with a public woman or with a widow who

would serve him as concubine. In this disquieting and sad state, he addressesto his Church a plea of which the following is a précis:

  My  wife  is  criminal,  and  it  is  I  who  am  punished.  Another  woman  is

necessary as a comfort to my life, to my virtue even; and the sect of which I

am a member refuses her to me; it forbids me to marry an honest girl. The

civil laws of to-day, unfortunately founded on canon law, deprive me of the

rights of humanity. The Church reduces me to seeking either the pleasures it

reproves, or the shameful compensations it condemns; it tries to force me to

be criminal.

  I cast my eyes over all the peoples of the earth; there is not a single one

except the Roman Catholic people among whom divorce and a new marriage

are not natural rights.

  What upheaval of the rule has therefore made among the Catholics a virtue

of undergoing adultery, and a duty of lacking a wife when one has been

infamously outraged by one's own?

  Why is a bond that has rotted indissoluble in spite of the great law adopted

by the code, quidquid ligatur dissolubile est? I am allowed a separation a

mensa et thoro, and I am not allowed divorce. The law can deprive me of my

wife, and it leaves me a name called "sacrament"! What a contradiction! what

slavery! and under what laws did we receive birth!

  What is still more strange is that this law of my Church is directly contrary

to the words which this Church itself believes to have been uttered by Jesus

Christ: "Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for fornication, and

shall marry another, committeth adultery" (Matt. xix. 9).

  I do not examine whether the pontiffs of Rome are in the right to violate at

their pleasure the law of him they regard as their master; whether when a

state has need of an heir, it is permissible to repudiate her who can give it

one. I do not inquire if a turbulent woman, demented, homicidal, a poisoner,

should not be repudiated equally with an adulteress: I limit myself to the sad

state which concerns me: God permits me to remarry, and the Bishop of

Rome does not permit me.

  Divorce was a practice among Catholics under all the emperors; it was

also in all the dismembered states of the Roman Empire. The kings of France,

those called "of the first line," almost all repudiated their wives in order totake new ones. At last came Gregory IX., enemy of the emperors and kings,

who by a decree made marriage an unshakeable yoke; his decretal became the

law  of  Europe.  When  the  kings  wanted  to  repudiate  a  wife  who  was  an

adulteress according to Jesus Christ's law, they could not succeed; it was

necessary  to  find  ridiculous  pretexts.  Louis  the  younger  was  obliged,  to

accomplish  his  unfortunate  divorce  from  Eleanor  of  Guienne,  to  allege  a

relationship  which  did  not  exist.  Henry  IV.,  to  repudiate  Marguerite  de

Valois, pretexted a still more false cause, a refusal of consent. One had to lie

to obtain a divorce legitimately.

  What! a king can abdicate his crown, and without the Pope's permission he

cannot abdicate his wife! Is it possible that otherwise enlightened men have

wallowed so long in this absurd servitude!

  That our priests, that our monks renounce wives, to that I consent; it is an

outrage against population, it is a misfortune for them, but they merit this

misfortune which they have made for themselves. They have been the victims

of the popes who wanted to have in them slaves, soldiers without families

and without fatherland, living solely for the Church: but I, magistrate, who

serve the state all day, I need a wife in the evening; and the Church has not

the right to deprive me of a benefit which God accords me. The apostles were

married, Joseph was married, and I want to be. If I, Alsacian, am dependent

on a priest who dwells at Rome, if this priest has the barbarous power to rob

me of a wife, let him make a eunuch of me for the singing of Misereres in his

chapel.

  Note for Women

  Equity demands that, having recorded this note in favour of husbands, we

should also put before the public the case in favour of wives, presented to the

junta of Portugal by a Countess of Arcira. This is the substance of it:

  The Gospel has forbidden adultery for my husband just as for me; he will

be  damned  as  I  shall,  nothing  is  better  established.  When  he  committed

twenty infidelities, when he gave my necklace to one of my rivals, and my

ear-rings to another, I did not ask the judges to have him shaved, to shut him

up among monks and to give me his property. And I, for having imitated him

once, for having done with the most handsome young man in Lisbon what he

did every day with impunity with the most idiotic strumpets of the court andthe town, have to answer at the bar before licentiates each of whom would be

at my feet if we were alone together in my closet; have to endure at the court

the usher cutting off my hair which is the most beautiful in the world; and

being  shut  up  among  nuns  who  have  no  common  sense,  deprived  of  my

dowry  and  my  marriage  covenants,  with  all  my  property  given  to  my

coxcomb of a husband to help him seduce other women and to commit fresh

adulteries.

  I ask if it is just, and if it is not evident that the laws were made by

cuckolds?

  In answer to my plea I am told that I should be happy not to be stoned at

the city gate by the canons, the priests of the parish and the whole populace.

This was the practice among the first nation of the earth, the chosen nation,

the cherished nation, the only one which was right when all the others were

wrong.

  To these barbarities I reply that when the poor adulteress was presented by

her accusers to the Master of the old and new law, He did not have her

stoned; that on the contrary He reproached them with their injustice, that he

laughed at them by writing on the ground with his finger, that he quoted the

old Hebraic proverb-"He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a

stone at her"; that then they all retired, the oldest fleeing first, because the

older they were the more adulteries had they committed.

  The doctors of canon law answer me that this history of the adulteress is

related only in the Gospel of St. John, that it was not inserted there until later.

Leontius, Maldonat, affirm that it is not to be found in a single ancient Greek

copy; that none of the twenty-three early commentators mentions it. Origen,

St. Jerome, St. John Chrysostom, Theophilact, Nonnus, do not recognize it at

all. It is not to be found in the Syriac Bible, it is not in Ulphilas' version.

  That is what my husband's advocates say, they who would have me not

only shaved, but also stoned.

  But the advocates who pleaded for me say that Ammonius, author of the

third century, recognized this story as true, and that if St. Jerome rejects it in

some places, he adopts it in others; that, in a word, it is authentic to-day. I

leave there, and I say to my husband: "If you are without sin, shave me,

imprison me, take my property; but if you have committed more sins than Ihave, it is for me to shave you, to have you imprisoned, and to seize your

fortune. In justice these things should be equal."

  My husband answers that he is my superior and my chief, that he is more

than an inch taller, that he is shaggy as a bear; that consequently I owe him

everything, and that he owes me nothing.

  But I ask if Queen Anne of England is not her husband's chief? if her

husband the Prince of Denmark, who is her High Admiral, does not owe her

entire obedience? and if she would not have him condemned by the court of

peers if the little man's infidelity were in question? It is therefore clear that if

the  women  do  not  have  the  men  punished,  it  is  when  they  are  not  the

stronger.


  ADVOCATE

  An advocate is a man who, not having a sufficient fortune to buy one of

those resplendent offices on which the universe has its eyes, studies the laws

of Theodosius and Justinian for three years, so that he may learn the usages

of Paris, and who finally, being registered, has the right to plead causes for

money, if he have a strong voice.


  ANCIENTS AND MODERNS


  The great dispute between the ancients and the moderns is not yet settled;

it  has  been  on  the  table  since  the  silver  age  succeeded  the  golden  age.

Mankind has always maintained that the good old times were much better

than the present day. Nestor, in the "Iliad," wishing to insinuate himself as a

wise conciliator into the minds of Achilles and Agamemnon, starts by saying

to them-"I lived formerly with better men than you; no, I have never seen and

I  shall  never  see  such  great  personages  as  Dryas,  Cenæus,  Exadius,

Polyphemus equal to the gods, etc."

  Posterity has well avenged Achilles for Nestor's poor compliment. Nobody

knows  Dryas  any  longer;  one  has  hardly  heard  speak  of  Exadius,  or  of

Cenæus; and as for Polyphemus equal to the gods, he has not too good a

reputation, unless the possession of a big eye in one's forehead, and the eatingof men raw, are to have something of the divine.

  Lucretius does not hesitate to say that nature has degenerated (lib. II. v.

1159). Antiquity is full of eulogies of another more remote antiquity. Horace

combats this prejudice with as much finesse as force in his beautiful Epistle

to Augustus (Epist. I. liv. ii.). "Must our poems, then," he says, "be like our

wines, of which the oldest are always preferred?"

  The learned and ingenious Fontenelle expresses himself on this subject as

follows:

  "The whole question of the pre-eminence between the ancients and the

moderns, once it is well understood, is reduced to knowing whether the trees

which formerly were in our countryside were bigger than those of to-day. In

the event that they were, Homer, Plato, Demosthenes cannot be equalled in

these latter centuries.

  "Let us throw light on this paradox. If the ancients had more intellect than

us, it is that the brains of those times were better ordered, formed of firmer or

more delicate fibres, filled with more animal spirits; but in virtue of what

were the brains of those times better ordered? The trees also would have been

bigger and more beautiful; for if nature was then younger and more vigorous,

the trees, as well as men's brains, would have been conscious of this vigour

and this youth." ("Digression on the Ancients and the Moderns," vol. 4, 1742

edition.)

  With the illustrious academician's permission, that is not at all the state of

the question. It is not a matter of knowing whether nature has been able to

produce in our day as great geniuses and as good works as those of Greek and

Latin antiquity; but to know whether we have them in fact. Without a doubt it

is not impossible for there to be as big oaks in the forest of Chantilli as in the

forest  of  Dodona;  but  supposing  that  the  oaks  of  Dodona  had  spoken,  it

would be quite clear that they had a great advantage over ours, which in all

probability will never speak.

  Nature  is  not  bizarre;  but  it  is  possible  that  she  gave  the  Athenians  a

country  and  a  sky  more  suitable  than  Westphalia  and  the  Limousin  for

forming  certain  geniuses.  Further,  it  is  possible  that  the  government  of

Athens, by seconding the climate, put into Demosthenes' head something that

the air of Climart and La Grenouillère and the government of Cardinal deRichelieu did not put into the heads of Omer Talon and Jérome Bignon.

  This dispute is therefore a question of fact. Was antiquity more fecund in

great  monuments  of  all  kinds,  up  to  the  time  of  Plutarch,  than  modern

centuries  have  been  from  the  century  of  the  Medicis  up  to  Louis  XIV.

inclusive?

  The Chinese, more than two hundred years before our era, constructed that

great wall which was not able to save them from the invasion of the Tartars.

The Egyptians, three thousand years before, had overloaded the earth with

their astonishing pyramids, which had a base of about ninety thousand square

feet. Nobody doubts that, if one wished to undertake to-day these useless

works, one could easily succeed by a lavish expenditure of money. The great

wall of China is a monument to fear; the pyramids are monuments to vanity

and superstition. Both bear witness to a great patience in the peoples, but to

no superior genius. Neither the Chinese nor the Egyptians would have been

able to make even a statue such as those which our sculptors form to-day.

  The chevalier Temple, who has made it his business to disparage all the

moderns,  claims  that  in  architecture  they  have  nothing  comparable  to  the

temples of Greece and Rome: but, for all that he is English, he must agree

that the Church of St. Peter is incomparably more beautiful than the Capitol

was.

  It is curious with what assurance he maintains that there is nothing new in

our astronomy, nothing in the knowledge of the human body, unless perhaps,

he says, the circulation of the blood. Love of his own opinion, founded on his

vast self-esteem, makes him forget the discovery of the satellites of Jupiter, of

the five moons and the ring of Saturn, of the rotation of the sun on its axis, of

the calculated position of three thousand stars, of the laws given by Kepler

and Newton for the heavenly orbs, of the causes of the precession of the

equinoxes, and of a hundred other pieces of knowledge of which the ancients

did not suspect even the possibility.

  The discoveries in anatomy are as great in number. A new universe in

little, discovered by the microscope, was counted for nothing by the chevalier

Temple; he closed his eyes to the marvels of his contemporaries, and opened

them only to admire ancient ignorance.

  He goes so far as to pity us for having nothing left of the magic of theIndians, the Chaldeans, the Egyptians; and by this magic he understands a

profound knowledge of nature, whereby they produced miracles: but he does

not  cite  one  miracle,  because  in  fact  there  never  were  any.  "What  has

become," he asks, "of the charms of that music which so often enchanted man

and beast, the fishes, the birds, the snakes, and changed their nature?"

  This enemy of his century really believes the fable of Orpheus, and has not

apparently heard either the beautiful music of Italy, or even that of France,

which  in  truth  does  not  charm  snakes,  but  does  charm  the  ears  of

connoisseurs.

  What  is  still  more  strange  is  that,  having  all  his  life  cultivated  belles-

lettres,  he  does  not  reason  better  about  our  good  authors  than  about  our

philosophers. He looks on Rabelais as a great man. He cites the "Amours des

Gaules" as one of our best works. He was, however, a scholar, a courtier, a

man of much wit, an ambassador, a man who had reflected profoundly on all

he had seen. He possessed great knowledge: a prejudice sufficed to spoil all

this merit.

  There are beauties in Euripides, and in Sophocles still more; but they have

many more defects. One dares say that the beautiful scenes of Corneille and

the  touching  tragedies  of  Racine  surpass  the  tragedies  of  Sophocles  and

Euripides as much as these two Greeks surpass Thespis. Racine was quite

conscious of his great superiority over Euripides; but he praised the Greek

poet in order to humiliate Perrault.

  Molière, in his good pieces, is as superior to the pure but cold Terence,

and to the droll Aristophanes, as to Dancourt the buffoon.

  There are therefore spheres in which the moderns are far superior to the

ancients, and others, very few in number, in which we are their inferiors. It is

to this that the whole dispute is reduced.


  ANIMALS


  What a pitiful, what a sorry thing to have said that animals are machines

bereft of understanding and feeling, which perform their operations always in

the same way, which learn nothing, perfect nothing, etc.!  What! that bird which makes its nest in a semi-circle when it is attaching it

to a wall, which builds it in a quarter circle when it is in an angle, and in a

circle upon a tree; that bird acts always in the same way? That hunting-dog

which you have disciplined for three months, does it not know more at the

end of this time than it knew before your lessons? Does the canary to which

you teach a tune repeat it at once? do you not spend a considerable time in

teaching it? have you not seen that it has made a mistake and that it corrects

itself?

  Is it because I speak to you, that you judge that I have feeling, memory,

ideas?  Well,  I  do  not  speak  to  you;  you  see  me  going  home  looking

disconsolate, seeking a paper anxiously, opening the desk where I remember

having  shut  it,  finding  it,  reading  it  joyfully.  You  judge  that  I  have

experienced the feeling of distress and that of pleasure, that I have memory

and understanding.

  Bring the same judgment to bear on this dog which has lost its master,

which has sought him on every road with sorrowful cries, which enters the

house agitated, uneasy, which goes down the stairs, up the stairs, from room

to room, which at last finds in his study the master it loves, and which shows

him its joy by its cries of delight, by its leaps, by its caresses.

  Barbarians  seize  this  dog,  which  in  friendship  surpasses  man  so

prodigiously; they nail it on a table, and they dissect it alive in order to show

the mesenteric veins. You discover in it all the same organs of feeling that are

in  yourself.  Answer  me,  machinist,  has  nature  arranged  all  the  means  of

feeling in this animal, so that it may not feel? has it nerves in order to be

impassible? Do not suppose this impertinent contradiction in nature.

  But the schoolmasters ask what the soul of animals is? I do not understand

this question. A tree has the faculty of receiving in its fibres its sap which

circulates, of unfolding the buds of its leaves and its fruit; will you ask what

the soul of this tree is? it has received these gifts; the animal has received

those of feeling, of memory, of a certain number of ideas. Who has bestowed

these gifts? who has given these faculties? He who has made the grass of the

fields to grow, and who makes the earth gravitate toward the sun.

  "Animals' souls are substantial forms," said Aristotle, and after Aristotle,

the Arab school, and after the Arab school, the angelical school, and after theangelical school, the Sorbonne, and after the Sorbonne, nobody at all.

  "Animals' souls are material," cry other philosophers. These have not been

in any better fortune than the others. In vain have they been asked what a

material soul is; they have to admit that it is matter which has sensation: but

what has given it this sensation? It is a material soul, that is to say that it is

matter which gives sensation to matter; they cannot issue from this circle.

  Listen to other brutes reasoning about the brutes; their soul is a spiritual

soul which dies with the body; but what proof have you of it? what idea have

you  of  this  spiritual  soul,  which,  in  truth,  has  feeling,  memory,  and  its

measure of ideas and ingenuity; but which will never be able to know what a

child of six knows? On what ground do you imagine that this being, which is

not  body,  dies  with  the  body?  The  greatest  fools  are  those  who  have

advanced that this soul is neither body nor spirit. There is a fine system. By

spirit we can understand only some unknown thing which is not body. Thus

these  gentlemen's  system  comes  back  to  this,  that  the  animals'  soul  is  a

substance which is neither body nor something which is not body.

  Whence can come so many contradictory errors? From the habit men have

always had of examining what a thing is, before knowing if it exists. The

clapper, the valve of a bellows, is called in French the "soul" of a bellows.

What is this soul? It is a name that I have given to this valve which falls, lets

air enter, rises again, and thrusts it through a pipe, when I make the bellows

move.

  There is not there a distinct soul in the machine: but what makes animals'

bellows move? I have already told you, what makes the stars move. The

philosopher who said, "Deus est anima brutorum," was right; but he should

go further.


  ANTIQUITY


  Have you sometimes seen in a village Pierre Aoudri and his wife Peronelle

wishing to go before their neighbours in the procession? "Our grandfathers,"

they say, "were tolling the bells before those who jostle us to-day owned even

a pig-sty."  The vanity of Pierre Aoudri, his wife and his neighbours, knows nothing

more about it. Their minds kindle. The quarrel is important; honour is in

question. Proofs are necessary. A scholar who sings in the choir, discovers an

old rusty iron pot, marked with an "A," first letter of the name of the potter

who made the pot. Pierre Aoudri persuades himself that it was his ancestors'

helmet. In this way was Cæsar descended from a hero and from the goddess

Venus. Such is the history of nations; such is, within very small margins, the

knowledge of early antiquity.

  The scholars of Armenia demonstrate that the terrestrial paradise was in

their land. Some profound Swedes demonstrate that it was near Lake Vener

which is visibly a remnant of it. Some Spaniards demonstrate also that it was

in Castille; while the Japanese, the Chinese, the Indians, the Africans, the

Americans  are  not  sufficiently  unfortunate  to  know  even  that  there  was

formerly a terrestrial paradise at the source of the Phison, the Gehon, the

Tigris  and  the  Euphrates,  or,  if  you  prefer  it,  at  the  source  of  the

Guadalquivir, the Guadiana, the Douro and the Ebro; for from Phison one

easily makes Phaetis; and from Phaetis one makes the Baetis which is the

Guadalquivir. The Gehon is obviously the Guadiana, which begins with a

"G."  The  Ebro,  which  is  in  Catalonia,  is  incontestably  the  Euphrates,  of

which the initial letter is "E."

  But a Scotsman appears who demonstrates in his turn that the garden of

Eden was at Edinburgh, which has retained its name; and it is to be believed

that in a few centuries this opinion will make its fortune.

  The whole globe was burned once upon a time, says a man versed in

ancient and modern history; for I read in a newspaper that some absolutely

black  charcoal  has  been  found  in  Germany  at  a  depth  of  a  hundred  feet,

between mountains covered with wood. And it is suspected even that there

were charcoal burners in this place.

  Phaeton's adventure makes it clear that everything has boiled right to the

bottom of the sea. The sulphur of Mount Vesuvius proves invincibly that the

banks of the Rhine, Danube, Ganges, Nile and the great Yellow River are

merely sulphur, nitre and Guiac oil, which only await the moment of the

explosion to reduce the earth to ashes, as it has already been. The sand on

which we walk is evident proof that the earth has been vitrified, and that ourglobe is really only a glass ball, just as are our ideas.

  But  if  fire  has  changed  our  globe,  water  has  produced  still  finer

revolutions. For you see clearly that the sea, the tides of which mount as high

as eight feet in our climate, has produced mountains of a height of sixteen to

seventeen thousand feet. This is so true that some learned men who have

never been in Switzerland have found a big ship with all its rigging petrified

on Mount St. Gothard, or at the bottom of a precipice, one knows not where;

but it is quite certain that it was there. Therefore men were originally fish,

quod erat demonstrandum.

  To descend to a less antique antiquity, let us speak of the times when the

greater part of the barbarous nations left their countries, to go to seek others

which were hardly any better. It is true, if there be anything true in ancient

history, that there were some Gaulish brigands who went to pillage Rome in

the time of Camillus. Other Gaulish brigands had passed, it is said, through

Illyria on the way to hire their services as murderers to other murderers, in

the  direction  of  Thrace;  they  exchanged  their  blood  for  bread,  and  later

established  themselves  in  Galatia.  But  who  were  these  Gauls?  were  they

Berichons  and  Angevins?  They  were  without  a  doubt  Gauls  whom  the

Romans  called  Cisalpines,  and  whom  we  call  Transalpines,  famished

mountain-dwellers, neighbours of the Alps and the Apennines. The Gauls of

the Seine and the Marne did not know at that time that Rome existed, and

could not take it into their heads to pass Mount Cenis, as Hannibal did later,

to  go  to  steal  the  wardrobes  of  Roman  senators  who  at  that  time  for  all

furniture had a robe of poor grey stuff, ornamented with a band the colour of

ox blood; two little pummels of ivory, or rather dog's bone, on the arms of a

wooden chair; and in their kitchens a piece of rancid bacon.

  The  Gauls,  who  were  dying  of  hunger,  not  finding  anything  to  eat  in

Rome,  went  off  therefore  to  seek  their  fortune  farther  away,  as  was  the

practice of the Romans later, when they ravaged so many countries one after

the other; as did the peoples of the North when they destroyed the Roman

Empire.

  And,  further,  what  is  it  which  instructs  very  feebly  about  these

emigrations? It is a few lines that the Romans wrote at hazard; because for

the Celts, the Velches or the Gauls, these men who it is desired to make passfor eloquent, at that time did not know, they and their bards, how either to

read or write.

  But to infer from that that the Gauls or Celts, conquered after by a few of

Cæsar's legions, and by a horde of Bourguignons, and lastly by a horde of

Sicamores, under one Clodovic, had previously subjugated the whole world,

and given their names and laws to Asia, seems to me to be very strange: the

thing is not mathematically impossible, and if it be demonstrated, I give way;

it would be very uncivil to refuse to the Velches what one accords to the

Tartars.


  ARTS


  That the Newness of the Arts in no wise proves the Newness of the Globe

  All the philosophers thought matter eternal but the arts appear new. There

is not one, even to the art of making bread, which is not recent. The first

Romans ate pap; and these conquerors of so many nations never thought of

either  windmills  or  watermills.  This  truth  seems  at  first  to  contradict  the

antiquity of the globe such as it is, or supposes terrible revolutions in this

globe. The inundations of barbarians can hardly annihilate arts which have

become necessary. I suppose that an army of negroes come among us like

locusts,  from  the  mountains  of  Cobonas,  through  the  Monomotapa,  the

Monoemugi,  the  Nosseguais,  the  Maracates;  that  they  have  traversed

Abyssinia, Nubia, Egypt, Syria, Asia Minor, the whole of our Europe; that

they  have  overthrown  everything,  ransacked  everything;  there  will  still

remain a few bakers, a few cobblers, a few tailors, a few carpenters: the

necessary arts will survive; only luxury will be annihilated. It is what was

seen at the fall of the Roman Empire; the art of writing even became very

rare; almost all those which contributed to the comfort of life were reborn

only long after. We invent new ones every day.

  From all this one can at bottom conclude nothing against the antiquity of

the globe. For, supposing even that an influx of barbarians had made us lose

entirely all the arts even to the arts of writing and making bread; supposing,

further, that for ten years past we had no bread, pens, ink and paper; the land

which has been able to subsist for ten years without eating bread and withoutwriting its thoughts, would be able to pass a century, and a hundred thousand

centuries without these aids.

  It is quite clear that man and the other animals can exist very well without

bakers,  without  novelists,  and  without  theologians,  witness  the  whole  of

America, witness three quarters of our continent.

  The newness of the arts among us does not therefore prove the newness of

the globe, as was claimed by Epicurus, one of our predecessors in reverie,

who supposed that by chance the eternal atoms in declining, had one day

formed our earth. Pomponace said: "Se il mondo non è eterno, per tutti santi è

molto vecchio."


  ASTROLOGY


  Astrology may rest on better foundations than Magic. For if no one has

seen  either  Goblins,  or  Lemures,  or  Dives,  or  Peris,  or  Demons,  or

Cacodemons, the predictions of astrologers have often been seen to succeed.

If of two astrologers consulted on the life of a child and on the weather, one

says that the child will live to manhood, the other not; if one announces rain,

and the other fine weather, it is clear that one of them will be a prophet.

  The great misfortune of the astrologers is that the sky has changed since

the rules of the art were established. The sun, which at the equinox was in

Aries in the time of the Argonauts, is to-day in Taurus; and the astrologers, to

the great ill-fortune of their art, to-day attribute to one house of the sun what

belongs  visibly  to  another.  However,  that  is  not  a  demonstrative  reason

against astrology. The masters of the art deceive themselves; but it is not

demonstrated that the art cannot exist.

  There  is  no  absurdity  in  saying:  Such  and  such  a  child  is  born  in  the

waxing of the moon, during stormy weather, at the rising of such and such

star; his constitution has been feeble, and his life unhappy and short; which is

the ordinary lot of poor constitutions: this child, on the contrary, was born

when the moon was full, the sun strong, the weather calm, at the rising of

such and such star; his constitution has been good, his life long and happy. If

these  observations  had  been  repeated,  if  they  had  been  found  accurate,

experience would have been able after some thousands of years to form an artwhich it would have been difficult to doubt: one would have thought, with

some likelihood, that men are like trees and vegetables which must be planted

and sown only in certain seasons. It would have been of no avail against the

astrologers to say: My son was born at a fortunate time, and nevertheless died

in his cradle; the astrologer would have answered: It often happens that trees

planted in the proper season perish; I answered to you for the stars, but I did

not answer for the flaw of conformation you communicated to your child.

Astrology operates only when no cause opposes itself to the good the stars

can do.

  One  would  not  have  succeeded  better  in  discrediting  the  astrologer  by

saying: Of two children who were born in the same minute, one has been

king, the other has been only churchwarden of his parish; for the astrologer

could very well have defended himself by pointing out that the peasant made

his fortune when he became churchwarden, as the prince when he became

king.

  And if one alleged that a bandit whom Sixtus V. had hanged was born at

the  same  time  as  Sixtus  V.,  who  from  a  pig-herd  became  Pope,  the

astrologers would say one had made a mistake of a few seconds, and that it is

impossible, according to the rules, for the same star to give the triple crown

and  the  gibbet.  It  is  then  only  because  a  host  of  experiences  belied  the

predictions, that men perceived at last that the art was illusory; but before

being undeceived, they were long credulous.

  One of the most famous mathematicians in Europe, named Stoffler, who

flourished in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and who long worked at

the reform of the calendar, proposed at the Council of Constance, foretold a

universal flood for the year 1524. This flood was to arrive in the month of

February, and nothing is more plausible; for Saturn, Jupiter and Mars were

then in conjunction in the sign of Pisces. All the peoples of Europe, Asia and

Africa,  who  heard  speak  of  the  prediction,  were  dismayed.  Everyone

expected the flood, despite the rainbow. Several contemporary authors record

that the inhabitants of the maritime provinces of Germany hastened to sell

their lands dirt cheap to those who had most money, and who were not so

credulous as they. Everyone armed himself with a boat as with an ark. A

Toulouse doctor, named Auriol, had a great ark made for himself, his family

and his friends; the same precautions were taken over a large part of Italy. Atlast the month of February arrived, and not a drop of water fell: never was

month  more  dry,  and  never  were  the  astrologers  more  embarrassed.

Nevertheless they were not discouraged, nor neglected among us; almost all

princes continued to consult them.

  I  have  not  the  honour  of  being  a  prince;  but  the  celebrated  Count  of

Boulainvilliers and an Italian, named Colonne, who had much prestige in

Paris, both foretold that I should die infallibly at the age of thirty-two. I have

been  so  malicious  as  to  deceive  them  already  by  nearly  thirty  years,

wherefore I humbly beg their pardon.


  ATHEISM

  SECTION I


  Of the Comparison so often made between Atheism and Idolatry

  It seems to me that in the "Encyclopedic Dictionary" the opinion of the

Jesuit Richeome, on atheists and idolaters, has not been refuted as strongly as

it might have been; opinion held formerly by St. Thomas, St. Gregory of

Nazianze, St. Cyprian and Tertullian, opinion that Arnobius set forth with

much force when he said to the pagans: "Do you not blush to reproach us

with despising your gods, and is it not much more proper to believe in no

God at all, than to impute to them infamous actions?"[1] opinion established

long before by Plutarch, who says "that he much prefers people to say there is

no  Plutarch,  than  to  say-'There  is  an  inconstant,  choleric,  vindictive

Plutarch'";[2]  opinion  strengthened  finally  by  all  the  effort  of  Bayle's

dialectic.

  Here is the ground of dispute, brought to fairly dazzling light by the Jesuit

Richeome, and rendered still more plausible by the way Bayle has turned it to

account.[3]

  "There are two porters at the door of a house; they are asked: 'Can one

speak to your master?' 'He is not there,' answers one. 'He is there,' answers the

other, 'but he is busy making counterfeit money, forged contracts, daggers

and poisons, to undo those who have but accomplished his purposes.' The

atheist resembles the first of these porters, the pagan the other. It is clear,therefore,  that  the  pagan  offends  the  Deity  more  gravely  than  does  the

atheist."

  With Father Richeome's and even Bayle's permission, that is not at all the

position of the matter. For the first porter to resemble the atheists, he must

not say-"My master is not here": he should say-"I have no master; him whom

you claim to be my master does not exist; my comrade is a fool to tell you

that he is busy compounding poisons and sharpening daggers to assassinate

those who have executed his caprices. No such being exists in the world."

  Richeome  has  reasoned,  therefore,  very  badly.  And  Bayle,  in  his

somewhat diffuse discourses, has forgotten himself so far as to do Richeome

the honour of annotating him very malapropos.

  Plutarch seems to express himself much better in preferring people who

affirm there is no Plutarch, to those who claim Plutarch to be an unsociable

man. In truth, what does it matter to him that people say he is not in the

world? But it matters much to him that his reputation be not tarnished. It is

not thus with the Supreme Being.

  Plutarch even does not broach the real object under discussion. It is not a

question of knowing who offends more the Supreme Being, whether it be he

who denies Him, or he who distorts Him. It is impossible to know otherwise

than by revelation, if God is offended by the empty things men say of Him.

  Without a thought, philosophers fall almost always into the ideas of the

common herd, in supposing God to be jealous of His glory, to be choleric, to

love vengeance, and in taking rhetorical figures for real ideas. The interesting

subject for the whole universe, is to know if it be not better, for the good of

all mankind, to admit a rewarding and revengeful God, who recompenses

good actions hidden, and who punishes secret crimes, than to admit none at

all.

  Bayle exhausts himself in recounting all the infamies imputed by fable to

the gods of antiquity. His adversaries answer him with commonplaces that

signify nothing. The partisans of Bayle and his enemies have almost always

fought without making contact. They all agree that Jupiter was an adulterer,

Venus a wanton, Mercury a rogue. But, as I see it, that is not what needs

consideration. One must distinguish between Ovid's Metamorphoses and the

religion  of  the  ancient  Romans.  It  is  quite  certain  that  never  among  theRomans or even among the Greeks, was there a temple dedicated to Mercury

the rogue, Venus the wanton, Jupiter the adulterer.

  The god whom the Romans called Deus optimus, very good, very great,

was not reputed to encourage Clodius to sleep with Cæsar's wife, or Cæsar to

be King Nicomedes' Sodomite.

  Cicero does not say that Mercury incited Verres to steal Sicily, although

Mercury,  in  the  fable,  had  stolen  Apollo's  cows.  The  real  religion  of  the

ancients was that Jupiter, very good and very just, and the secondary gods,

punished the perjurer in the infernal regions. Likewise the Romans were long

the most religious observers of oaths. Religion was very useful, therefore, to

the Romans. There was no command to believe in Leda's two eggs, in the

changing  of  Inachus'  daughter  into  a  cow,  in  the  love  of  Apollo  for

Hyacinthus.

  One must not say therefore that the religion of Numa dishonoured the

Deity. For a long time, therefore, people have been disputing over a chimera;

which happens only too often.

  The question is then asked whether a nation of atheists can exist; it seems

to me that one must distinguish between the nation properly so called, and a

society of philosophers above the nation. It is very true that in every country

the populace has need of the greatest curb, and that if Bayle had had only five

or six hundred peasants to govern, he would not have failed to announce to

them the existence of a God, rewarder and revenger. But Bayle would not

have spoken of Him to the Epicureans who were rich people, fond of rest,

cultivating  all  the  social  virtues,  and  above  all  friendship,  fleeing  the

embarrassment and danger of public affairs, in fine, leading a comfortable

and innocent life. It seems to me that in this way the dispute is finished as

regards society and politics.

  For entirely savage races, it has been said already that one cannot count

them among either the atheists or the theists. Asking them their belief would

be  like  asking  them  if  they  are  for  Aristotle  or  Democritus:  they  know

nothing; they are not atheists any more than they are Peripatetics.

  In  this  case,  I  shall  answer  that  the  wolves  live  like  this,  and  that  an

assembly of cannibal barbarians such as you suppose them is not a society;

and I shall always ask you if, when you have lent your money to someone inyour society, you want neither your debtor, nor your attorney, nor your judge,

to believe in God.


  Of Modern Atheists. Reasons of the Worshippers of God

  We are intelligent beings: intelligent beings cannot have been formed by a

crude, blind, insensible being: there is certainly some difference between the

ideas of Newton and the dung of a mule. Newton's intelligence, therefore,

came from another intelligence.

  When we see a beautiful machine, we say that there is a good engineer,

and  that  this  engineer  has  excellent  judgment.  The  world  is  assuredly  an

admirable machine; therefore there is in the world an admirable intelligence,

wherever it may be. This argument is old, and none the worse for that.

  All  living  bodies  are  composed  of  levers,  of  pulleys,  which  function

according to the laws of mechanics; of liquids which the laws of hydrostatics

cause to circulate perpetually; and when one thinks that all these beings have

a perception quite unrelated to their organization, one is overwhelmed with

surprise.

  The movement of the heavenly bodies, that of our little earth round the

sun, all operate by virtue of the most profound mathematical law. How Plato

who was not aware of one of these laws, eloquent but visionary Plato, who

said that the earth was erected on an equilateral triangle, and the water on a

right-angled triangle; strange Plato, who says there can be only five worlds,

because there are only five regular bodies: how, I say, did Plato, who did not

know even spherical trigonometry, have nevertheless a genius sufficiently

fine, an instinct sufficiently happy, to call God the "Eternal Geometer," to

feel the existence of a creative intelligence? Spinoza himself admits it. It is

impossible to strive against this truth which surrounds us and which presses

on us from all sides.


  Reasons of the Atheists

    Notwithstanding, I have known refractory persons who say that there is no

creative intelligence at all, and that movement alone has by itself formed all

that we see and all that we are. They tell you brazenly:  "The  combination  of  this  universe  was  possible,  seeing  that  the

combination exists: therefore it was possible that movement alone arranged

it. Take four of the heavenly bodies only, Mars, Venus, Mercury and the

Earth: let us think first only of the place where they are, setting aside all the

rest, and let us see how many probabilities we have that movement alone put

them in their respective places. We have only twenty-four chances in this

combination, that is, there are only twenty-four chances against one to bet

that these bodies will not be where they are with reference to each other. Let

us add to these four globes that of Jupiter; there will be only a hundred and

twenty against one to bet that Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury and our globe,

will not be placed where we see them.

  "Add finally Saturn: there will be only seven hundred and twenty chances

against one, for putting these six big planets in the arrangement they preserve

among  themselves,  according  to  their  given  distances.  It  is  therefore

demonstrated that in seven hundred and twenty throws, movement alone has

been able to put these six principal planets in their order.

  "Take  then  all  the  secondary  bodies,  all  their  combinations,  all  their

movements, all the beings that vegetate, that live, that feel, that think, that

function  in  all  the  globes,  you  will  have  but  to  increase  the  number  of

chances; multiply this number in all eternity, up to the number which our

feebleness  calls  'infinity,'  there  will  always  be  a  unity  in  favour  of  the

formation  of  the  world,  such  as  it  is,  by  movement  alone:  therefore  it  is

possible that in all eternity the movement of matter alone has produced the

entire  universe  such  as  it  exists.  It  is  even  inevitable  that  in  eternity  this

combination should occur. Thus," they say, "not only is it possible for the

world to be what it is by movement alone, but it was impossible for it not to

be likewise after an infinity of combinations."

  Answer

  All this supposition seems to me prodigiously fantastic, for two reasons;

first, that in this universe there are intelligent beings, and that you would not

know how to prove it possible for movement alone to produce understanding;

second, that, from your own avowal, there is infinity against one to bet, that

an intelligent creative cause animates the universe. When one is alone face to

face with the infinite, one feels very small.  Again,  Spinoza  himself  admits  this  intelligence;  it  is  the  basis  of  his

system. You have not read it, and it must be read. Why do you want to go

further than him, and in foolish arrogance plunge your feeble reason in an

abyss into which Spinoza dared not descend? Do you realize thoroughly the

extreme folly of saying that it is a blind cause that arranges that the square of

a  planet's  revolution  is  always  to  the  square  of  the  revolutions  of  other

planets, as the cube of its distance is to the cube of the distances of the others

to the common centre? Either the heavenly bodies are great geometers, or the

Eternal Geometer has arranged the heavenly bodies.

  But where is the Eternal Geometer? is He in one place or in all places,

without occupying space? I have no idea. Is it of His own substance that He

has arranged all things? I have no idea. Is He immense without quantity and

without quality? I have no idea. All that I know is that one must worship Him

and be just.


  New Objection of a Modern Atheist[4]

  Can one say that the parts of animals conform to their needs: what are

these needs? preservation and propagation. Is it astonishing then that, of the

infinite  combinations  which  chance  has  produced,  there  has  been  able  to

subsist  only  those  that  have  organs  adapted  to  the  nourishment  and

continuation of their species? have not all the others perished of necessity?

  Answer

  This objection, oft-repeated since Lucretius, is sufficiently refuted by the

gift of sensation in animals, and by the gift of intelligence in man. How

should combinations "which chance has produced," produce this sensation

and  this  intelligence  (as  has  just  been  said  in  the  preceding  paragraph)?

Without  any  doubt  the  limbs  of  animals  are  made  for  their  needs  with

incomprehensible art, and you are not so bold as to deny it. You say no more

about it. You feel that you have nothing to answer to this great argument

which nature brings against you. The disposition of a fly's wing, a snail's

organs suffices to bring you to the ground.


  Maupertuis' Objection  Modern  natural  philosophers  have  but  expanded  these  so-called

arguments, often they have pushed them to trifling and indecency. They have

found God in the folds of the skin of the rhinoceros: one could, with equal

reason, deny His existence because of the tortoise's shell.

  Answer

  What  reasoning!  The  tortoise  and  the  rhinoceros,  and  all  the  different

species, are proof equally in their infinite variety of the same cause, the same

design, the same aim, which are preservation, generation and death.

  There is unity in this infinite variety; the shell and the skin bear witness

equally.  What!  deny  God  because  shell  does  not  resemble  leather!  And

journalists have been prodigal of eulogies about these ineptitudes, eulogies

they have not given to Newton and Locke, both worshippers of the Deity who

spoke with full knowledge.


  Maupertuis' Objection

  Of what use are beauty and proportion in the construction of the snake?

They may have uses, some say, of which we are ignorant. At least let us be

silent then; let us not admire an animal which we know only by the harm it

does.

  Answer

  And be you silent too, seeing that you cannot conceive its utility any more

than I can; or avow that in reptiles everything is admirably proportioned.

  Some are venomous, you have been so yourself. Here there is question

only of the prodigious art which has formed snakes, quadrupeds, birds, fish

and  bipeds.  This  art  is  sufficiently  evident.  You  ask  why  the  snake  does

harm? And you, why have you done harm so many times? Why have you

been a persecutor? which is the greatest of all crimes for a philosopher. That

is another question, a question of moral and physical ill. For long has one

asked why there are so many snakes and so many wicked men worse than

snakes. If flies could reason, they would complain to God of the existence of

spiders; but they would admit what Minerva admitted about Arachne, in the

fable, that she arranges her web marvellously.

  One is bound therefore to recognize an ineffable intelligence which evenSpinoza admitted. One must agree that this intelligence shines in the vilest

insect as in the stars. And as regards moral and physical ill, what can one say,

what  do?  console  oneself  by  enjoying  physical  and  moral  good,  in

worshipping the Eternal Being who has made one and permitted the other.

  One more word on this subject. Atheism is the vice of a few intelligent

persons, and superstition is the vice of fools. But rogues! what are they?

rogues.


  SECTION II


  Let us say a word on the moral question set in action by Bayle, to know "if

a society of atheists could exist?" Let us mark first of all in this matter what is

the  enormous  contradiction  of  men  in  this  dispute;  those  who  have  risen

against Bayle's opinion with the greatest ardour; those who have denied with

the  greatest  insults  the  possibility  of  a  society  of  atheists,  have  since

maintained  with  the  same  intrepidity  that  atheism  is  the  religion  of  the

government of China.

  Assuredly they are quite mistaken about the Chinese government; they had

but to read the edicts of the emperors of this vast country to have seen that

these  edicts  are  sermons,  and  that  everywhere  there  is  mention  of  the

Supreme Being, ruler, revenger, rewarder.

  But at the same time they are not less mistaken on the impossibility of a

society of atheists; and I do not know how Mr. Bayle can have forgotten one

striking example which was capable of making his cause victorious.

  In what does a society of atheists appear impossible? It is that one judges

that  men  who  had  no  check  could  never  live  together;  that  laws  can  do

nothing against secret crimes; that a revengeful God who punishes in this

world or the other the wicked who have escaped human justice is necessary.

  The laws of Moses, it is true, did not teach a life to come, did not threaten

punishments after death, did not teach the first Jews the immortality of the

soul; but the Jews, far from being atheists, far from believing in avoiding

divine  vengeance,  were  the  most  religious  of  all  men.  Not  only  did  they

believe in the existence of an eternal God, but they believed Him alwayspresent among them; they trembled lest they be punished in themselves, in

their  wives,  in  their  children,  in  their  posterity,  even  unto  the  fourth

generation; this curb was very potent.

  But, among the Gentiles, many sects had no curb; the sceptics doubted

everything:  the  academicians  suspended  judgment  on  everything;  the

Epicureans were persuaded that the Deity could not mix Himself in the affairs

of men; and at bottom, they admitted no Deity. They were convinced that the

soul is not a substance, but a faculty which is born and which perishes with

the body; consequently they had no yoke other than morality and honour. The

Roman senators and knights were veritable atheists, for the gods did not exist

for  men  who  neither  feared  nor  hoped  anything  from  them.  The  Roman

senate in the time of Cæsar and Cicero, was therefore really an assembly of

atheists.

  That great orator, in his harangue for Cluentius, says to the whole senate

in assembly: "What ill does death do him? we reject all the inept fables of the

nether  regions:  of  what  then  has  death  deprived  him?  of  nothing  but  the

consciousness of suffering."

  Does not Cæsar, the friend of Cataline, wishing to save his friend's life

against this same Cicero, object to him that to make a criminal die is not to

punish him at all, that death is nothing, that it is merely the end of our ills,

that it is a moment more happy than calamitous? And do not Cicero and the

whole senate surrender to these reasons? The conquerors and the legislators

of the known universe formed visibly therefore a society of men who feared

nothing from the gods, who were real atheists.

  Further  on  Bayle  examines  whether  idolatry  is  more  dangerous  than

atheism,  if  it  is  a  greater  crime  not  to  believe  in  the  Deity  than  to  have

unworthy opinions thereof: in that he is of Plutarch's opinion; he believes it is

better to have no opinion than to have a bad opinion; but with all deference to

Plutarch, it was clearly infinitely better for the Greeks to fear Ceres, Neptune

and  Jupiter,  than  to  fear  nothing  at  all.  The  sanctity  of  oaths  is  clearly

necessary, and one should have more confidence in those who believe that a

false oath will be punished, than in those who think they can make a false

oath with impunity. It is indubitable that in a civilized town, it is infinitely

more useful to have a religion, even a bad one, than to have none at all.  It looks, therefore, that Bayle should have examined rather which is the

more dangerous, fanaticism or atheism. Fanaticism is certainly a thousand

times  more  deadly;  for  atheism  inspires  no  bloody  passion,  whereas

fanaticism  does:  atheism  is  not  opposed  to  crime,  but  fanaticism  causes

crimes  to  be  committed.  Fanatics  committed  the  massacres  of  St.

Bartholomew. Hobbes passed for an atheist; he led a tranquil and innocent

life. The fanatics of his time deluged England, Scotland and Ireland with

blood. Spinoza was not only atheist, but he taught atheism; it was not he

assuredly who took part in the judicial assassination of Barneveldt; it was not

he who tore the brothers De Witt in pieces, and who ate them grilled.

  The atheists are for the most part impudent and misguided scholars who

reason badly, and who not being able to understand the creation, the origin of

evil, and other difficulties, have recourse to the hypothesis of the eternity of

things and of inevitability.

  The  ambitious,  the  sensual,  have  hardly  time  for  reasoning,  and  for

embracing  a  bad  system;  they  have  other  things  to  do  than  comparing

Lucretius with Socrates. That is how things go among us.

  That was not how things went with the Roman senate which was almost

entirely composed of atheists in theory and in practice, that is to say, who

believed in neither a Providence nor a future life; this senate was an assembly

of philosophers, of sensualists and ambitious men, all very dangerous, who

ruined the republic. Epicureanism existed under the emperors: the atheists of

the senate had been rebels in the time of Sylla and Cæsar: under Augustus

and Tiberius they were atheist slaves.

  I would not wish to have to deal with an atheist prince, who would find it

to his interest to have me ground to powder in a mortar: I should be quite sure

of being ground to powder. If I were a sovereign, I would not wish to have to

deal with atheist courtiers, whose interest it would be to poison me: I should

have to be taking antidotes every day. It is therefore absolutely necessary for

princes and for peoples, that the idea of a Supreme Being, creator, ruler,

rewarder, revenger, shall be deeply engraved in people's minds.

  Bayle says, in his "Thoughts on the Comets," that there are atheist peoples.

The Caffres, the Hottentots, the Topinambous, and many other small nations,

have no God: they neither deny nor affirm; they have never heard speak ofHim; tell them that there is a God: they will believe it easily; tell them that

everything  happens  through  the  nature  of  things;  they  will  believe  you

equally. To claim that they are atheists is to make the same imputation as if

one said they are anti-Cartesian; they are neither for nor against Descartes.

They are real children; a child is neither atheist nor deist, he is nothing.

  What  conclusion  shall  we  draw  from  all  this?  That  atheism  is  a  very

pernicious  monster  in  those  who  govern;  that  it  is  also  pernicious  in  the

persons  around  statesmen,  although  their  lives  may  be  innocent,  because

from their cabinets it may pierce right to the statesmen themselves; that if it is

not so deadly as fanaticism, it is nearly always fatal to virtue. Let us add

especially  that  there  are  less  atheists  to-day  than  ever,  since  philosophers

have recognized that there is no being vegetating without germ, no germ

without a plan, etc., and that wheat comes in no wise from putrefaction.

  Some geometers who are not philosophers have rejected final causes, but

real philosophers admit them; a catechist proclaims God to the children, and

Newton demonstrates Him to the learned.

  If there are atheists, whom must one blame, if not the mercenary tyrants of

souls, who, making us revolt against their knaveries, force a few weak minds

to deny the God whom these monsters dishonour. How many times have the

people's leeches brought oppressed citizens to the point of revolting against

their king!

  Men fattened on our substance cry to us: "Be persuaded that a she-ass has

spoken; believe that a fish has swallowed a man and has given him up at the

end of three days safe and sound on the shore; have no doubt that the God of

the  universe  ordered  one  Jewish  prophet  to  eat  excrement  (Ezekiel),  and

another prophet to buy two whores and to make with them sons of whoredom

(Hosea). These are the very words that the God of truth and purity has been

made  to  utter;  believe  a  hundred  things  either  visibly  abominable  or

mathematically impossible; unless you do, the God of pity will burn you, not

only during millions of thousands of millions of centuries in the fire of hell,

but through all eternity, whether you have a body, whether you have not."

  These inconceivable absurdities revolt weak and rash minds, as well as

wise and resolute minds. They say: "Our masters paint God to us as the most

insensate and the most barbarous of all beings; therefore there is no God;" butthey should say: therefore our masters attribute to God their absurdities and

their furies, therefore God is the contrary of what they proclaim, therefore

God is as wise and as good as they make him out mad and wicked. It is thus

that wise men account for things. But if a bigot hears them, he denounces

them to a magistrate who is a watchdog of the priests; and this watchdog has

them burned over a slow fire, in the belief that he is avenging and imitating

the divine majesty he outrages.


  FOOTNOTES:

  [1] Arnobius, Adversus Gentes., lib. v.

  [2] Of Superstition, by Plutarch.

  [3] See Bayle, Continuation of Divers Thoughts, par. 77, art. XIII.

  [4] See, for this objection, Maupertuis' Essay on Cosmology, first part.


  AUTHORITY


  Wretched human beings, whether you wear green robes, turbans, black

robes or surplices, cloaks and neckbands, never seek to use authority where

there is question only of reason, or consent to be scoffed at throughout the

centuries as the most impertinent of all men, and to suffer public hatred as the

most unjust.

  A hundred times has one spoken to you of the insolent absurdity with

which you condemned Galileo, and I speak to you for the hundred and first,

and I hope you will keep the anniversary of it for ever; I desire that there be

graved on the door of your Holy Office:

  "Here  seven  cardinals,  assisted  by  minor  brethren,  had  the  master  of

thought in Italy thrown into prison at the age of seventy; made him fast on

bread and water because he instructed the human race, and because they were

ignorant."

  There was pronounced a sentence in favour of Aristotle's categories, and

there  was  decreed  learnedly  and  equitably  the  penalty  of  the  galleys  for

whoever should be sufficiently daring as to have an opinion different fromthat of the Stagyrite, whose books were formerly burned by two councils.

  Further on a faculty, which had not great faculties, issued a decree against

innate ideas, and later a decree for innate ideas, without the said faculty being

informed by its beadles what an idea is.

  In the neighbouring schools judicial proceedings were instituted against

the circulation of the blood.

  An  action  was  started  against  inoculation,  and  parties  have  been

subpœnaed.

  At  the  Customs  of  thought  twenty-one  folio  volumes  were  seized,  in

which it was stated treacherously and wickedly that triangles always have

three angles; that a father is older than his son; that Rhea Silvia lost her

virginity before giving birth to her child, and that flour is not an oak leaf.

  In another year was judged the action: Utrum chimera bombinans in vacuo

possit comedere secundas intentiones, and was decided in the affirmative.

  In consequence, everyone thought themselves far superior to Archimedes,

Euclid, Cicero, Pliny, and strutted proudly about the University quarter.


  AUTHORS


  Author is a generic name which can, like the name of all other professions,

signify good or bad, worthy of respect or ridicule, useful and agreeable, or

trash for the wastepaper-basket.

  We think that the author of a good work should refrain from three things-

from putting his name, save very modestly, from the epistle dedicatory, and

from the preface. Others should refrain from a fourth-that is, from writing.

  Prefaces are another stumbling-block. "The 'I,'" said Pascal, "is hateful."

Speak as little of yourself as possible; for you must know that the reader's

self-esteem is as great as yours. He will never forgive you for wanting to

condemn him to have a good opinion of you. It is for your book to speak for

you, if it comes to be read by the crowd.

  If you want to be an author, if you want to write a book; reflect that it must

be useful and new, or at least infinitely agreeable.  If  an  ignoramus,  a  pamphleteer,  presumes  to  criticize  without

discrimination, you can confound him; but make rare mention of him, for fear

of sullying your writings.

  If you are attacked as regards your style, never reply; it is for your work

alone to make answer.

  Someone says you are ill, be content that you are well, without wanting to

prove to the public that you are in perfect health. And above all remember

that the public cares precious little whether you are well or ill.

  A hundred authors make compilations in order to have bread, and twenty

pamphleteers make excerpts from these compilations, or apology for them, or

criticism and satire of them, also with the idea of having bread, because they

have no other trade. All these persons go on Friday to the police lieutenant of

Paris to ask permission to sell their rubbish. They have audience immediately

after the strumpets who do not look at them because they know that these are

underhand dealings.[5]

  Real authors are those who have succeeded in one of the real arts, in epic

poetry, in tragedy or comedy, in history or philosophy, who have taught men

or charmed them. The others of whom we have spoken are, among men of

letters, what wasps are among birds.


  FOOTNOTES:

  [5] When Voltaire was writing, it was the police lieutenant of Paris who

had, under the chancellor, the inspection of books: since then, a part of his

department has been taken from him. He has kept only the inspection of

theatrical plays and works below those on printed sheets. The detail of this

part is immense. In Paris one is not permitted to print that one has lost one's

dog, unless the police are assured that in the poor beast's description there is

no proposition contrary to morality and religion (1819).


  BANISHMENT


  Banishment for a period or for life, punishment to which one condemns

delinquents, or those one wishes to appear as such.  Not long ago one banished outside the sphere of jurisdiction a petty thief,

a petty forger, a man guilty of an act of violence. The result was that he

became a big robber, a forger on a big scale, and murderer within the sphere

of another jurisdiction. It is as if we threw into our neighbours' fields the

stones which incommode us in our own.

  Those who have written on the rights of men, have been much tormented

to know for certain if a man who has been banished from his fatherland still

belongs to his fatherland. It is nearly the same thing as asking if a gambler

who has been driven away from the gaming-table is still one of the gamblers.

  If to every man it is permitted by natural right to choose his fatherland, he

who has lost the right of citizen can, with all the more reason, choose for

himself a new fatherland; but can he bear arms against his former fellow-

citizens? There are a thousand examples of it. How many French protestants

naturalized in Holland, England and Germany have served against France,

and against armies containing their own kindred and their own brothers! The

Greeks who were in the King of Persia's armies made war on the Greeks,

their former compatriots. One has seen the Swiss in the Dutch service fire on

the Swiss in the French service. It is still worse than to fight against those

who have banished you; for, after all, it seems less dishonest to draw the

sword for vengeance than to draw it for money.


    BANKRUPTCY


  Few bankruptcies were known in France before the sixteenth century. The

great reason is that there were no bankers. Lombards, Jews lent on security at

ten per cent: trade was conducted in cash. Exchange, remittances to foreign

countries were a secret unknown to all judges.

  It  is  not  that  many  people  were  not  ruined;  but  that  was  not  called

bankruptcy; one said discomfiture; this word is sweeter to the ear. One used

the word rupture as did the Boulonnais; but rupture does not sound so well.

  The  bankruptcies  came  to  us  from  Italy,  bancorotto,  bancarotta,

gambarotta e la giustizia non impicar. Every merchant had his bench (banco)

in the place of exchange; and when he had conducted his business badly,

declared himself fallito, and abandoned his property to his creditors with theproviso that he retain a good part of it for himself, be free and reputed a very

upright man. There was nothing to be said to him, his bench was broken,

banco rotto, banca rotta; he could even, in certain towns, keep all his property

and baulk his creditors, provided he seated himself bare-bottomed on a stone

in the presence of all the merchants. This was a mild derivation of the old

Roman proverb-solvere aut in aere aut in cute, to pay either with one's money

or one's skin. But this custom no longer exists; creditors have preferred their

money to a bankrupt's hinder parts.

  In England and in some other countries, one declares oneself bankrupt in

the  gazettes.  The  partners  and  creditors  gather  together  by  virtue  of  this

announcement  which  is  read  in  the  coffee-houses,  and  they  come  to  an

arrangement as best they can.

  As among the bankruptcies there are frequently fraudulent cases, it has

been necessary to punish them. If they are taken to court they are everywhere

regarded as theft, and the guilty are condemned to ignominious penalties.

  It  is  not  true  that  in  France  the  death  penalty  was  decreed  against

bankrupts without distinction. Simple failures involved no penalty; fraudulent

bankrupts suffered the penalty of death in the states of Orleans, under Charles

IX., and in the states of Blois in 1576, but these edicts, renewed by Henry

IV., were merely comminatory.

  It is too difficult to prove that a man has dishonoured himself on purpose,

and has voluntarily ceded all his goods to his creditors in order to cheat them.

When  there  has  been  a  doubt,  one  has  been  content  with  putting  the

unfortunate man in the pillory, or with sending him to the galleys, although

ordinarily a banker makes a poor convict.

  Bankrupts were very favourably treated in the last year of Louis XIV.'s

reign, and during the Regency. The sad state to which the interior of the

kingdom was reduced, the multitude of merchants who could not or would

not pay, the quantity of unsold or unsellable effects, the fear of interrupting

all commerce, obliged the government in 1715, 1716, 1718, 1721, 1722, and

1726 to suspend all proceedings against all those who were in a state of

insolvency.  The  discussions  of  these  actions  were  referred  to  the  judge-

consuls; this is a jurisdiction of merchants very expert in these cases, and

better constituted for going into these commercial details than the parliamentswhich have always been more occupied with the laws of the kingdom than

with finance. As the state was at that time going bankrupt, it would have been

too hard to punish the poor middle-class bankrupts.

  Since then we have had eminent men, fraudulent bankrupts, but they have

not been punished.


  BEAUTY


  Ask a toad what beauty is, the to kalon? He will answer you that it is his

toad wife with two great round eyes issuing from her little head, a wide, flat

mouth, a yellow belly, a brown back. Interrogate a Guinea negro, for him

beauty is a black oily skin, deep-set eyes, a flat nose. Interrogate the devil; he

will tell you that beauty is a pair of horns, four claws and a tail. Consult,

lastly, the philosophers, they will answer you with gibberish: they have to

have something conforming to the arch-type of beauty in essence, to the to

kalon.

  One day I was at a tragedy near by a philosopher. "How beautiful that is!"

he said.

  "What do you find beautiful there?" I asked.

  "It is beautiful," he answered, "because the author has reached his goal."

  The  following  day  he  took  some  medicine  which  did  him  good.  "The

medicine has reached its goal," I said to him. "What a beautiful medicine!"

He grasped that one cannot say a medicine is beautiful, and that to give the

name of "beauty" to something, the thing must cause you to admire it and

give you pleasure. He agreed that the tragedy had inspired these sentiments in

him, and that there was the to kalon, beauty.

  We journeyed to England: the same piece, perfectly translated, was played

there; it made everybody in the audience yawn. "Ho, ho!" he said, "the to

kalon is not the same for the English and the French." After much reflection

he came to the conclusion that beauty is often very relative, just as what is

decent in Japan is indecent in Rome, and what is fashionable in Paris, is not

fashionable in Pekin; and he saved himself the trouble of composing a long

treatise on beauty.  There are actions which the whole world finds beautiful. Two of Cæsar's

officers, mortal enemies, send each other a challenge, not as to who shall

shed the other's blood with tierce and quarte behind a thicket as with us, but

as to who shall best defend the Roman camp, which the Barbarians are about

to attack. One of them, having repulsed the enemy, is near succumbing; the

other rushes to his aid, saves his life, and completes the victory.

  A  friend  sacrifices  his  life  for  his  friend;  a  son  for  his  father....  The

Algonquin,  the  Frenchman,  the  Chinaman,  will  all  say  that  that  is  very

beautiful, that these actions give them pleasure, that they admire them.

  They will say as much of the great moral maxims, of Zarathustra's-"In

doubt if an action be just, abstain..."; of Confucius'-"Forget injuries, never

forget kindnesses."

  The negro with the round eyes and flat nose, who will not give the name

of "beauties" to the ladies of our courts, will without hesitation give it to

these actions and these maxims. The wicked man even will recognize the

beauty of these virtues which he dare not imitate. The beauty which strikes

the senses merely, the imagination, and that which is called "intelligence," is

often uncertain therefore. The beauty which speaks to the heart is not that.

You will find a host of people who will tell you that they have found nothing

beautiful in three-quarters of the Iliad; but nobody will deny that Codrus'

devotion to his people was very beautiful, supposing it to be true.

  There are many other reasons which determine me not to write a treatise

on beauty.


  BISHOP


  Samuel Ornik, native of Basle, was, as you know, a very amiable young

man who, besides, knew his New Testament by heart in Greek and German.

When he was twenty his parents sent him on a journey. He was charged to

carry some books to the coadjutor of Paris, at the time of the Fronde. He

arrived at the door of the archbishop's residence; the Swiss told him that

Monseigneur saw nobody. "Comrade," said Ornik to him, "you are very rude

to your compatriots. The apostles let everyone approach, and Jesus Christ

desired that people should suffer all the little children to come to him. I havenothing  to  ask  of  your  master;  on  the  contrary,  I  have  brought  him

something."

  "Come inside, then," said the Swiss.

  He waits an hour in a first antechamber. As he was very naïve, he began a

conversation with a servant, who was very fond of telling all he knew of his

master. "He must be mightily rich," said Ornik, "to have this crowd of pages

and flunkeys whom I see running about the house."

  "I don't know what his income is," answered the other, "but I heard it said

to Joly and the Abbé Charier that he already had two millions of debts."

  "But who is that lady coming out of the room?"

  "That is Madame de Pomereu, one of his mistresses."

  "She is really very pretty; but I have not read that the apostles had such

company in their bedrooms in the mornings. Ah! I think the archbishop is

going to give audience."

  "Say-'His Highness, Monseigneur.'"

  "Willingly."  Ornik  salutes  His  Highness,  presents  his  books,  and  is

received with a very gracious smile. The archbishop says four words to him,

then  climbs  into  his  coach,  escorted  by  fifty  horsemen.  In  climbing,

Monseigneur lets a sheath fall. Ornik is quite astonished that Monseigneur

carries so large an ink-horn in his pocket. "Don't you see that's his dagger?"

says the chatterbox. "Everyone carries a dagger when he goes to parliament."

  "That's a pleasant way of officiating," says Ornik; and he goes away very

astonished.

  He traverses France, and enlightens himself from town to town; thence he

passes into Italy. When he is in the Pope's territory, he meets one of those

bishops with a thousand crowns income, walking on foot. Ornik was very

polite; he offers him a place in his cambiature. "You are doubtless on your

way to comfort some sick man, Monseigneur?"

  "Sir, I am on my way to my master's."

  "Your master? that is Jesus Christ, doubtless?"

  "Sir, it is Cardinal Azolin; I am his almoner. He pays me very poorly; buthe has promised to place me in the service of Donna Olimpia, the favourite

sister-in-law di nostro signore."

  "What! you are in the pay of a cardinal? But do you not know that there

were no cardinals in the time of Jesus Christ and St. John?"

  "Is it possible?" cried the Italian prelate.

  "Nothing is more true; you have read it in the Gospel."

  "I have never read it," answered the bishop; "all I know is Our Lady's

office."

  "I tell you there were neither cardinals nor bishops, and when there were

bishops, the priests were their equals almost, according to Jerome's assertions

in several places."

  "Holy Virgin," said the Italian. "I knew nothing about it: and the popes?"

  "There were not any popes any more than cardinals."

  The good bishop crossed himself; he thought he was with an evil spirit,

and jumped out of the cambiature.


  BOOKS


  You despise them, books, you whose whole life is plunged in the vanities

of ambition and in the search for pleasure or in idleness; but think that the

whole  of  the  known  universe,  with  the  exception  of  the  savage  races  is

governed by books alone. The whole of Africa right to Ethiopia and Nigritia

obeys the book of the Alcoran, after having staggered under the book of the

Gospel. China is ruled by the moral book of Confucius; a greater part of India

by the book of the Veidam. Persia was governed for centuries by the books of

one of the Zarathustras.

  If you have a law-suit, your goods, your honour, your life even depends on

the interpretation of a book which you never read.

  Robert the Devil, the Four Sons of Aymon, the Imaginings of Mr. Oufle,

are books also; but it is with books as with men; the very small number play a

great part, the rest are mingled in the crowd.  Who leads the human race in civilized countries? those who know how to

read  and  write.  You  do  not  know  either  Hippocrates,  Boerhaave  or

Sydenham; but you put your body in the hands of those who have read them.

You abandon your soul to those who are paid to read the Bible, although

there are not fifty among them who have read it in its entirety with care.

  To such an extent do books govern the world, that those who command to-

day in the city of the Scipios and the Catos have desired that the books of

their law should be only for them; it is their sceptre; they have made it a

crime  of  lèse-majesté  for  their  subjects  to  look  there  without  express

permission.  In  other  countries  it  has  been  forbidden  to  think  in  writing

without letters patent.

  There are nations among whom thought is regarded purely as an object of

commerce. The operations of the human mind are valued there only at two

sous the sheet.

  In another country, the liberty of explaining oneself by books is one of the

most inviolable prerogatives. Print all that you like under pain of boring or of

being punished if you abuse too considerably your natural right.

  Before the admirable invention of printing, books were rarer and more

expensive  than  precious  stones.  Almost  no  books  among  the  barbarian

nations  until  Charlemagne,  and  from  him  to  the  French  king  Charles  V.,

surnamed "the wise"; and from this Charles right to François Ier, there is an

extreme dearth.

  The  Arabs  alone  had  books  from  the  eighth  century  of  our  era  to  the

thirteenth.

  China was filled with them when we did not know how to read or write.

  Copyists were much employed in the Roman Empire from the time of the

Scipios up to the inundation of the barbarians.

  The Greeks occupied themselves much in transcribing towards the time of

Amyntas,  Philip  and  Alexander;  they  continued  this  craft  especially  in

Alexandria.

  This craft is somewhat ungrateful. The merchants always paid the authors

and  the  copyists  very  badly.  It  took  two  years  of  assiduous  labour  for  a

copyist to transcribe the Bible well on vellum. What time and what troublefor copying correctly in Greek and Latin the works of Origen, of Clement of

Alexandria, and of all those other authors called "fathers."

  The poems of Homer were long so little known that Pisistratus was the

first who put them in order, and who had them transcribed in Athens, about

five hundred years before the era of which we are making use.

  To-day there are not perhaps a dozen copies of the Veidam and the Zend-

Avesta in the whole of the East.

  You would not have found a single book in the whole of Russia in 1700,

with the exception of Missals and a few Bibles in the homes of aged men

drunk on brandy.

  To-day people complain of a surfeit: but it is not for readers to complain;

the remedy is easy; nothing forces them to read. It is not any the more for

authors to complain. Those who make the crowd must not cry that they are

being  crushed.  Despite  the  enormous  quantity  of  books,  how  few  people

read! and if one read profitably, one would see the deplorable follies to which

the common people offer themselves as prey every day.

  What  multiplies  books,  despite  the  law  of  not  multiplying  beings

unnecessarily, is that with books one makes others; it is with several volumes

already printed that a new history of France or Spain is fabricated, without

adding anything new. All dictionaries are made with dictionaries; almost all

new geography books are repetitions of geography books. The Summation of

St.  Thomas  has  produced  two  thousand  fat  volumes  of  theology;  and  the

same family of little worms that have gnawed the mother, gnaw likewise the

children.


  BOULEVERD OR BOULEVART


  Boulevart, fortification, rampart. Belgrade is the boulevart of the Ottoman

Empire on the Hungarian side. Who would believe that this word originally

signified only a game of bowls? The people of Paris played bowls on the

grass of the rampart; this grass was called the verd, like the grass market. On

boulait sur le verd. From there it comes that the English, whose language is a

copy of ours in almost all the words which are not Saxon, have called thegame of bowls "bowling-green," the verd (green) of the game of bowls. We

have taken back from them what we had lent them. Following their example,

we gave the name of boulingrins, without knowing the strength of the word,

to the grass-plots we introduced into our gardens.

  I  once  heard  two  good  dames  who  were  going  for  a  walk  on  the

Bouleverd, and not on the Boulevart. People laughed at them, and wrongly.

But in all matters custom carries the day; and everyone who is right against

custom is hissed or condemned.


  BOURGES


  Our questions barely turn on geography; but let us be permitted to mark in

two words our astonishment about the town of Bourges. The "Dictionnaire de

Trévoux" claims that "it is one of the most ancient towns of Europe, that it

was the seat of the empire of the Gauls, and gave kings to the Celts."

  I do not wish to combat the ancientness of any town or any family. But

was there ever an empire of the Gauls? Did the Celts have kings? This mania

for antiquity is a malady from which one will not be healed so soon. The

Gauls, Germany, Scandinavia have nothing that is antique save the land, the

trees and the animals. If you want antiquities, go toward Asia, and even then

it is very small beer. Man is ancient and monuments new, that is what we

have in view in more than one article.

  If it were a real benefit to be born in a stone or wooden enclosure more

ancient than another, it would be very reasonable to make the foundation of

one's town date back to the time of the war of the giants; but since there is not

the least advantage in this vanity, one must break away from it. That is all I

had to say about Bourges.


    BRAHMINS


  Is it not probable that the Brahmins were the first legislators of the earth,

the first philosophers, the first theologians?

  Do not the few monuments of ancient history which remain to us form agreat presumption in their favour, since the first Greek philosophers went to

them to learn mathematics, and since the most ancient curiosities collected by

the emperors of China are all Indian?

  We will speak elsewhere of the "Shasta"; it is the first book of theology of

the Brahmins, written about fifteen hundred years before their "Veidam," and

anterior to all the other books.

  Their annals make no mention of any war undertaken by them at any time.

The  words  for  arms,  to  kill,  to  maim,  are  not  to  be  found  either  in  the

fragments of the "Shasta" which we have, or in the "Ezourveidam," or in the

"Cormoveidam." I can at least give the assurance that I did not see them in

these last two collections: and what is still more singular is that the "Shasta"

which speaks of a conspiracy in heaven, makes no mention of any war in the

great peninsula enclosed between the Indus and the Ganges.

  The Hebrews, who were known so late, never name the Brahmins; they

had no knowledge of India until after the conquests of Alexander, and their

settling in Egypt, of which they had said so much evil. The name of India is

to be found only in the Book of Esther, and in that of Job which was not

Hebrew. One remarks a singular contrast between the sacred books of the

Hebrews, and those of the Indians. The Indian books announce only peace

and gentleness; they forbid the killing of animals: the Hebrew books speak

only of killing, of the massacre of men and beasts; everything is slaughtered

in the name of the Lord; it is quite another order of things.

  It is incontestably from the Brahmins that we hold the idea of the fall of

the celestial beings in revolt against the Sovereign of nature; and it is from

there probably that the Greeks drew the fable of the Titans. It is there also

that the Jews at last took the idea of the revolt of Lucifer, in the first century

of our era.

  How could these Indians suppose a revolt in heaven without having seen

one on earth? Such a jump from human nature to divine nature is barely

conceivable. Usually one goes from known to unknown.

  One does not imagine a war of giants until one has seen some men more

robust than the others tyrannize over their fellows. The first Brahmins must

either  have  experienced  violent  discords,  or  at  least  have  seen  them  in

heaven.  It is a very astonishing phenomenon for a society of men who have never

made war to have invented a species of war made in the imaginary spaces, or

in  a  globe  distant  from  ours,  or  in  what  is  called  the  "firmament,"  the

"empyrean." But it must be carefully observed that in this revolt of celestial

beings  against  their  Sovereign  no  blows  were  struck,  no  celestial  blood

flowed, no mountains hurled at the head, no angels cut in two, as in Milton's

sublime and grotesque poem.

  According to the "Shasta," it is only a formal disobedience to the orders of

the  Most  High,  a  cabal  which  God  punishes  by  relegating  the  rebellious

angels to a vast place of shadows called "Ondera" during the period of an

entire mononthour. A mononthour is four hundred and twenty-six millions of

our years. But God deigned to pardon the guilty after five thousand years, and

their ondera was only a purgatory.

  He  made  "Mhurd"  of  them,  men,  and  placed  them  in  our  globe  on

condition that they should not eat animals, and that they should not copulate

with the males of their new species, under pain of returning to ondera.

  Those are the principal articles of the Brahmins' faith, which have lasted

without interruption from immemorial times right to our day: it seems strange

to us that among them it should be as grave a sin to eat a chicken as to

commit sodomy.

  This is only a small part of the ancient cosmogony of the Brahmins. Their

rites, their pagodas, prove that among them everything was allegorical; they

still represent virtue beneath the emblem of a woman who has ten arms, and

who combats ten mortal sins represented by monsters. Our missionaries have

not failed to take this image of virtue for that of the devil, and to assure us

that  the  devil  is  worshipped  in  India.  We  have  never  been  among  these

people but to enrich ourselves and to calumniate them.

  Really we have forgotten a very essential thing in this little article on the

Brahmins; it is that their sacred books are filled with contradictions. But the

people do not know of them, and the doctors have solutions ready, figurative

meanings, allegories, symbols, express declarations of Birma, Brahma and

Vitsnou, which should close the mouths of all who reason.  CHARACTER


  From the Greek word impression, engraving.

  It is what nature has graved in us.

  Can one change one's character? Yes, if one changes one's body. It is

possible for a man born blunderer, unbending and violent, being stricken with

apoplexy  in  his  old  age,  to  become  a  foolish,  tearful  child,  timid  and

peaceable. His body is no longer the same. But as long as his nerves, his

blood and his marrow are in the same state, his nature will not change any

more than a wolf's and a marten's instinct.

  The  character  is  composed  of  our  ideas  and  our  feelings:  well,  it  is

substantiated that we give ourselves neither feelings nor ideas; therefore our

character does not depend on us.

  If it depended on us, there is nobody who would not be perfect.

  We cannot give ourselves tastes, talents; why should we give ourselves

qualities?

  If one does not reflect, one thinks oneself master of everything; when one

reflects thereon, one sees that one is master of nothing.

  Should you wish to change a man's character completely, purge him with

diluents every day until you have killed him. Charles XII., in his suppurative

fever on the road to Bender, was no longer the same man. One prevailed

upon him as upon a child.

  If I have a crooked nose and two cat's eyes, I can hide them with a mask.

Can I do more with the character which nature has given me?

  A man born violent, hasty, presented himself before François I., King of

France, to complain of an injustice; the prince's countenance, the respectful

bearing  of  the  courtiers,  the  very  place  where  he  is,  make  a  powerful

impression on this man; mechanically he lowers his eyes, his rough voice

softens,  he  presents  his  petition  humbly,  one  would  believe  him  born  as

gentle as are (at that moment at least) the courtiers, amongst whom he is even

disconcerted; but François I. understands physiognomy, he easily discovers in

the lowered eyes, burning nevertheless with sombre fire, in the strained facialmuscles, in the compressed lips, that this man is not so gentle as he is forced

to appear. This man follows him to Pavia, is taken with him, led to the same

prison in Madrid: François I.'s majesty no longer makes the same impression

on  him;  he  grows  familiar  with  the  object  of  his  respect.  One  day  when

pulling off the king's boots, and pulling them off badly, the king, embittered

by his misfortune, gets angry; my man sends the king about his business, and

throws his boots out of the window.

  Sixtus  V.  was  born  petulant,  stubborn,  haughty,  impetuous,  vindictive,

arrogant; this character seemed softened during the trials of his novitiate. He

begins to enjoy a certain credit in his order; he flies into a passion with a

guard, and batters him with his fist: he is inquisitor at Venice; he performs his

duties  with  insolence:  behold  him  cardinal,  he  is  possessed  dalla  rabbia

papale:  this  fury  triumphs  over  his  nature;  he  buries  his  person  and  his

character in obscurity; he apes the humble and the dying man; he is elected

Pope; this moment gives back to the spring, which politics have bent, all its

long curbed elasticity; he is the haughtiest and most despotic of sovereigns.

  Naturam expella furca, tamen usque recurret.


  (Hor. L. I., ep. x).

  Drive away nature, it returns at the gallop.


  (Destouches, Glorieux, Act 3, Sc. 5.)

  Religion, morality put a brake on a nature's strength; they cannot destroy

it. The drunkard in a cloister, reduced to a half-sétier of cider at each meal,

will no longer get drunk, but he will always like wine.

  Age enfeebles character; it is a tree that produces only degenerate fruit,

but the fruit is always of the same nature; it is knotted and covered with

moss, it becomes worm-eaten, but it is always oak or pear tree. If one could

change one's character, one would give oneself one, one would be master of

nature. Can one give oneself anything? do we not receive everything? Try to

animate an indolent man with a continued activity; to freeze with apathy the

boiling soul of an impetuous fellow, to inspire someone who has neither ear

nor taste with a taste for music and poetry, you will no more succeed than ifyou undertook to give sight to a man born blind. We perfect, we soften, we

conceal what nature has put in us, but we do not put in ourselves anything at

all.

  One says to a farmer: "You have too many fish in this pond, they will not

prosper; there are too many cattle in your meadows, grass lacks, they will

grow thin." It happens after this exhortation that the pikes eat half my man's

carp,  and  the  wolves  the  half  of  his  sheep;  the  rest  grow  fat.  Will  he

congratulate himself on his economy? This countryman, it is you; one of your

passions has devoured the others, and you think you have triumphed over

yourself. Do not nearly all of us resemble that old general of ninety who,

having met some young officers who were debauching themselves with some

girls, says to them angrily: "Gentlemen, is that the example I give you?"


  CHARLATAN


  The article entitled "Charlatan" in the "Encyclopedic Dictionary" is filled

with useful truths agreeably presented. The Chevalier de Jaucourt has there

presented the charlatanry of medicine.

  We will take the liberty of adding here a few reflections. The abode of the

doctors is in the large towns; there are barely any doctors in the country. It is

in the great towns that the rich invalids are; debauchery, the excesses of the

table, the passions, are the cause of their maladies. Dumoulin, not the lawyer,

the doctor, who was as good a practician as the other, said as he was dying,

that he left two great doctors behind him, diet and river water.

  In 1728, in the time of Law, the most famous charlatan of the first species,

another, Villars by name, confided to some friends that his uncle who had

lived nearly a hundred years, and who died only by accident, had left him the

secret of a water which could easily prolong life to a hundred and fifty years,

provided a man was temperate. When he saw a funeral pass, he shrugged his

shoulders in pity; if the defunct, he observed, had drunk my water, he would

not be where he is. His friends to whom he gave generously of the water, and

who observed the prescribed regime in some degree, thrived on it and praised

it. He then sold the bottle for six francs; the sale was prodigious. It was water

from  the  Seine  with  a  little  nitre.  Those  who  took  it  and  who  subjectedthemselves to a certain amount of regime, above all those who were born

with a good constitution, recovered perfect health in a few days. He said to

the others: "It is your fault if you are not entirely cured: correct these two

vices and you will live at least a hundred and fifty years." Some of them

reformed;  this  good  charlatan's  fortune  increased  like  his  reputation.  The

Abbé de Pons, the enthusiast, put him far above the Maréchal de Villars:

"The Maréchal kills men," he said to him, "but you make them live."

  People learned at last that Villars Water was only river water; they would

have no more of it; and went to other charlatans.

  It is certain that he had done good, and that the only reproach one could

make against him was that he had sold Seine water a little too dear. He led

men to temperance by which fact he was superior to the apothecary Arnoult,

who  stuffed  Europe  with  his  sachets  against  apoplexy,  without

recommending any virtue.

  I knew in London a doctor named Brown, who practised in Barbados. He

had a sugar refinery and negroes; he was robbed of a considerable sum; he

assembled  his  negroes:  "My  lads,"  he  said  to  them,  "the  great  serpent

appeared  to  me  during  the  night,  he  told  me  that  the  thief  would  at  this

moment  have  a  parrot's  feather  on  the  end  of  his  nose."  The  guilty  man

promptly put his hand to his nose. "It is you who robbed me," said the master;

"the great serpent has just told me so." And he regained his money. One can

hardly condemn such a charlatanry; but one must be dealing with negroes.

  Scipio  Africanus,  this  great  Scipio  very  different  otherwise  from  Dr.

Brown, willingly made his soldiers believe that he was inspired by the gods.

This great charlatanry was long the custom. Can one blame Scipio to have

availed himself of it? he was the man who perhaps did most honour to the

Roman  Republic;  but  why  did  the  gods  inspire  him  not  to  render  his

accounts?

  Numa did better; it was necessary to police some brigands and a senate

which was the most difficult section of these brigands to govern. If he had

proposed his laws to the assembled tribes, the assassins of his predecessor

would  have  made  a  thousand  difficulties.  He  addressed  himself  to  the

goddess Egeria, who gave him some pandects from Jupiter; he was obeyed

without contradiction, and he reigned happily. His instructions were good, hischarlatanry did good; but if some secret enemy had discovered the imposture,

if he had said: "Exterminate an impostor who prostitutes the name of the gods

in order to deceive men," Numa ran the risk of being sent to heaven with

Romulus.

  It is probable that Numa took his measures very carefully, and that he

deceived the Romans for their benefit, with a dexterity suitable to the time,

the place, the intelligence of the early Romans.

  Mahomet was twenty times on the point of failing, but he succeeded at last

with the Arabs of Medina; and people believed that he was the intimate friend

of  the  Archangel  Gabriel.  If  to-day  someone  came  to  Constantinople  to

announce that he was the favourite of the Archangel Raphael, far superior to

Gabriel in dignity, and that it was in him alone people should believe, he

would be impaled in the public place. It is for charlatans to choose their time

well.

  Was there not a little charlatanry in Socrates with his familiar demon, and

Apollo's precise declaration which proclaimed him the wisest of all men?

How can Rollin, in his history, reason from this oracle? How is it that he does

not let the young idea know that it was pure charlatanry? Socrates chose his

time badly. A hundred years earlier, maybe, he would have governed Athens.

  All leaders of sects in philosophy have been somewhat charlatans: but the

greatest of all have been those who have aspired to domination. Cromwell

was the most terrible of all our charlatans. He appeared at precisely the only

time he could succeed: under Elizabeth he would have been hanged; under

Charles II. he would have been merely ridiculous. He came happily at a time

when people were disgusted with kings; and his son, at a time when people

were weary of a protector.


  Of Charlatanry in Science and Literature

  The sciences can barely be without charlatanry. People wish to have their

opinions accepted; the quibbling doctor wishes to eclipse the angelic doctor;

the recondite doctor wishes to reign alone. Each builds his system of physics,

metaphysics,  scholastic  theology;  it  is  a  competition  in  turning  one's

merchandise to account. You have agents who extol it, fools who believe

you, protectors who support you.  Is there a greater charlatanry than that of substituting words for things, and

of wanting others to believe what you do not believe yourself?

  One establishes whirlwinds of subtle matter, ramous, globulous, striated,

channelled; the other elements of matter which are not matter at all, and a

pre-established harmony which makes the clock of the body sound the hour,

when  the  clock  of  the  soul  shows  it  with  its  hand.  These  chimeras  find

partisans for a few years. When this rubbish has passed out of fashion, new

fanatics appear on the itinerant theatre; they banish germs from the world,

they say that the sea produced the mountains, and that men were once fish.

  How much charlatanry has been put into history, either by astonishing the

reader  with  prodigies,  by  titillating  human  malignity  with  satire,  or  by

flattering the families of tyrants with infamous eulogy?

  The wretched species that writes for a living is charlatan in another way. A

poor man who has no trade, who has had the misfortune to go to college, and

who thinks he knows how to write, goes to pay his court to a bookseller, and

asks him for work. The bookseller knows that the majority of most people

who live in houses want to have little libraries, that they need abridgments

and new titles; he orders from the writer an abridgment of the "History by

Rapin-Thoyras," an abridgment of the "History of the Church," a "Collection

of  Witty  Sayings"  drawn  from  the  "Menagiana,"  a  "Dictionary  of  Great

Men," where an unknown pedant is placed beside Cicero, and a sonettiero of

Italy near Virgil.

  Another bookseller orders novels, or translations of novels. "If you have

no  imagination,"  he  says  to  the  workman,  "you  will  take  a  few  of  the

adventures in 'Cyrus,' in 'Gusman d'Alfarache,' in the 'Secret Memoirs of a

Gentleman of Quality,' or 'Of a Lady of Quality'; and from the total you will

prepare a volume of four hundred pages at twenty sous the sheet."

  Another bookseller gives the gazettes and almanacs for ten years past to a

man of genius. "You will make me an extract of all that, and you will bring it

me back in three months under the name of 'Faithful History of the Times,' by

the  Chevalier  de  Trois  Etoiles,  Lieutenant  of  the  Navy,  employed  in  the

Ministry of Foreign Affairs."

  Of this kind of book there are about fifty thousand in Europe; and it allpasses just like the secret of whitening the skin, of darkening the hair, and the

universal panacea.


  CIVIL LAWS


  Extract from Some Notes found among a Lawyer's Papers, which maybe

merit Examination.

  Let the punishments of criminals be useful. A hanged man is good for

nothing, and a man condemned to public works still serves the country, and is

a living lesson.

  Let  all  laws  be  clear,  uniform  and  precise:  to  interpret  laws  is  almost

always to corrupt them.

  Let nothing be infamous save vice.

  Let taxes be always proportional.

  Let the law never be contradictory to custom: for if the custom be good,

the law is worthless.


  CLIMATE


  Climate  influences  religion  as  regards  customs  and  ceremonies.  A

legislator  will  not  have  had  difficulty  in  making  the  Indians  bathe  in  the

Ganges at certain seasons of the moon; it is a great pleasure for them. He

would have been stoned if he had proposed the same bath to the peoples who

dwell on the banks of the Dwina near Archangel. Forbid pig to an Arab who

would have leprosy if he ate of this flesh which is very bad and disgusting in

his country, he will obey you joyfully. Issue the same veto to a Westphalian

and he will be tempted to fight you.

  Abstinence from wine is a good religious precept in Arabia where orange

water, lemon water, lime water are necessary to health. Mohammed would

not have forbidden wine in Switzerland perhaps, especially before going to

battle.

  There are customs of pure fantasy. Why did the priests of Egypt imaginecircumcision?  it  is  not  for  health.  Cambyses  who  treated  them  as  they

deserved, they and their bull Apis, Cambyses' courtiers, Cambyses' soldiers,

had not had their prepuces lopped, and were very well. Climate does nothing

to  a  priest's  genitals.  One  offered  one's  prepuce  to  Isis,  probably  as  one

presented everywhere the first fruits of the earth. It was offering the first

fruits of life.

  Religions  have  always  rolled  on  two  pivots;  observance  and  creed:

observance depends largely on climate; creed not at all. One could as easily

make a dogma accepted on the equator as the polar circle. It would later be

rejected equally at Batavia and in the Orkneys, while it would be maintained

unguibus et rostro at Salamanca. That depends in no way on the soil and the

atmosphere, but solely on opinion, that fickle queen of the world.

  Certain libations of wine will be precept in a vine-growing country, and it

will not occur to a legislator's mind to institute in Norway sacred mysteries

which cannot be performed without wine.

  It will be expressly ordered to burn incense in the parvis of a temple where

beasts are slaughtered in the Deity's honour, and for the priests' supper. This

butcher's shop called "temple" would be a place of abominable infection if it

were not continually purified: and without the assistance of aromatics, the

religion of the ancients would have caused the plague. Even the interior of

the temple was decked with festoons of flowers in order to make the air

sweeter.

  No cow will be sacrificed in the burning land of the Indian peninsula;

because this animal which furnishes necessary milk is very rare in an arid

country,  its  flesh  is  dry,  tough,  contains  very  little  nourishment,  and  the

Brahmins  would  live  very  badly.  On  the  contrary,  the  cow  will  become

sacred, in view of its rarity and utility.

  One will only enter barefoot the temple of Jupiter Ammon where the heat

is  excessive:  one  must  be  well  shod  to  perform  one's  devotions  in

Copenhagen.

  It  is  not  so  with  dogma.  People  have  believed  in  polytheism  in  all

climates; and it is as easy for a Crimean Tartar as for an inhabitant of Mecca

to recognize a single God, incommunicable, non-begetting, non-begotten. It

is through its dogma still more than through its rites that a religion is spreadfrom one climate to another. The dogma of the unity of God soon passed

from Medina to the Caucasus; then the climate cedes to opinion.

  The Arabs said to the Turks: "We had ourselves circumcised in Arabia

without really knowing why; it was an old fashion of the priests of Egypt to

offer to Oshireth or Osiris a little part of what they held most precious. We

had  adopted  this  custom  three  thousand  years  before  we  became

Mohammedans. You will be circumcised like us; like us you will be obliged

to sleep with one of your wives every Friday, and to give each year two and a

half per cent of your income to the poor. We drink only water and sherbet; all

intoxicating  liquor  is  forbidden  us;  in  Arabia  it  is  pernicious.  You  will

embrace this regime although you love wine passionately, and although it

may even be often necessary for you to go on the banks of the Phasis and

Araxes. Lastly, if you want to go to Heaven, and be well placed there, you

will take the road to Mecca."

  The inhabitants of the north of the Caucasus submit to these laws, and

embrace throughout the country a religion which was not made for them.

  In Egypt the symbolic worship of animals succeeded the dogmas of Thaut.

The gods of the Romans later shared Egypt with the dogs, the cats and the

crocodiles.  To  the  Roman  religion  succeeded  Christianity;  it  was  entirely

driven out by Mohammedanism, which perhaps will cede its place to a new

religion.

  In all these vicissitudes climate has counted for nothing: government has

done everything. We are considering here second causes only, without raising

profane eyes to the Providence which directs them. The Christian religion,

born  in  Syria,  having  received  its  principal  development  in  Alexandria,

inhabits  to-day  the  lands  where  Teutate,  Irminsul,  Frida,  Odin  were

worshipped.

  There are peoples whose religion has been made by neither climate nor

government. What cause detached the north of Germany, Denmark, three-

quarters  of  Switzerland,  Holland,  England,  Scotland,  Ireland,  from  the

Roman communion? Poverty. Indulgences and deliverance from purgatory

were sold too dear to souls whose bodies had at that time very little money.

The prelates, the monks devoured a province's whole revenue. People took a

cheaper religion. At last, after twenty civil wars, people believed that thePope's religion was very good for great lords, and the reformed religion for

citizens. Time will show whether the Greek religion or the Turkish religion

will prevail by the Ægean Sea and the Pont-Euxine.


  COMMON SENSE


  There are sometimes in common expressions an image of what passes in

the depths of all men's hearts. Among the Romans sensus communis signified

not only common sense, but humanity, sensibility. As we are not as good as

the  Romans,  this  word  signifies  among  us  only  half  of  what  it  signified

among them. It means only good sense, plain reason, reason set in operation,

a  first  notion  of  ordinary  things,  a  state  midway  between  stupidity  and

intelligence. "This man has no common sense" is a great insult. "A common-

sense man" is an insult likewise; it means that he is not entirely stupid, and

that he lacks what is called wit and understanding. But whence comes this

expression common sense, unless it be from the senses? Men, when they

invented this word, avowed that nothing entered the soul save through the

senses; otherwise, would they have used the word sense to signify common

reasoning?

  People  say  sometimes-"Common  sense  is  very  rare."  What  does  this

phrase signify? that in many men reason set in operation is stopped in its

progress by prejudices, that such and such man who judges very sanely in

one matter, will always be vastly deceived in another. This Arab, who will be

a  good  calculator,  a  learned  chemist,  an  exact  astronomer,  will  believe

nevertheless that Mohammed put half the moon in his sleeve.

  Why will he go beyond common sense in the three sciences of which I

speak, and why will he be beneath common sense when there is question of

this half moon? Because in the first cases he has seen with his eyes, he has

perfected his intelligence; and in the second, he has seen with other people's

eyes, he has closed his own, he has perverted the common sense which is in

him.

  How has this strange mental alienation been able to operate? How can the

ideas which move with so regular and so firm a step in the brain on a great

number of subjects limp so wretchedly on another a thousand times morepalpable and easy to comprehend? This man always has inside him the same

principles of intelligence; he must have some organ vitiated then, just as it

happens sometimes that the finest gourmet may have a depraved taste as

regards a particular kind of food.

  How is the organ of this Arab, who sees half the moon in Mohammed's

sleeve, vitiated? It is through fear. He has been told that if he did not believe

in this sleeve, his soul, immediately after his death, when passing over the

pointed bridge, would fall for ever into the abyss. He has been told even

worse things: If ever you have doubts about this sleeve, one dervish will treat

you as impious; another will prove to you that you are an insensate fool who,

having all possible motives for believing, have not wished to subordinate

your superb reason to the evidence; a third will report you to the little divan

of a little province, and you will be legally impaled.

  All this terrifies the good Arab, his wife, his sister, all his little family into

a state of panic. They have good sense about everything else, but on this

article their imagination is wounded, as was the imagination of Pascal, who

continually saw a precipice beside his armchair. But does our Arab believe in

fact in Mohammed's sleeve? No. He makes efforts to believe; he says it is

impossible, but that it is true; he believes what he does not believe. On the

subject of this sleeve he forms in his head a chaos of ideas which he is afraid

to disentangle; and this veritably is not to have common sense.


    CONCATENATION OF EVENTS


  The present is delivered, it is said, of the future. Events are linked to each

other by an invincible fatality: it is Destiny which, in Homer, is above even

Jupiter. This master of gods and men declares roundly that he cannot stop his

son Sarpedon dying in his appointed time. Sarpedon was born at the moment

when he had to be born, and could not be born at another moment; he could

not die otherwise than before Troy; he could not be buried elsewhere than in

Lycia;  had  at  the  appointed  time  to  produce  vegetables  which  had  to  be

changed into the substance of a few Lycians; his heirs had to establish a new

order  in  his  states;  this  new  order  had  to  exert  an  influence  over  the

neighbouring kingdoms; from it resulted a new arrangement of war and peacewith the neighbours of the neighbours of Lycia: thus, step by step, the destiny

of the whole world has been dependent on Sarpedon's death, which depended

on Helen being carried off; and this carrying off was necessarily linked to

Hecuba's marriage, which by tracing back to other events was linked to the

origin of things.

  If only one of these facts had been arranged differently, another universe

would have resulted: but it was not possible for the present universe not to

exist; therefore it was not possible for Jupiter to save his son's life, for all that

he was Jupiter.

  This system of necessity and fatality has been invented in our time by

Leibnitz,  according  to  what  people  say,  under  the  name  of  self-sufficient

reason; it is, however, very ancient: that there is no effect without a cause and

that often the smallest cause produces the greatest effects, does not date from

to-day.

  Lord Bolingbroke avows that the little quarrels of Madame Marlborough

and  Madame  Masham  gave  birth  to  his  chance  of  making  Queen  Anne's

private treaty with Louis XIV.; this treaty led to the Peace of Utrecht; this

Peace of Utrecht established Philip V. on the throne of Spain. Philip V. took

Naples and Sicily from the house of Austria; the Spanish prince who is to-day

King of Naples clearly owes his kingdom to my lady Masham: and he would

not have had it, he would not perhaps even have been born, if the Duchess of

Marlborough had been more complaisant towards the Queen of England. His

existence at Naples depended on one foolishness more or less at the court of

London.

  Examine  the  position  of  all  the  peoples  of  the  universe;  they  are

established like this on a sequence of facts which appear to be connected with

nothing and which are connected with everything. Everything is cog, pulley,

cord, spring, in this vast machine.

  It is likewise in the physical sphere. A wind which blows from the depths

of Africa and the austral seas, brings a portion of the African atmosphere,

which falls in rain in the valleys of the Alps; these rains fertilize our lands;

our north wind in its turn sends our vapours among the negroes; we do good

to Guinea, and Guinea does good to us. The chain stretches from one end of

the universe to the other.  But  it  seems  to  me  that  a  strange  abuse  is  made  of  the  truth  of  this

principle. From it some people conclude that there is not a sole minute atom

whose movement has not exerted its influence in the present arrangement of

the world; that there is not a single minute accident, among either men or

animals, which is not an essential link in the great chain of fate.

  Let us understand each other: every effect clearly has its cause, going back

from cause to cause in the abyss of eternity; but every cause has not its effect

going forward to the end of the centuries. All events are produced by each

other, I admit; if the past is delivered of the present, the present is delivered

of the future; everything has father, but everything has not always children.

Here it is precisely as with a genealogical tree; each house goes back, as we

say,  to  Adam;  but  in  the  family  there  are  many  persons  who  have  died

without leaving issue.

  There is a genealogical tree of the events of this world. It is incontestable

that the inhabitants of Gaul and Spain are descended from Gomer, and the

Russians from Magog, his younger brother: one finds this genealogy in so

many fat books! On this basis one cannot deny that the Great Turk, who is

also descended from Magog, was not bound to be well beaten in 1769 by

Catherine II., Empress of Russia. This adventure is clearly connected with

other  great  adventures.  But  that  Magog  spat  to  right  or  left,  near  Mount

Caucasus, and that he made two circles in a well or three, that he slept on the

left side or on the right; I do not see that that has had much influence on

present affairs.

  One must think that everything is not complete in nature, as Newton has

demonstrated, and that every movement is not communicated step by step

until it makes a circuit of the world, as he has demonstrated still further.

Throw into water a body of like density, you calculate easily that after a short

time the movement of this body, and the movement it has communicated to

the water, are destroyed; the movement disappears and is effaced; therefore

the  movement  that  Magog  might  produce  by  spitting  in  a  well  cannot

influence  what  is  passing  to-day  in  Moldavia  and  Wallachia;  therefore

present events are not the children of all past events: they have their direct

lines; but a thousand little collateral lines do not serve them at all. Once more,

every being has a father, but every being has not children.    CONTRADICTIONS


  If  some  literary  society  wishes  to  undertake  the  dictionary  of

contradictions, I subscribe for twenty folio volumes.

  The  world  can  exist  only  by  contradictions:  what  is  needed  to  abolish

them? to assemble the states of the human race. But from the manner in

which men are made, it would be a fresh contradiction if they were to agree.

Assemble  all  the  rabbits  of  the  universe,  there  will  not  be  two  different

opinions among them.

  I know only two kinds of immutable beings on the earth, mathematicians

and animals; they are led by two invariable rules, demonstration and instinct:

and even the mathematicians have had some disputes, but the animals have

never varied.

  The contrasts, the light and shade in which public men are represented in

history, are not contradictions, they are faithful portraits of human nature.

  Every day people condemn and admire Alexander the murderer of Clitus,

but the avenger of Greece, the conqueror of the Persians, and the founder of

Alexandria;

  Cæsar the debauchee, who robs the public treasury of Rome to reduce his

country to dependence; but whose clemency equals his valour, and whose

intelligence equals his courage;

  Mohammed, impostor, brigand; but the sole religious legislator who had

courage, and who founded a great empire;

  Cromwell the enthusiast, a rogue in his fanaticism even, judicial assassin

of his king, but as profound politician as brave warrior.

  A thousand contrasts frequently crowd together, and these contrasts are in

nature; they are no more astonishing than a fine day followed by storm.

  Men are equally mad everywhere; they have made the laws little by little,

as gaps are repaired in a wall. Here eldest sons have taken all they could from

younger sons, there younger sons share equally. Sometimes the Church has

commanded the duel, sometimes she has anathematized it. The partisans and

the enemies of Aristotle have each been excommunicated in their turn, ashave those who wore long hair and those who wore short. In this world we

have perfect law only to rule a species of madness called gaming. The rules

of  gaming  are  the  only  ones  which  admit  neither  exception,  relaxation,

variety nor tyranny. A man who has been a lackey, if he play at lansquenet

with kings, is paid without difficulty if he win; everywhere else the law is a

sword with which the stronger cut the weaker in pieces.

  Nevertheless,  this  world  exists  as  if  everything  were  well  ordered;  the

irregularity is of our nature; our political world is like our globe, a misshapen

thing  which  always  preserves  itself.  It  would  be  mad  to  wish  that  the

mountains,  the  seas,  the  rivers,  were  traced  in  beautiful  regular  forms;  it

would be still more mad to ask perfect wisdom of men; it would be wishing

to give wings to dogs or horns to eagles.


  CORN


  The Gauls had corn in Cæsar's time: one is curious to know where they

and the Teutons found it to sow. People answer you that the Tyrians had

brought it into Spain, the Spaniards into Gaul, the Gauls into Germany. And

where did the Tyrians get this corn? Among the Greeks probably, from whom

they received it in exchange for their alphabet.

  Who had made this present to the Greeks? It was formerly Ceres without a

doubt; and when one has gone back to Ceres one can hardly go farther. Ceres

must have come down on purpose from the sky to give us wheat, rye, barley,

etc.

  But as the credit of Ceres who gave the corn to the Greeks, and that of

Isheth or Isis who bestowed it on the Egyptians, is very much fallen in these

days, we remain in uncertainty as to the origin of corn.

    Sanchoniathon  affirms  that  Dagon  or  Dagan,  one  of  the  grandsons  of

Thaut, had the control of corn in Phœnicia. Well, his Thaut is of about the

same time as our Jared. From this it results that corn is very old, and that it is

of the same antiquity as grass. Perhaps this Dagon was the first man to make

bread, but that is not demonstrated.

  Strange thing! we know positively that it is to Noah that we are under anobligation for wine, and we do not know to whom we owe bread. And, still

more strange thing, we are so ungrateful to Noah, that we have more than two

thousand songs in honour of Bacchus, and we chant barely one in honour of

Noah our benefactor.

  A Jew has assured me that corn came by itself in Mesopotamia, like the

apples, wild pears, chestnuts, medlars in the West. I want to believe it until I

am  sure  of  the  contrary;  for  corn  must  certainly  grow  somewhere.  It  has

become  the  ordinary  and  indispensable  food  in  the  good  climates,  and

throughout the North.

  Some great philosophers whose talents we esteem and whose systems we

do not follow (Buffon) have claimed on page 195 of the "Natural History of

the Dog," that mankind has made corn; that our fathers by virtue of sowing

lolium and gramina changed them into wheat. As these philosophers are not

of our opinion about shells, they will permit us not to be of theirs about corn.

We do not believe that one has ever made tulips grow from jasmin. We find

that the germ of corn is quite different from that of lolium, and we do not

believe in any transmutation. When somebody shows it to us we will retract.

  Corn assuredly is not the food of the greater part of the world. Maize,

tapioca,  feed  the  whole  of  America.  We  have  entire  provinces  where  the

peasants  eat  nothing  but  chestnut  bread,  more  nourishing  and  of  better

flavour than that of rye and barley which so many people eat, and which is

much better than the ration bread which is given to the soldier. The whole of

southern Africa does not know of bread. The immense archipelago of the

Indies, Siam, Laos, Pegu, Cochin China, Tonkin, a part of China, Japan, the

coast of Malabar and Coromandel, the banks of the Ganges furnish a rice, the

cultivation of which is much easier than that of wheat, and which causes it to

be neglected. Corn is absolutely unknown for the space of fifteen hundred

leagues  on  the  coasts  of  the  Glacial  Sea.  This  food,  to  which  we  are

accustomed, is among us so precious that the fear of seeing a dearth of it

alone  causes  riots  among  the  most  subjugated  peoples.  The  corn  trade  is

everywhere one of the great objects of government; it is a part of our being,

and yet this essential commodity is sometimes squandered ridiculously. The

powder merchants use the best flour for covering the heads of our young men

and women. But over three-quarters of the earth bread is not eaten at all.

People maintain that the Ethiopians mocked at the Egyptians who lived onbread. But since it is our chief food, corn has become one of the great objects

of trade and politics. So much has been written on this subject, that if a

husbandman sowed as much corn as the weight of the volumes we have about

this commodity, he might hope for the amplest harvest, and become richer

than  those  who  in  their  gilded  and  lacquered  drawing-rooms  ignore  his

exceeding labour and wretchedness.


  CROMWELL

  SECTION I


  Cromwell is painted as a man who was an impostor all his life. I have

difficulty in believing it. I think that first of all he was an enthusiast, and that

later  he  made  even  his  fanaticism  serve  his  greatness.  A  novice  who  is

fervent at the age of twenty often becomes a skilful rogue at forty. In the

great game of human life one begins by being a dupe, and one finishes by

being  a  rogue.  A  statesman  takes  as  almoner  a  monk  steeped  in  the

pettinesses of his monastery, devout, credulous, clumsy, quite new to the

world: the monk learns, forms himself, intrigues, and supplants his master.

  Cromwell did not know at first whether he would be an ecclesiastic or a

soldier. He was both. In 1622 he served a campaign in the army of Frederick

Henry, Prince of Orange, a great man, brother of two great men; and when he

returned to England, he went into the service of Bishop Williams, and was his

grace's theologian, while his grace passed as his wife's lover. His principles

were those of the Puritans; thus he had to hate a bishop with all his heart, and

not  have  a  liking  for  kings.  He  was  driven  from  Bishop  Williams'  house

because he was a Puritan; and there is the origin of his fortune. The English

Parliament declared itself against the throne and against the episcopacy; some

of his friends in this parliament procured the nomination of a village for him.

Only at this time did he begin to exist, and he was more than forty before he

had ever made himself talked of. In vain was he conversant with Holy Writ,

in vain did he argue about the rights of priests and deacons, and preach a few

poor sermons and libels, he was ignored. I have seen one of his sermons

which  is  very  insipid,  and  which  bears  sufficient  resemblance  to  the

predications of the quakers; assuredly there is to be found there no trace ofthat persuasive eloquence with which later he carried the parliaments away.

The reason is that in fact he was much more suited to public affairs than to

the Church. It was above all in his tone and in his air that his eloquence

consisted; a gesture of that hand that had won so many battles and killed so

many royalists, was more persuasive than the periods of Cicero. It must be

avowed that it was his incomparable bravery which made him known, and

which led him by degrees to the pinnacle of greatness.

  He began by launching out as a volunteer who wished to make his fortune,

in the town of Hull, besieged by the king. There he did many fine and happy

actions, for which he received a gratification of about six thousand francs

from the parliament. This present made by the parliament to an adventurer

made it clear that the rebel party must prevail. The king was not in a position

to give to his general officers what the parliament gave to volunteers. With

money  and  fanaticism  one  is  bound  in  the  long  run  to  be  master  of

everything.  Cromwell  was  made  colonel.  Then  his  great  talents  for  war

developed  to  the  point  that  when  the  parliament  created  the  Count  of

Manchester  general  of  its  armies,  it  made  Cromwell  lieutenant-general,

without his having passed through the other ranks. Never did man appear

more worthy of commanding; never were more activity and prudence, more

boldness and more resource seen than in Cromwell. He is wounded at the

battle of York; and while the first dressing is being put on his wound, he

learns that his general, Manchester, is retiring, and that the battle is lost. He

hastens to Manchester's side; he finds him fleeing with some officers; he

takes him by the arm, and says to him with an air of confidence and grandeur:

"You are mistaken, my lord; it is not on this side that the enemy is." He leads

him  back  near  the  battlefield,  rallies  during  the  night  more  than  twelve

thousand men, speaks to them in the name of God, quotes Moses, Gideon and

Joshua,  at  daybreak  recommences  the  battle  against  the  victorious  royal

army, and defeats it completely. Such a man had to perish or be master.

Nearly all the officers of his army were enthusiasts who carried the New

Testament at their saddle-bow: in the army as in the parliament men spoke

only of making Babylon fall, of establishing the religion in Jerusalem, of

shattering the colossus. Among so many madmen Cromwell ceased to be

mad, and thought that it was better to govern them than to be governed by

them. The habit of preaching as though he were inspired remained to him.Picture a fakir who has put an iron belt round his waist as a penitence, and

who  then  takes  off  his  belt  to  beat  the  other  fakirs'  ears:  there  you  have

Cromwell. He becomes as intriguing as he was intrepid; he associates himself

with all the colonels of the army, and thus forms among the troops a republic

which forces the commander-in-chief to resign. Another commander-in-chief

is nominated, he disgusts him. He governs the army, and by it he governs the

parliament;  he  puts  this  parliament  in  the  necessity  of  making  him

commander-in-chief at last. All this was a great deal; but what is essential is

that he wins all the battles he engages in in England, Scotland and Ireland;

and he wins them, not in watching the fighting and in taking care of himself,

but always by charging the enemy, rallying his troops, rushing everywhere,

often  wounded,  killing  many  royalist  officers  with  his  own  hand,  like  a

desperate and infuriated grenadier.

  Amid this frightful war Cromwell made love; he went, his Bible under his

arm, to sleep with the wife of his major-general, Lambert. She loved the

Count of Holland, who was serving in the king's army. Cromwell took him

prisoner in a battle, and enjoyed the pleasure of having his rival's head cut

off. His maxim was to shed the blood of every important enemy, either on the

field of battle, or by the executioner's hand. He always increased his power,

by always daring to abuse it; the profundity of his plans took away nothing

from his ferocious impetuosity. He goes into the House of Parliament and,

taking his watch, which he threw on the ground and which he shattered to

atoms: "I will break you," he said, "like this watch." He returns there some

time after, drives all the members out one after the other, making them defile

before him. Each is obliged, as he passes, to make him a deep bow: one of

them passes with his hat on his head; Cromwell takes his hat from him and

throws it on the ground: "Learn to respect me," he says.

  When he had outraged all kings by having his own legitimate king's head

cut off, and when he started to reign himself, he sent his portrait to a crowned

head; it was to Christine, Queen of Sweden. Marvell, a famous English poet,

who wrote very good Latin verse, accompanied this portrait with six verses

where he made Cromwell himself speak. Cromwell corrected the last two as

follows:

  At tibi submittit frontem reverentior umbra,  Non sunt hi vultus regibus usque truces.

  This queen was the first to recognize him as soon as he was protector of

the  three  kingdoms.  Almost  all  the  sovereigns  of  Europe  sent  their

ambassadors to their brother Cromwell, to this bishop's servant, who had just

caused a sovereign, their own kin, to perish at the hand of the executioner.

They vied with each in soliciting his alliance. Cardinal Mazarin, to please

him, drove out of France the two sons of Charles I., the two grandsons of

Henry IV., the two first cousins of Louis XIV. France conquered Dunkirk for

him, and sent him the keys. After his death, Louis XIV. and all his court wore

mourning,  excepting  Mademoiselle,  who  had  the  courage  to  come  to  the

company in a coloured habit, and alone maintained the honour of her race.

  Never was a king more absolute than he was. He said that he had preferred

governing under the name of protector rather than under that of king, because

the  English  knew  the  point  to  which  a  King  of  England's  prerogative

extended, and did not know to what point a protector's might go. That was to

understand men, who are governed by opinion, and whose opinion depends

on a name. He had conceived a profound scorn for the religion which had

served to his fortune. There is a certain anecdote preserved in the house of St.

John, which proves sufficiently the little account which Cromwell made of

the instrument which had produced such great effects in his hands. He was

drinking one day with Ireton, Fleetwood and St. John, great-grandfather of

the celebrated Lord Bolingbroke; they wished to uncork a bottle, and the

corkscrew  fell  under  the  table;  they  all  looked  for  it  and  did  not  find  it.

Meanwhile a deputation from the Presbyterian churches was waiting in the

antechamber,  and  an  usher  came  to  announce  them.  "Tell  them,"  said

Cromwell, "that I have retired, and that I am seeking the Lord." It was the

expression  which  the  fanatics  used  when  they  were  saying  their  prayers.

When he had thus dismissed the band of ministers, he said these very words

to his confidants: "Those puppies think that we are seeking the Lord, and we

are only seeking the corkscrew."

  There is barely an example in Europe of any man who, come from so low,

raised himself so high. But what was absolutely essential to him with all his

talents? Fortune. He had this fortune; but was he happy? He lived poorly and

anxiously until he was forty-three; from that time he bathed himself in blood,

passed his life in turmoil, and died before his time at the age of fifty-seven.Let us compare this life with that of Newton, who lived eighty-four years,

always tranquil, always honoured, always the light of all thinking beings,

seeing increase each day his renown, his reputation, his fortune, without ever

having either care or remorse; and let us judge which of the two had the

better part.


  SECTION II


  Oliver  Cromwell  was  regarded  with  admiration  by  the  Puritans  and

independents of England; he is

  still their hero; but Richard Cromwell, his son, is my man.

  The  first  is  a  fanatic  who  would  be  hissed  to-day  in  the  House  of

Commons, if he uttered there one single one of the unintelligible absurdities

which  he  gave  out  with  so  much  confidence  before  other  fanatics  who

listened to him open-mouthed and wide-eyed, in the name of the Lord. If he

said that one must seek the Lord, and fight the Lord's battles; if he introduced

the Jewish jargon into the parliament of England, to the eternal shame of the

human intelligence, he would be nearer to being led to Bedlam than to being

chosen to command armies.

  He was brave without a doubt; so are wolves; there are even monkeys as

fierce as tigers. From being a fanatic he became an adroit politician, that is to

say that from a wolf he became fox, climbed by imposture from the first steps

where the infuriated enthusiasm of the times had placed him, right to the

pinnacle of greatness; and the impostor walked on the heads of the prostrated

fanatics. He reigned, but he lived in the horrors of anxiety. He knew neither

serene days nor tranquil nights. The consolations of friendship and society

never  approached  him;  he  died  before  his  time,  more  worthy,  without  a

doubt, of execution than the king whom he had conducted from a window of

his own palace to the scaffold.

  Richard Cromwell, on the contrary, born with a gentle, wise spirit, refused

to keep his father's crown at the price of the blood of two or three rebels

whom  he  could  sacrifice  to  his  ambition.  He  preferred  to  be  reduced  to

private life rather than be an omnipotent assassin. He left the protectorate

without regret to live as a citizen. Free and tranquil in the country, he enjoyedhealth there, and there did he possess his soul in peace for eighty-six years,

loved by his neighbours, to whom he was arbiter and father.

  Readers, give your verdict. If you had to choose between the destiny of the

father and that of the son, which would you take?


  CUSTOMS


  Contemptible Customs do not always Suppose a Contemptible Nation

  There are cases where one must not judge a nation by its customs and

popular superstitions. I suppose that Cæsar, having conquered Egypt, wanting

to make trade flourish in the Roman Empire, has sent an embassy to China,

by the port of Arsinoë, the Red Sea, and the Indian Ocean. The Emperor

Yventi, first of his name, was then reigning; the annals of China represent

him as a very wise and learned prince. After receiving Cæsar's ambassadors

with  all  the  Chinese  politeness,  he  informs  himself  secretly  through  his

interpreters of the customs, science and religion of this Roman people, as

celebrated in the West as the Chinese people is in the East. He learns first of

all that this people's pontiffs have arranged their year in so absurd a fashion

that the sun has already the heavenly signs of spring when the Romans are

celebrating the first festivals of winter.

  He learns that this nation supports at great cost a college of priests who

know exactly the time when one should set sail and when one should give

battle, by inspecting an ox's liver, or by the way in which the chickens eat

barley. This sacred science was brought formerly to the Romans by a little

god named Tages, who emerged from the earth in Tuscany. These peoples

worship one supreme God whom they always call the very great and very

good God. Nevertheless, they have built a temple to a courtesan named Flora;

and almost all the good women of Rome have in their homes little household

gods four or five inches high. One of these little divinities is the goddess of

the breasts; the other the goddess of the buttocks. There is a household god

who is called the god Pet. The emperor Yventi starts laughing: the tribunals

of  Nankin  think  first  of  all  with  him  that  the  Roman  ambassadors  are

madmen  or  impostors  who  have  taken  the  title  of  envoys  of  the  Roman

Republic; but as the emperor is as just as he is polite, he has private talks withthe ambassadors. He learns that the Roman pontiffs have been very ignorant,

but that Cæsar is now reforming the calendar; they admit to him that the

college  of  augurs  was  established  in  early  barbarous  times;  that  this

ridiculous institution, become dear to a people long uncivilized, has been

allowed to subsist; that all honest people laugh at the augurs; that Cæsar has

never consulted them; that according to a very great man named Cato, never

has an augur been able to speak to his comrade without laughter; and that

finally Cicero, the greatest orator and the best philosopher in Rome, has just

written against the augurs a little work entitled "Of Divination," in which he

commits to eternal ridicule all the soothsayers, all the predictions, and all the

sorcery of which the world is infatuated. The emperor of China is curious to

read Cicero's book, the interpreters translate it; he admires the book and the

Roman Republic.


    DEMOCRACY


  Ordinarily there is no comparison between the crimes of the great who are

always ambitious, and the crimes of the people who always want, and can

want only liberty and equality. These two sentiments, Liberty and Equality,

do  not  lead  direct  to  calumny,  rapine,  assassination,  poisoning,  the

devastation  of  one's  neighbours'  lands,  etc.;  but  ambitious  might  and  the

mania for power plunge into all these crimes whatever be the time, whatever

be the place.

  Popular government is in itself, therefore, less iniquitous, less abominable

than despotic power.

  The great vice of democracy is certainly not tyranny and cruelty: there

have been mountain-dwelling republicans, savage, ferocious; but it is not the

republican spirit that made them so, it is nature.

  The real vice of a civilized republic is in the Turkish fable of the dragon

with many heads and the dragon with many tails. The many heads hurt each

other,  and  the  many  tails  obey  a  single  head  which  wants  to  devour

everything.

  Democracy seems suitable only to a very little country, and further it must

be happily situated. Small though it be, it will make many mistakes, becauseit will be composed of men. Discord will reign there as in a monastery; but

there will be no St. Bartholomew, no Irish massacres, no Sicilian vespers, no

inquisition, no condemnation to the galleys for having taken some water from

the sea without paying for it, unless one supposes this republic composed of

devils in a corner of hell.

  One questions every day whether a republican government is preferable to

a king's government? The dispute ends always by agreeing that to govern

men is very difficult. The Jews had God Himself for master; see what has

happened to them on that account: nearly always have they been beaten and

slaves, and to-day do you not find that they cut a pretty figure?


  DESTINY

  Of all the books of the Occident which have come down to us, the most

ancient is Homer; it is there that one finds the customs of profane antiquity,

of the gross heroes, of the gross gods, made in the image of men; but it is

there that among the reveries and inconsequences, one finds too the seeds of

philosophy, and above all the idea of the destiny which is master of the gods,

as the gods are masters of the world.

  When  the  magnanimous  Hector  wishes  absolutely  to  fight  the

magnanimous Achilles, and with this object starts fleeing with all his might,

and three times makes the circuit of the city before fighting, in order to have

more vigour; when Homer compares fleet-of-foot Achilles, who pursues him,

to a man who sleeps; when Madame Dacier goes into ecstasies of admiration

over the art and mighty sense of this passage, then Jupiter wants to save great

Hector who has made so many sacrifices to him, and he consults the fates; he

weighs the destinies of Hector and Achilles in the balance (Iliad, liv. xxii.):

he finds that the Trojan must absolutely be killed by the Greek; he cannot

oppose it; and from this moment, Apollo, Hector's guardian genius, is forced

to abandon him. It is not that Homer is not often prodigal, and particularly in

this place, of quite contrary ideas, following the privilege of antiquity; but he

is the first in whom one finds the notion of destiny. This notion, therefore,

was very much in vogue in his time.

  The Pharisees, among the little Jewish people, did not adopt destiny until

several centuries later; for these Pharisees themselves, who were the firstliterates among the Jews, were very new fangled. In Alexandria they mixed a

part of the dogmas of the Stoics with the old Jewish ideas. St. Jerome claims

even that their sect is not much anterior to the Christian era.

  The  philosophers  never  had  need  either  of  Homer  or  the  Pharisees  to

persuade themselves that everything happens through immutable laws, that

everything is arranged, that everything is a necessary effect. This is how they

argued.

  Either  the  world  exists  by  its  own  nature,  by  its  physical  laws,  or  a

supreme being has formed it according to his supreme laws: in both cases,

these laws are immutable; in both cases everything is necessary; heavy bodies

tend towards the centre of the earth, without being able to tend to pause in the

air. Pear-trees can never bear pineapples. A spaniel's instinct cannot be an

ostrich's instinct; everything is arranged, in gear, limited.

  Man can have only a certain number of teeth, hair and ideas; there comes a

time when he necessarily loses his teeth, hair and ideas.

  It would be a contradiction that what was yesterday was not, that what is

to-day is not; it is also a contradiction that what must be cannot be.

  If you could disturb the destiny of a fly, there would be no reason that

could stop your making the destiny of all the other flies, of all the other

animals, of all men, of all nature; you would find yourself in the end more

powerful than God.

  Imbeciles say: "My doctor has extricated my aunt from a mortal malady;

he has made my aunt live ten years longer than she ought to have lived."

Others  who  affect  knowledge,  say:  "The  prudent  man  makes  his  own

destiny."

  But often the prudent, far from making their destinies, succumb to them; it

is destiny which makes them prudent.

  Profound students of politics affirm that, if Cromwell, Ludlow, Ireton and

a dozen other parliamentarians had been assassinated a week before Charles

I.'s head was cut off, this king might have lived longer and died in his bed;

they are right; they can add further that if the whole of England had been

swallowed up in the sea, this monarch would not have perished on a scaffold

near Whitehall; but things were arranged so that Charles had to have his necksevered.

  Cardinal d'Ossat was doubtless more prudent than a madman in Bedlam;

but is it not clear that the organs of d'Ossat the sage were made otherwise

than those of the scatter-brain? just as a fox's organs are different from a

stork's and a lark's.

  Your doctor saved your aunt; but assuredly he did not in that contradict

nature's order; he followed it. It is clear that your aunt could not stop herself

being born in such and such town, that she could not stop herself having a

certain malady at a particular time, that the doctor could not be elsewhere

than in the town where he was, that your aunt had to call him, that he had to

prescribe for her the drugs which cured her, or which one thinks cured her,

when nature was the only doctor.

  A  peasant  thinks  that  it  has  hailed  on  his  field  by  chance;  but  the

philosopher knows that there is no chance, and that it was impossible, in the

constitution of this world, for it not to hail on that day in that place.

  There are persons who, frightened by this truth, admit half of it as debtors

who offer half to their creditors, and ask respite for the rest. "There are," they

say, "some events which are necessary, and others which are not." It would

be very comic that one part of the world was arranged, and that the other

were not; that a part of what happens had to happen, and that another part of

what happens did not have to happen. If one looks closely at it, one sees that

the doctrine contrary to that of destiny is absurd; but there are many people

destined to reason badly, others not to reason at all, others to persecute those

who reason.

  Some  say  to  you:  "Do  not  believe  in  fatalism;  for  then  everything

appearing  inevitable,  you  will  work  at  nothing,  you  will  wallow  in

indifference, you will love neither riches, nor honours, nor glory; you will not

want to acquire anything, you will believe yourself without merit as without

power; no talent will be cultivated, everything will perish through apathy."

  Be  not  afraid,  gentlemen,  we  shall  ever  have  passions  and  prejudices,

since it is our destiny to be subjected to prejudices and passions: we shall

know that it no more depends on us to have much merit and great talent, than

to have a good head of hair and beautiful hands: we shall be convinced that

we must not be vain about anything, and yet we shall always have vanity.  I necessarily have the passion for writing this, and you have the passion

for condemning me; both of us are equally fools, equally the toys of destiny.

Your nature is to do harm, mine is to love truth, and to make it public in spite

of you.

  The owl, which feeds on mice in its ruins, said to the nightingale: "Finish

singing under your beautiful shady trees, come into my hole, that I may eat

you"; and the nightingale answered: "I was born to sing here, and to laugh at

you."

  You ask me what will become of liberty? I do not understand you. I do not

know  what  this  liberty  is  of  which  you  speak;  so  long  have  you  been

disputing about its nature, that assuredly you are not acquainted with it. If

you wish, or rather, if you are able to examine peaceably with me what it is,

pass to the letter L.


  DEVOUT


  The word "devout" signifies "devoted"; and in the strict sense of the term

this qualification should belong only to monks and nuns who make vows. But

as in the Gospel there is no more mention of vows than of devout persons,

this  title  does  not  in  fact  belong  to  anyone.  Everyone  should  be  equally

righteous.  A  man  who  styles  himself  devout  resembles  a  commoner  who

styles  himself  a  marquis;  he  arrogates  to  himself  a  quality  he  does  not

possess. He thinks himself more worthy than his neighbour. One can forgive

such  foolishness  in  women;  their  frailty  and  their  frivolity  render  them

excusable; the poor creatures pass from a lover to a director in good faith: but

one cannot pardon the rogues who direct them, who abuse their ignorance,

who  establish  the  throne  of  their  pride  on  the  credulity  of  the  sex.  They

resolve themselves into a little mystic seraglio composed of seven or eight

aged beauties, subdued by the weight of their lack of occupation, and almost

always do these persons pay tribute to their new masters. No young woman

without a lover, no aged devout woman without a director. Oh! the Orientals

are wiser than we are! Never does a pasha say: "We supped yesterday with

the  Aga  of  the  Janissaries  who  is  my  sister's  lover,  and  the  vicar  of  the

mosque who is my wife's director."  THE ECCLESIASTICAL MINISTRY


  The institution of religion exists only to keep mankind in order, and to

make men merit the goodness of God by their virtue. Everything in a religion

which  does  not  tend  towards  this  goal  must  be  considered  foreign  or

dangerous.

  Instruction, exhortation, menaces of pains to come, promises of immortal

beatitude, prayers, counsels, spiritual help are the only means ecclesiastics

may use to try to make men virtuous here below, and happy for eternity.

  All other means are repugnant to the liberty of the reason, to the nature of

the soul, to the inalterable rights of the conscience, to the essence of religion

and of the ecclesiastical ministry, to all the rights of the sovereign.

  Virtue supposes liberty, as the carrying of a burden supposes active force.

Under coercion no virtue, and without virtue no religion. Make a slave of me,

I shall be no better for it.

  The sovereign even has no right to use coercion to lead men to religion,

which supposes essentially choice and liberty. My thought is subordinate to

authority no more than is sickness or health.

  In order to disentangle all the contradictions with which books on canon

law have been filled, and to fix our ideas on the ecclesiastical ministry, let us

investigate amid a thousand equivocations what the Church is.

  The Church is the assembly of all the faithful summoned on certain days

to pray in common, and at all times to do good actions.

  The priests are persons established under the authority of the sovereign to

direct these prayers and all religious worship.

  A  numerous  Church  could  not  exist  without  ecclesiastics;  but  these

ecclesiastics are not the Church.

  It is no less evident that if the ecclesiastics, who are part of civil society,

had acquired rights which might trouble or destroy society, these rights ought

to be suppressed.

  It is still more evident that, if God has attached to the Church prerogativesor  rights,  neither  these  rights  nor  these  prerogatives  should  belong

exclusively either to the chief of the Church or to the ecclesiastics, because

they are not the Church, just as the magistrates are not the sovereign in either

a democratic state or in a monarchy.

  Finally, it is quite evident that it is our souls which are under the clergy's

care, solely for spiritual things.

  Our soul acts internally; internal acts are thought, volition, inclinations,

acquiescence in certain truths. All these acts are above all coercion, and are

within the ecclesiastical minister's sphere only in so far as he must instruct

and never command.

  This soul acts also externally. External actions are under the civil law.

Here coercion may have a place; temporal or corporal pains maintain the law

by punishing those who infringe it.

  Obedience to ecclesiastical order must consequently always be free and

voluntary: no other should be possible. Submission, on the other hand, to

civil order may be coerced and compulsory.

  For the same reason, ecclesiastical punishments, always spiritual, do not

reach here below any but those who are convinced inwardly of their fault.

Civil  pains,  on  the  contrary,  accompanied  by  a  physical  ill,  have  their

physical effects, whether or no the guilty recognize their justice.

  From this it results obviously that the authority of the clergy is and can be

spiritual only; that it should not have any temporal power; that no coercive

force is proper to its ministry, which would be destroyed by it.

  It follows from this further that the sovereign, careful not to suffer any

partition of his authority, must permit no enterprise which puts the members

of society in external and civil dependence on an ecclesiastical body.

  Such are the incontestable principles of real canon law, of which the rules

and decisions should be judged at all times by the eternal and immutable

truths which are founded on natural law and the necessary order of society.


  EMBLEM  In  antiquity  everything  is  symbol  or  emblem.  In  Chaldea  it  starts  by

putting a ram, two kids, a bull in the sky, to mark the productions of the earth

in the spring. Fire is the symbol of the Deity in Persia; the celestial dog warns

the Egyptians of the Nile floods; the serpent which hides its tail in its head,

becomes  the  image  of  eternity.  The  whole  of  nature  is  represented  and

disguised.

  In India again you find many of those old statues, uncouth and frightful, of

which we have already spoken, representing virtue provided with ten great

arms with which to combat vice, and which our poor missionaries have taken

for the picture of the devil.

  Put all these symbols of antiquity before the eyes of a man of the soundest

sense, who has never heard speak of them, he will not understand anything: it

is a language to be learned.

  The old theological poets were in the necessity of giving God eyes, hands,

feet; of announcing Him in the form of a man. St. Clement of Alexandria

records some verses of Xenophanes the Colophonian (Stromates liv. v.), from

which one sees that it is not merely from to-day that men have made God in

their own image. Orpheus of Thrace, the first theologian of the Greeks, long

before Homer, expresses himself similarly, according to the same Clement of

Alexandria.

  Everything being symbol and emblem, the philosophers, and especially

those who had travelled in India, employed this method; their precepts were

emblems and enigmas.

  Do not stir the fire with a sword, that is, do not irritate angry men.

  Do not hide the light under the bushel.-Do not hide the truth from men.

  Abstain from beans.-Flee frequently public assemblies in which one gave

one's suffrage with black or white beans.

  Do  not  have  swallows  in  your  house.-That  it  may  not  be  filled  with

chatterers.

  In the tempest worship the echo.-In times of public trouble retire to the

country.

  Do not write on the snow.-Do not teach feeble and sluggish minds.  Do not eat either your heart or your brain.-Do not give yourself up to

either grief or to too difficult enterprises, etc.

  Such are the maxims of Pythagoras, the sense of which is not hard to

understand.

  The most beautiful of all the emblems is that of God, whom Timæus of

Locres represents by this idea: A circle the centre of which is everywhere and

the circumference nowhere. Plato adopted this emblem; Pascal had inserted it

among the material which he intended using, and which has been called his

"Thoughts."

  In metaphysics, in moral philosophy, the ancients have said everything.

We coincide with them, or we repeat them. All modern books of this kind are

only repetitions.

  It is above all among the Indians, the Egyptians, the Syrians, that these

emblems, which to us appear most strange, were consecrated. It is there that

the  two  organs  of  generation,  the  two  symbols  of  life,  were  carried  in

procession  with  the  greatest  respect.  We  laugh  at  it,  we  dare  treat  these

peoples as barbarous idiots, because they innocently thanked God for having

given them existence. What would they have said if they had seen us enter

our temples with the instrument of destruction at our side?

  At Thebes the sins of the people were represented by a goat. On the coast

of Phœnicia a naked woman, with a fish's tail, was the emblem of nature.

  One must not be astonished, therefore, if this use of symbols reached the

Hebrews when they had formed a body of people near the Syrian desert.

  One of the most beautiful emblems of the Judaic books is this passage of

Ecclesiastes: "... when the grinders cease because they are few, and those that

look out of the windows be darkened, when the almond-tree shall flourish

and the grasshopper shall be a burden: or ever the silver cord be loosed, or

the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain...."

  That signifies that the old men lose their teeth, that their sight is dim, that

their hair whitens like the flower of the almond-tree, that their feet swell like

the grasshopper, that they are no more fit for engendering children, and that

then they must prepare for the great journey.

  The  "Song  of  Songs"  is  (as  one  knows)  a  continual  emblem  of  themarriage of Jesus Christ with the Church. It is an emblem from beginning to

end. Especially does the ingenious Dom Calmet demonstrate that the palm-

tree to which the well-beloved goes is the cross to which our Lord Jesus

Christ was condemned. But it must be avowed that a pure and healthy moral

philosophy is still preferable to these allegories.

  One sees in this people's books a crowd of typical emblems which revolt

us to-day and which exercise our incredulity and our mockery, but which

appeared ordinary and simple to the Asiatic peoples.

  In Ezekiel are images which appear to us as licentious and revolting: in

those times they were merely natural. There are thirty examples in the "Song

of  Songs,"  model  of  the  most  chaste  union.  Remark  carefully  that  these

expressions, these images are always quite serious, and that in no book of this

distant  antiquity  will  you  find  the  least  mockery  on  the  great  subject  of

generation. When lust is condemned it is in definite terms; but never to excite

to passion, nor to make the smallest pleasantry. This far-distant antiquity did

not have its Martial, its Catullus, or its Petronius.

  It results from all the Jewish prophets and from all the Jewish books, as

from  all  the  books  which  instruct  us  in  the  usages  of  the  Chaldeans,  the

Persians, the Phœnicians, the Syrians, the Indians, the Egyptians; it results, I

say,  that  their  customs  were  not  ours,  that  this  ancient  world  in  no  way

resembled our world. Go from Gibraltar to Mequinez merely, the manners are

no longer the same; no longer does one find the same ideas; two leagues of

sea have changed everything.


  ON THE ENGLISH THEATRE


  I have cast my eyes on an edition of Shakespeare issued by Master Samuel

Johnson. I saw there that foreigners who are astonished that in the plays of

the great Shakespeare a Roman senator plays the buffoon, and that a king

appears on the stage drunk, are treated as little-minded. I do not desire to

suspect Master Johnson of being a sorry jester, and of being too fond of wine;

but  I  find  it  somewhat  extraordinary  that  he  counts  buffoonery  and

drunkenness among the beauties of the tragic stage: and no less singular is the

reason he gives, that the poet disdains accidental distinctions of circumstanceand  country,  like  a  painter  who,  content  with  having  painted  the  figure,

neglects the drapery. The comparison would be more just if he were speaking

of a painter who in a noble subject should introduce ridiculous grotesques,

should paint Alexander the Great mounted on an ass in the battle of Arbela,

and Darius' wife drinking at an inn with rapscallions.

  But there is one thing more extraordinary than all, that is that Shakespeare

is a genius. The Italians, the French, the men of letters of all other countries,

who have not spent some time in England, take him only for a clown, for a

joker far inferior to Harlequin, for the most contemptible buffoon who has

ever amused the populace. Nevertheless, it is in this same man that one finds

pieces which exalt the imagination and which stir the heart to its depths. It is

Truth, it is Nature herself who speaks her own language with no admixture of

artifice. It is of the sublime, and the author has in no wise sought it.

  What can one conclude from this contrast of grandeur and sordidness, of

sublime reason and uncouth folly, in short from all the contrasts that we see

in Shakespeare? That he would have been a perfect poet had he lived in the

time of Addison.

  The famous Addison, who flourished under Queen Anne, is perhaps of all

English writers the one who best knew how to guide genius with taste. He

had a correct style, an imagination discreet in expression, elegance, strength

and  simplicity  in  his  verse  and  in  his  prose.  A  friend  of  propriety  and

orderliness, he wanted tragedy to be written with dignity, and it is thus that

his "Cato" is composed.

  From the very first act the verses are worthy of Virgil, and the sentiments

worthy of Cato. There is no theatre in Europe where the scene of Juba and

Syphax  was  not  applauded  as  a  masterpiece  of  skill,  of  well-developed

characters, of fine contrasts, and of pure and noble diction. Literary Europe,

which knows the translations of this piece, applauded even to the philosophic

traits with which the rôle of Cato is filled.

  The piece had the great success which its beauty of detail merited, and

which was assured to it by the troubles in England to which this tragedy was

in  more  than  one  place  a  striking  allusion.  But  the  appositeness  of  these

allusions having passed, the verse being only beautiful, the maxims being

only noble and just, and the piece being cold, people no longer felt anythingmore than the coldness. Nothing is more beautiful than Virgil's second canto;

recite it on the stage, it will bore: on the stage one must have passion, live

dialogue,  action.  People  soon  returned  to  Shakespeare's  uncouth  but

captivating aberrations.


  ENVY


  One knows well enough what antiquity has said of this shameful passion,

and what the moderns have repeated. Hesiod is the first classic author who

speaks of it.

  "The potter is envious of the potter, the artisan of the artisan, the poor man

even of the poor man, the musician of the musician (or if one would give

another sense to the word Aoidos) the poet of the poet."

  Long before Hesiod, Job had said: "Envy slayeth the silly one" (Job. chap.

v. verse 2).

  I think that Mandeville, author of the "Fable of the Bees," was the first to

try to prove that envy is a very good thing, a very useful passion. His first

reason is that envy is as natural to man as hunger and thirst; that it can be

found in children, as well as in horses and dogs. Do you want your children

to hate each other, kiss one more than the other; the secret is infallible.

  He maintains that the first thing that two young women meeting each other

do is to cast about for what is ridiculous in each other, and the second to

flatter each other.

  He believes that without envy the arts would be indifferently cultivated,

and that Raphael would not have been a great painter if he had not been

jealous of Michael Angelo.

  Mandeville has taken emulation for envy, maybe; maybe, also, emulation

is only envy kept within the bounds of decency.

  Michael Angelo might say to Raphael: "Your envy has only led you to

work still better than me; you have not decried me, you have not intrigued

against me with the Pope, you have not tried to have me excommunicated for

having put cripples and one-eyed men in paradise, and succulent cardinals

with beautiful women naked as your hand in hell, in my picture of the lastjudgment. Your envy is very praiseworthy; you are a fine envious fellow; let

us be good friends."

  But  if  the  envious  man  is  a  wretch  without  talent,  jealous  of  merit  as

beggars are of the rich; if, pressed by the indigence as by the turpitude of his

character  he  writes  you  some  "News  from  Parnassus,"  some  "Letters  of

Madame la Comtesse," some "Années Littéraires," this animal displays an

envy that is good for nothing, and for which Mandeville could never make an

apology.

  One  asks  why  the  ancients  thought  that  the  eye  of  the  envious  man

bewitched those who looked at it. It is the envious, rather, who are bewitched.

  Descartes says: "That envy impels the yellow bile which comes from the

lower  part  of  the  liver,  and  the  black  bile  which  comes  from  the  spleen,

which is diffused from the heart through the arteries, etc." But as no kind of

bile is formed in the spleen, Descartes, by speaking thus, does not seem to

merit too much that his natural philosophy should be envied.

  A certain Voët or Voëtius, a theological scamp, who accused Descartes of

atheism, was very ill with the black bile; but he knew still less than Descartes

how his detestable bile was diffused in his blood.

  Madame  Pernelle  is  right:  "The  envious  will  die,  but  envy  never."

(Tartufe, Act v, Scene iii.)

  But it is good proverb which says that "it is better to be envious than to

have pity." Let us be envious, therefore, as hard as we can.


  EQUALITY

  SECTION I


  It is clear that men, enjoying the faculties connected with their nature, are

equal; they are equal when they perform animal functions, and when they

exercise  their  understanding.  The  King  of  China,  the  Great  Mogul,  the

Padisha of Turkey, cannot say to the least of men: "I forbid you to digest, to

go to the privy and to think." All the animals of each species are equal among

themselves. Animals by nature have over us the advantage of independence.

If a bull which is wooing a heifer is driven away with the blows of the hornsby a stronger bull, it goes in search of another mistress in another field, and

lives free. A cock, beaten by a cock, consoles itself in another poultry-house.

It is not so with us. A little vizier exiles a bostangi to Lemnos: the vizier

Azem exiles the little vizier to Tenedos: the padisha exiles the little vizier

Azem to Rhodes: the Janissaries put the padisha in prison, and elect another

who will exile good Mussulmans as he chooses; people will still be very

obliged to him if he limits his sacred authority to this little exercise.

  If  this  world  were  what  it  seems  it  should  be,  if  man  could  find

everywhere in it an easy subsistence, and a climate suitable to his nature, it is

clear that it would be impossible for one man to enslave another. If this globe

were covered with wholesome fruits; if the air, which should contribute to

our life, gave us no diseases and a premature death; if man had no need of

lodging and bed other than those of the buck and the deer; then the Gengis-

kans and the Tamerlans would have no servants other than their children,

who would be folk honourable enough to help them in their old age.

  In the natural state enjoyed by all untamed quadrupeds, birds and reptiles,

man would be as happy as they; domination would then be a chimera, an

absurdity of which no one would think; for why seek servants when you have

no need of their service?

  If it came into the head of some individual of tyrannous mind and brawny

arm  to  enslave  a  neighbour  less  strong  than  he,  the  thing  would  be

impossible; the oppressed would be on the Danube before the oppressor had

taken his measures on the Volga.

  All men would then be necessarily equal, if they were without needs; the

poverty connected with our species subordinates one man to another; it is not

the inequality which is the real misfortune, it is the dependence. It matters

very little that So-and-so calls himself "His Highness," and So-and-so "His

Holiness"; but to serve the one or the other is hard.

  A big family has cultivated fruitful soil; two little families near by have

thankless  and  rebellious  fields;  the  two  poor  families  have  to  serve  the

opulent family, or slaughter it: there is no difficulty in that. One of the two

indigent families offers its arms to the rich family in order to have bread; the

other goes to attack it and is beaten. The serving family is the origin of the

servants and the workmen; the beaten family is the origin of the slaves.  In our unhappy world it is impossible for men living in society not to be

divided into two classes, the one the rich that commands, the other the poor

that serves; and these two are subdivided into a thousand, and these thousand

still have different gradations.

  When the prizes are drawn you come to us: "I am a man like you," you

say. "I have two hands and two feet, as much pride as you, nay more, a mind

as disordered, at least, as inconsequent, as contradictory as yours. I am a

citizen of San Marino, or of Ragusa, or Vaugirard: give me my share of the

land. In our known hemisphere there are about fifty thousand million arpents

to  cultivate,  some  passable,  some  sterile.  We  are  only  about  a  thousand

million featherless bipeds in this continent; that makes fifty arpents apiece: be

just; give me my fifty arpents."

  "Go  and  take  them  in  the  land  of  the  Cafres,"  we  answer,  "or  the

Hottentots, or the Samoyedes; come to an amicable arrangement with them;

here all the shares are taken. If among us you want to eat, be clothed, lodged,

warmed, work for us as your father did; serve us or amuse us, and you will be

paid;  otherwise  you  will  be  obliged  to  ask  charity,  which  would  be  too

degrading to your sublime nature, and would stop your being really the equal

of kings, and even of country parsons, according to the pretensions of your

noble pride."


  SECTION II


  All the poor are not unhappy. The majority were born in that state, and

continual work stops their feeling their position too keenly; but when they

feel it, then one sees wars, like that of the popular party against the senate

party in Rome, like those of the peasants in Germany, England and France.

All  these  wars  finish  sooner  or  later  with  the  subjection  of  the  people,

because the powerful have money, and money is master of everything in a

state: I say in a state; for it is not the same between nations. The nation which

makes the best use of the sword will always subjugate the nation which has

more gold and less courage.

  All men are born with a sufficiently violent liking for domination, wealth

and pleasure, and with much taste for idleness; consequently, all men wanttheir  money  and  the  wives  or  daughters  of  others,  to  be  their  master,  to

subject them to all their caprices, and to do nothing, or at least to do only

very agreeable things. You see clearly that with these fine inclinations it is as

impossible for men to be equal as it is impossible for two predicants or two

professors of theology not to be jealous of each other.

  The human race, such as it is, cannot subsist unless there is an infinity of

useful men who possess nothing at all; for it is certain that a man who is well

off will not leave his own land to come to till yours; and if you have need of a

pair of shoes, it is not the Secretary to the Privy Council who will make them

for you. Equality, therefore, is at once the most natural thing and the most

fantastic.

  As men go to excess in everything when they can, this inequality has been

exaggerated.  It  has  been  maintained  in  many  countries  that  it  was  not

permissible for a citizen to leave the country where chance has caused him to

be born; the sense of this law is visibly: "This land is so bad and so badly

governed, that we forbid any individual to leave it, for fear that everyone will

leave it." Do better: make all your subjects want to live in your country, and

foreigners to come to it.

  All men have the right in the bottom of their hearts to think themselves

entirely equal to other men: it does not follow from that that the cardinal's

cook should order his master to prepare him his dinner; but the cook can say:

"I am a man like my master; like him I was born crying; like me he will die

with the same pangs and the same ceremonies. Both of us perform the same

animal functions. If the Turks take possession of Rome, and if then I am

cardinal  and  my  master  cook,  I  shall  take  him  into  my  service."  This

discourse is reasonable and just; but while waiting for the Great Turk to take

possession of Rome, the cook must do his duty, or else all human society is

perverted.

  As regards a man who is neither a cardinal's cook, nor endowed with any

other employment in the state; as regards a private person who is connected

with nothing, but who is vexed at being received everywhere with an air of

being patronized or scorned, who sees quite clearly that many monsignors

have no more knowledge, wit or virtue than he, and who at times is bored at

waiting in their antechambers, what should he decide to do? Why, to takehimself off.


  EXPIATION

  Maybe the most beautiful institution of antiquity is that solemn ceremony

which repressed crimes by warning that they must be punished, and which

calmed  the  despair  of  the  guilty  by  making  them  atone  for  their

transgressions by penitences. Remorse must necessarily have preceded the

expiations; for the maladies are older than the medicine, and all needs have

existed before relief.

  It was, therefore, before all the creeds, a natural religion, which troubled

man's heart when in his ignorance or in his hastiness he had committed an

inhuman action. A friend killed his friend in a quarrel, a brother killed his

brother, a jealous and frantic lover even killed her without whom he could

not live. The head of a nation condemned a virtuous man, a useful citizen.

These are men in despair, if they have sensibility. Their conscience harries

them; nothing is more true; and it is the height of unhappiness. Only two

choices remain, either reparation, or a settling in crime. All sensitive souls

choose the first, monsters choose the second.

  As  soon  as  religions  were  established,  there  were  expiations;  the

ceremonies  accompanying  them  were  ridiculous:  for  what  connection

between the water of the Ganges and a murder? how could a man repair a

homicide  by  bathing  himself?  We  have  already  remarked  this  excess  of

aberration and absurdity, of imagining that he who washes his body washes

his soul, and wipes away the stains of bad actions.

  The water of the Nile had later the same virtue as the water of the Ganges:

to these purifications other ceremonies were added: I avow that they were

still more impertinent. The Egyptians took two goats, and drew lots for which

of the two should be thrown below, charged with the sins of the guilty. The

name of "Hazazel," the expiator, was given to this goat. What connection, I

ask you, between a goat and a man's crime?

  It is true that since, God permitted this ceremony to be sanctified among

the Jews our fathers, who took so many Egyptian rites; but doubtless it was

the repentance, and not the goat, which purified the Jewish souls.  Jason,  having  killed  Absyrthe  his  step-brother,  comes,  it  is  said,  with

Medea, more guilty than he, to have himself absolved by Circe, queen and

priestess of Aea, who ever after passed for a great magician. Circe absolves

them with a sucking-pig and salt cakes. That may make a fairly good dish,

but can barely either pay for Absyrthe's blood or render Jason and Medea

more honourable people, unless they avow a sincere repentance while eating

their sucking-pig.

  Orestes' expiation (he had avenged his father by murdering his mother)

was to go to steal a statue from the Tartars of Crimea. The statue must have

been very badly made, and there was nothing to gain on such an effect. Since

then we have done better, we have invented the mysteries; the guilty might

there receive their absolution by undergoing painful ordeals, and by swearing

that they would lead a new life. It is from this oath that the new members

were called among all nations by a name which corresponds to initiates, qui

ineunt vitam novam, who began a new career, who entered into the path of

virtue.

  The  Christian  catechumens  were  called  initiates  only  when  they  were

baptised.

  It is undoubted that in these mysteries one was washed of one's faults only

by the oath to be virtuous; that is so true that the hierophant in all the Greek

mysteries, in sending away the assembly, pronounced these two Egyptian

words-"Koth, ompheth, watch, be pure"; which is a proof at once that the

mysteries came originally from Egypt, and that they were invented only to

make men better.

  The sages in all times did what they could, therefore, to inspire virtue, and

not to reduce human frailty to despair; but also there are crimes so horrible

that  no  mystery  accorded  expiation  for  them.  Nero,  for  all  that  he  was

emperor,  could  not  get  himself  initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  Ceres.

Constantine,  on  the  Report  of  Zosimus,  could  not  obtain  pardon  for  his

crimes: he was stained with the blood of his wife, his son and all his kindred.

It was in the interest of the human race that such great transgressions should

remain  without  expiation,  in  order  that  absolution  should  not  invite  their

committal, and that universal horror might sometimes stop the villains.

  The Roman Catholics have expiations which are called "penitences."  By the laws of the barbarians who destroyed the Roman Empire, crimes

were expiated with money. That was called compounding, componat cum

decem, viginti, triginta solidis. It cost two hundred sous of that time to kill a

priest, and four hundred for killing a bishop; so that a bishop was worth

precisely two priests.

  Having thus compounded with men, one compounded with God, when

confession was generally established. Finally, Pope John XXII., who made

money out of everything, prepared a tariff of sins.

  The absolution of an incest, four turonenses for a layman; ab incestu pro

laico in foro conscientiæ turonenses quatuor. For the man and the woman

who have committed incest, eighteen turonenses four ducats and nine carlins.

That is not just; if one person pays only four turonenses, the two owed only

eight turonenses.

  Sodomy and bestiality are put at the same rate, with the inhibitory clause

to title XLIII: that amounts to ninety turonenses twelve ducats and six carlins:

cum inhibitione turonenses 90, ducatos 12, carlinos 6, etc.

  It is very difficult to believe that Leo X. was so imprudent as to have this

impost printed in 1514, as is asserted; but it must be considered that no spark

appeared at that time of the conflagration which reformers kindled later, that

the court of Rome slumbered on the people's credulity, and neglected to cover

its exactions with the lightest veil. The public sale of indulgences, which

followed soon after, makes it clear that this court took no precaution to hide

the  turpitudes  to  which  so  many  nations  were  accustomed.  As  soon  as

complaints against the Church's abuses burst forth, the court did what it could

to suppress the book; but it could not succeed.

  If I dare give my opinion of this impost, I think that the various editions

are not reliable; the prices are not at all proportionate: these prices do not

agree with those which are alleged by d'Aubigné, grandfather of Madame de

Maintenon, in the "Confession de Sanci"; he rates virginity at six gros, and

incest with his mother and sister at five gros; this account is ridiculous. I

think that there was in fact a tariff established in the datary's office, for those

who came to Rome to be absolved, or to bargain for dispensations; but that

the enemies of Rome added much to it in order to render it more odious.

  What is quite certain is that these imposts were never authorized by anycouncil; that it was an enormous abuse invented by avarice, and respected by

those whose interest it was not to abolish it. The buyers and the sellers were

equally  satisfied:  thus,  barely  anybody  protested,  until  the  troubles  of  the

reformation. It must be admitted that an exact note of all these imposts would

be of great service to the history of the human mind.


  EXTREME


  We shall try to extract from this word extreme a notion which may be

useful.

  One disputes every day if, in war, luck or leadership produces successes.

  If, in disease, nature acts more than medicine for curing or killing.

  If, in jurisprudence, it is not very advantageous to come to terms when one

is in the right, and to plead when one is in the wrong.

  If literature contributes to the glory of a nation or to its decadence.

  If one should or should not make the people superstitious.

  If there is anything true in metaphysics, history and moral philosophy.

  If taste is arbitrary, and if there is in fact good taste and bad taste, etc., etc.

  To decide all these questions right away, take an example of what is the

most extreme in each; compare the two opposed extremes, and you will at

once discover which is true.

  You wish to know if leadership can infallibly determine the success of the

war; look at the most extreme case, the most opposed situations, in which

leadership alone will infallibly triumph. The enemy's army is forced to pass

through a deep mountain gorge; your general knows it: he makes a forced

march, he takes possession of the heights, he holds the enemy shut in a pass;

they must either die or surrender. In this extreme case, luck cannot have any

part in the victory. It is therefore demonstrated that skill can determine the

success of a campaign; from that alone is it proved that war is an art.

  Now imagine an advantageous but less decisive position; success is not so

certain, but it is always very probable. You arrive thus, step by step, to a

perfect equality between the two armies. What will decide then? luck, that isto say an unforeseen event, a general officer killed when he is on his way to

execute an important order, a corps which is shaken by a false rumour, a

panic and a thousand other cases which cannot be remedied by prudence; but

it still remains certain that there is an art, a generalship.

  As much must be said of medicine, of this art of operating on the head and

the hand, to restore life to a man who is about to lose it.

  The first man who at the right moment bled and purged a sufferer from an

apoplectic fit; the first man who thought of plunging a knife into the bladder

in order to extract a stone, and of closing the wound again; the first man who

knew  how  to  stop  gangrene  in  a  part  of  the  body,  were  without  a  doubt

almost divine persons, and did not resemble Molière's doctors.

  Descend from this obvious example to experiments that are less striking

and more equivocal; you see fevers, ills of all kinds which are cured, without

it being well proved if it be nature or the doctor who has cured them; you see

diseases of which the result cannot be guessed; twenty doctors are deceived;

the one that has the most intelligence, the surest eye, guesses the character of

the  malady.  There  is  therefore  an  art;  and  the  superior  man  knows  the

finenesses of it. Thus did La Peyronie guess that a man of the court had

swallowed a pointed bone which had caused an ulcer, and put him in danger

of death; thus did Boerhaave guess the cause of the malady as unknown as

cruel of a count of Vassenaar. There is therefore really an art of medicine; but

in all arts there are men like Virgil and Mævius.

  In jurisprudence, take a clear case, in which the law speaks clearly; a bill

of  exchange  properly  prepared  and  accepted;  the  acceptor  must  be

condemned  to  pay  it  in  every  country.  There  is  therefore  a  useful

jurisprudence, although in a thousand cases judgments are arbitrary, to the

misfortune of the human race, because the laws are badly made.

  Do you desire to know if literature does good to a nation; compare the two

extremes, Cicero and an uncouth ignoramus. See if it is Pliny or Attila who

caused the fall of Rome.

  One asks if one should encourage superstition in the people; see above all

what  is  most  extreme  in  this  disastrous  matter,  St.  Bartholomew,  the

massacres in Ireland, the crusades; the question is soon answered.  Is there any truth in metaphysics? Seize first of all the points that are most

astonishing and the most true; something exists for all eternity. An eternal

Being exists by Himself; this Being cannot be either wicked or inconsequent.

One must surrender to these truths; almost all the rest is given over to dispute,

and the justest mind unravels the truth while the others are seeking in the

shadows.

  It is with all things as with colours; the weakest eyes distinguish black

from white; the better, more practised eyes, discern shades that resemble each

other.


    EZOURVEIDAM


  What is this "Ezourveidam" which is in the King of France's library? It is

an ancient commentary which an ancient Brahmin composed once upon a

time, before the epoch of Alexander, on the ancient "Veidam," which was

itself much less ancient than the book of the "Shasta."

  Let us respect, I tell you, all these ancient Indians. They invented the game

of chess, and the Greeks went among them to learn geometry.

  This "Ezourveidam" was lastly translated by a Brahmin, correspondent of

the  unfortunate  French  India  Company.  It  was  brought  to  me  on  Mount

Krapack, where I have long been observing the snows; and I sent it to the

great Library of Paris, where it is better placed than in my home.

  Those who wish to consult it will see that after many revolutions produced

by the Eternal, it pleased the Eternal to form a man who was called Adimo,

and a woman whose name corresponds to that of life.

  Is this Indian anecdote taken from the Jewish books? have the Jews copied

it from the Indians? or can one say that both wrote it originally, and that fine

minds meet?

  The Jews were not permitted to think that their writers had drawn anything

from  the  Brahmins,  for  they  had  never  heard  tell  of  them.  We  are  not

permitted to think about Adam otherwise than the Jews. Consequently I hold

my tongue, and I do not think at all.  FAITH


  We have long pondered whether or no we should print this article, which

we found in an old book. Our respect for St. Peter's see restrained us. But

some pious men having convinced us that Pope Alexander VI. had nothing in

common with St. Peter, we at last decided to bring this little piece into the

light, without scruple.

  One day Prince Pico della Mirandola met Pope Alexander VI. at the house

of the courtesan Emilia, while Lucretia, the holy father's daughter, was in

child-bed, and one did not know in Rome if the child was the Pope's, or his

son's the Duke of Valentinois, or Lucretia's husband's, Alphonse of Aragon,

who  passed  for  impotent.  The  conversation  was  at  first  very  sprightly.

Cardinal Bembo records a part of it.

  "Little Pic," said the Pope, "who do you think is my grandson's father?"

  "Your son-in-law, I think," answered Pic.

  "Eh! how can you believe such folly?"

  "I believe it through faith."

  "But do you not know quite well that a man who is impotent does not

make children?"

  "Faith  consists,"  returned  Pic,  "in  believing  things  because  they  are

impossible; and, further, the honour of your house demands that Lucretia's

son  shall  not  pass  as  the  fruit  of  an  incest.  You  make  me  believe  more

incomprehensible mysteries. Have I not to be convinced that a serpent spoke,

that since then all men have been damned, that Balaam's she-ass also spoke

very eloquently, and that the walls of Jericho fell at the sound of trumpets?"

Pic forthwith ran through a litany of all the admirable things he believed.

  Alexander fell on his sofa by dint of laughing.

  "I believe all that like you," he said, "for I know well that only by faith can

I be saved, and that I shall not be saved by my works."

  "Ah! Holy Father," said Pic, "you have need of neither works nor faith;

that is good for poor profane people like us; but you who are vice-god can

believe and do all you want to. You have the keys of heaven; and without adoubt St. Peter will not close the door in your face. But for myself, I avow I

should need potent protection if, being only a poor prince, I had slept with

my daughter, and if I had used the stiletto and the cantarella as often as your

Holiness."

  Alexander could take a jest. "Let us talk seriously," he said to Prince della

Mirandola.  "Tell  me  what  merit  one  can  have  in  telling  God  that  one  is

persuaded of things of which in fact one cannot be persuaded? What pleasure

can  that  give  God?  Between  ourselves,  saying  that  one  believes  what  is

impossible to believe is lying."

  Pico della Mirandola made a great sign of the cross. "Eh! paternal God,"

he cried, "may your Holiness pardon me, you are not a Christian."

  "No, by my faith," said the Pope.

  "I thought as much," said Pico della Mirandola.


  FALSE MINDS


  We have blind men, one-eyed men, squint-eyed men, men with long sight,

short sight, clear sight, dim sight, weak sight. All that is a faithful enough

image of our understanding; but we are barely acquainted with false sight.

There are hardly men who always take a cock for a horse, or a chamber-pot

for a house. Why do we often come across minds otherwise just enough,

which are absolutely false on important things? Why does this same Siamese

who will never let himself be cheated when there is question of counting him

three rupees, firmly believe in the metamorphoses of Sammonocodom? By

what strange singularity do sensible men resemble Don Quixote who thought

he saw giants where other men saw only windmills? Still, Don Quixote was

more excusable than the Siamese who believes that Sammonocodom came

several times on earth, and than the Turk who is persuaded that Mahomet put

half the moon in his sleeve; for Don Quixote, struck with the idea that he

must fight giants, can figure to himself that a giant must have a body as big as

a mill; but from what supposition can a sensible man set off to persuade

himself  that  the  half  of  the  moon  has  gone  into  a  sleeve,  and  that  a

Sammonocodom  has  come  down  from  heaven  to  play  at  shuttlecock,  cut

down a forest, and perform feats of legerdemain?  The greatest geniuses can have false judgment about a principle they have

accepted  without  examination.  Newton  had  very  false  judgment  when  he

commentated the Apocalypse.

  All that certain tyrants of the souls desire is that the men they teach shall

have  false  judgment.  A  fakir  rears  a  child  who  gives  much  promise;  he

spends five or six years in driving into his head that the god Fo appeared to

men as a white elephant, and he persuades the child that he will be whipped

after his death for five hundred thousand years if he does not believe these

metamorphoses. He adds that at the end of the world the enemy of the god Fo

will come to fight against this divinity.

  The  child  studies  and  becomes  a  prodigy;  he  argues  on  his  master's

lessons; he finds that Fo has only been able to change himself into a white

elephant, because that is the most beautiful of animals. "The kings of Siam

and Pegu," he says, "have made war for a white elephant; certainly if Fo had

not  been  hidden  in  that  elephant,  these  kings  would  not  have  been  so

senseless as to fight simply for the possession of an animal.

  "The enemy of Fo will come to defy him at the end of the world; certainly

this enemy will be a rhinoceros, for the rhinoceros fights the elephant." It is

thus that in mature age the fakir's learned pupil reasons, and he becomes one

of the lights of India; the more subtle his mind, the more false is it, and he

forms later minds as false as his.

  One shows all these fanatics a little geometry, and they learn it easily

enough; but strange to relate, their minds are not straightened for that; they

perceive the truths of geometry; but they do not learn to weigh probabilities;

they have got into a habit; they will reason crookedly all their lives, and I am

sorry for them.

  There are unfortunately many ways of having a false mind:

  1.  By  not  examining  if  the  principle  is  true,  even  when  one  deduces

accurate consequences therefrom; and this way is common.

  2. By drawing false consequences from a principle recognized as true. For

example,  a  servant  is  asked  if  his  master  is  in  his  room,  by  persons  he

suspects of wanting his life: if he were foolish enough to tell them the truth

on the pretext that one must not lie, it is clear he would be drawing an absurdconsequence from a very true principle.

  A judge who would condemn a man who has killed his assassin, because

homicide is forbidden, would be as iniquitous as he was poor reasoner.

  Similar cases are subdivided in a thousand different gradations. The good

mind, the just mind, is that which distinguishes them; whence comes that one

has seen so many iniquitous judgments, not because the judges' hearts were

bad, but because they were not sufficiently enlightened.


  FATHERLAND


  A young journeyman pastrycook who had been to college, and who still

knew a few of Cicero's phrases, boasted one day of loving his fatherland.

"What do you mean by your fatherland?" a neighbour asked him. "Is it your

oven? is it the village where you were born and which you have never seen

since? is it the street where dwelled your father and mother who have been

ruined and have reduced you to baking little pies for a living? is it the town-

hall where you will never be police superintendent's clerk? is it the church of

Our Lady where you have not been able to become a choir-boy, while an

absurd  man  is  archbishop  and  duke  with  an  income  of  twenty  thousand

golden louis?"

  The journeyman pastrycook did not know what to answer. A thinker who

was listening to this conversation, concluded that in a fatherland of some

extent there were often many thousand men who had no fatherland.

  You, pleasure loving Parisian, who have never made any great journey

save that to Dieppe to eat fresh fish; who know nothing but your varnished

town house, your pretty country house, and your box at that Opera where the

rest  of  Europe  persists  in  feeling  bored;  who  speak  your  own  language

agreeably enough because you know no other, you love all that, and you love

further the girls you keep, the champagne which comes to you from Rheims,

the dividends which the Hôtel-de-Ville pays you every six months, and you

say you love your fatherland!

  In all conscience, does a financier cordially love his fatherland?

  The officer and the soldier who will pillage their winter quarters, if onelets them, have they a very warm love for the peasants they ruin?

  Where was the fatherland of the scarred Duc de Guise, was it in Nancy,

Paris, Madrid, Rome?

  What  fatherland  have  you,  Cardinals  de  La  Balue,  Duprat,  Lorraine,

Mazarin?

  Where was the fatherland of Attila and of a hundred heroes of this type?

  I would like someone to tell me which was Abraham's fatherland.

  The  first  man  to  write  that  the  fatherland  is  wherever  one  feels

comfortable was, I believe, Euripides in his "Phaeton." But the first man who

left his birthplace to seek his comfort elsewhere had said it before him.

  Where then is the fatherland? Is it not a good field, whose owner, lodged

in a well-kept house, can say: "This field that I till, this house that I have

built, are mine; I live there protected by laws which no tyrant can infringe.

When those who, like me, possess fields and houses, meet in their common

interest, I have my voice in the assembly; I am a part of everything, a part of

the community, a part of the dominion; there is my fatherland."?

  Well now, is it better for your fatherland to be a monarchy or a republic?

For four thousand years has this question been debated. Ask the rich for an

answer, they all prefer aristocracy; question the people, they want democracy:

only  kings  prefer  royalty.  How  then  is  it  that  nearly  the  whole  world  is

governed by monarchs? Ask the rats who proposed to hang a bell round the

cat's neck. But in truth, the real reason is, as has been said, that men are very

rarely worthy of governing themselves.

  It is sad that often in order to be a good patriot one is the enemy of the rest

of mankind. To be a good patriot is to wish that one's city may be enriched by

trade,  and  be  powerful  by  arms.  It  is  clear  that  one  country  cannot  gain

without another loses, and that it cannot conquer without making misery.

Such then is the human state that to wish for one's country's greatness is to

wish harm to one's neighbours. He who should wish that his fatherland might

never be greater, smaller, richer, poorer, would be the citizen of the world.


  FINAL CAUSES  If a clock is not made to tell the hour, I will then admit that final causes

are chimeras; and I shall consider it quite right for people to call me "cause-

finalier," that is-an imbecile.

  All the pieces of the machine of this world seem, however, made for each

other.  A  few  philosophers  affect  to  mock  at  the  final  causes  rejected  by

Epicurus and Lucretius. It is, it seems to me, at Epicurus and Lucretius rather

that they should mock. They tell you that the eye is not made for seeing, but

that man has availed himself of it for this purpose when he perceived that

eyes  could  be  so  used.  According  to  them,  the  mouth  is  not  made  for

speaking, for eating, the stomach for digesting, the heart for receiving the

blood from the veins and for dispatching it through the arteries, the feet for

walking, the ears for hearing. These persons avow nevertheless that tailors

make them coats to clothe them, and masons houses to lodge them, and they

dare deny to nature, to the great Being, to the universal Intelligence, what

they accord to the least of their workmen.

  Of course one must not make an abuse of final causes; we have remarked

that in vain Mr. Prieur, in "The Spectacle of Nature," maintains that the tides

are given to the ocean so that vessels may enter port more easily, and to stop

the water of the sea from putrefying. In vain would he say that legs are made

to be booted, and the nose to wear spectacles.

  In  order  that  one  may  be  certain  of  the  true  end  for  which  a  cause

functions,  it  is  essential  that  that  effect  shall  exist  at  all  times  and  in  all

places. There were not ships at all times and on all the seas; hence one cannot

say that the ocean was made for the ships. One feels how ridiculous it would

be to maintain that nature had worked from all time in order to adjust herself

to the inventions of our arbitrary arts, which appeared so late; but it is quite

evident that if noses were not made for spectacles, they were for smelling,

and that there have been noses ever since there have been men. Similarly,

hands  not  having  been  given  on  behalf  of  glove-makers,  they  are  visibly

destined for all the purposes which the metacarpal bones and the phalanges

and the circular muscle of the wrist may procure for us.

  Cicero, who doubted everything, did not, however, doubt final causes.

  It seems especially difficult for the organs of generation not to be destined

to  perpetuate  the  species.  This  mechanism  is  very  admirable,  but  thesensation which nature has joined to this mechanism is still more admirable.

Epicurus had to avow that pleasure is divine; and that this pleasure is a final

cause, by which are ceaselessly produced sentient beings who have not been

able to give themselves sensation.

  This Epicurus was a great man for his time; he saw what Descartes denied,

what  Gassendi  affirmed,  what  Newton  demonstrated,  that  there  is  no

movement without space. He conceived the necessity of atoms to serve as

constituent parts of invariable species. Those are exceedingly philosophical

ideas. Nothing was especially more worthy of respect than the moral system

of the true Epicureans; it consisted in the removal to a distance of public

matters incompatible with wisdom, and in friendship, without which life is a

burden. But as regards the rest of Epicurus' physics, they do not appear any

more admissible than Descartes' channelled matter. It is, it seems to me, to

stop  one's  eyes  and  understanding  to  maintain  that  there  is  no  design  in

nature; and if there is design, there is an intelligent cause, there exists a God.

  People  present  to  us  as  objections  the  irregularities  of  the  globe,  the

volcanoes, the plains of shifting sands, a few small mountains destroyed and

others formed by earthquakes, etc. But from the fact that the naves of the

wheels of your coach have caught fire, does it ensue that your coach was not

made expressly to carry you from one place to another?

  The chains of mountains which crown the two hemispheres, and more than

six hundred rivers which flow right to the sea from the feet of these rocks; all

the streams which come down from these same reservoirs, and which swell

the rivers, after fertilizing the country; the thousands of fountains which start

from the same source, and which water animal and vegetable kind; all these

things seem no more the effect of a fortuitous cause and of a declension of

atoms, than the retina which receives the rays of light, the crystalline lens

which  refracts  them,  the  incus,  the  malleus,  the  stapes,  the  tympanic

membrane of the ear, which receives the sounds, the paths of the blood in our

veins, the systole and diastole of the heart, this pendulum of the machine

which makes life.


  FRAUD  Bambabef the fakir one day met one of the disciples of Confutzee, whom

we call "Confucius," and this disciple was named "Ouang," and Bambabef

maintained that the people had need of being deceived, and Ouang claimed

that one should never deceive anybody; and here is the summary of their

dispute:

  BAMBABEF:

  We must imitate the Supreme Being who does not show us things as they

are; he makes us see the sun in a diameter of two or three feet, although this

star is a million times bigger than the earth; he makes us see the moon and

the  stars  set  on  the  same  blue  background,  whereas  they  are  at  different

depths.  He  requires  that  a  square  tower  shall  appear  round  to  us  from  a

distance; he requires that fire shall seem hot to us, although it is neither hot

nor cold; in fine, he surrounds us with errors suited to our nature.

  OUANG:

  What you name error is not one at all. The sun, placed as it is at millions

of millions of lis[6] beyond our globe, is not the sun we see. We perceive in

reality, and we can perceive, only the sun which is depicted in our retina at a

determined angle. Our eyes have not been given us for appreciating sizes and

distances, we need other aids and other operations to appreciate them.

  Bambabef seemed very astonished at this proposition. Ouang, who was

very patient, explained to him the theory of optics; and Bambabef, who had a

quick  understanding,  surrendered  to  the  demonstrations  of  Confutzee's

disciple, then he resumed the argument.

  BAMBABEF:

  If  God  does  not  deceive  us  through  the  medium  of  our  senses,  as  I

believed, avow at least that doctors always deceive children for their good;

they tell them that they are giving them sugar, and in fact they are giving

them rhubarb. I, a fakir, may then deceive the people who are as ignorant as

the children.

  OUANG:

  I have two sons; I have never deceived them; when they have been ill I

have told them that there was a very bitter medicine, and that they must have

the courage to take it; "it would harm you if it were sweet." I have neverallowed their masters and teachers to make them afraid of spirits, ghosts,

goblins, sorcerers; by this means I have made brave, wise young citizens of

them.

  BAMBABEF:

  The people are not born so happily as your family.

  OUANG:

  All men are alike, or nearly so; they are born with the same dispositions.

One must not corrupt men's natures.

  BAMBABEF:

  We teach them errors, I admit, but it is for their good. We make them

believe that if they do not buy the nails we have blessed, if they do not

expiate their sins by giving us money, they will become, in another life, post-

horses,  dogs  or  lizards.  That  intimidates  them,  and  they  become  honest

people.

  OUANG:

  Do  you  not  see  that  you  are  perverting  these  poor  people?  There  are

among  them  many  more  than  you  think  who  reason,  who  laugh  at  your

miracles,  at  your  superstitions,  who  see  quite  well  that  they  will  not  be

changed into either lizards or post-horses. What is the consequence? They

have enough sense to see that you are telling them impertinences, and they

have not enough to raise themselves toward a religion that is pure and free

from superstition, such as ours. Their passions make them believe that there

is no religion at all, because the only one that is taught them is ridiculous;

you become guilty of all the vices in which they are plunged.

  BAMBABEF:

  Not at all, for we do not teach them anything but good morality.

  OUANG:

  You  would  have  yourselves  stoned  by  the  people  if  you  taught  them

impure morality. Men are so made that they want to do evil, but that they do

not want it preached to them. All that is necessary is that you should not mix

a wise moral system with absurd fables, because you weaken through your

impostures, which you can do without, the morality that you are forced toteach.

  BAMBABEF:

  What!  you  believe  that  one  can  teach  the  people  truth  without

strengthening it with fables?

  OUANG:

  I firmly believe it. Our literati are of the same stuff as our tailors, our

weavers  and  our  husbandmen.  They  worship  a  God  creator,  rewarder,

avenger. They do not sully their worship, either by absurd systems, or by

extravagant ceremonies; and there are far less crimes among the literati than

among the people. Why not deign to instruct our workmen as we instruct our

literati?

  BAMBABEF:

  You would be very foolish; it is as if you wanted them to have the same

courtesy, to be lawyers; that is neither possible nor proper. There must be

white bread for the masters, and brown bread for the servants.

  OUANG:

  I admit that all men should not have the same learning; but there are some

things necessary to all. It is necessary that all men should be just; and the

surest way of inspiring all men with justice is to inspire in them religion

without superstition.

  BAMBABEF:

  It is a fine project, but it is impracticable. Do you think that men will be

satisfied to believe in a God who punishes and rewards? You have told me

that it often happens that the most shrewd among the people revolt against

my fables; they will revolt in the same way against truth. They will say:

"Who will assure me that God punishes and rewards? where is the proof of

it? what is your mission? what miracle have you performed that I may believe

you?" They will laugh at you much more than at me.

  OUANG:

  That is where you are mistaken. You imagine that people will shake off

the yoke of an honest, probable idea that is useful to everyone, of an idea in

accordance  with  human  reason,  because  people  reject  things  that  aredishonest, absurd, useless, dangerous, that make good sense shudder.

  The  people  are  very  disposed  to  believe  their  magistrates:  when  their

magistrates  propose  to  them  only  a  reasonable  belief,  they  embrace  it

willingly. There is no need of prodigies for believing in a just God, who reads

in man's heart; this idea is too natural, too necessary, to be combated. It is not

necessary to say precisely how God will punish and reward; it suffices that

people believe in His justice. I assure you I have seen entire towns which

have had barely any other dogma, and that it is in those towns that I have

seen most virtue.

  BAMBABEF:

  Take care; in those towns you will find philosophers who will deny you

both your pains and your recompenses.

  OUANG:

  You will admit to me that these philosophers will deny your inventions

still  more  strongly;  so  you  gain  nothing  from  that.  Though  there  are

philosophers who do not agree with my principles, there are honest people

none the less; none the less do they cultivate the virtue of them, which must

be  embraced  by  love,  and  not  by  fear.  But,  further,  I  maintain  that  no

philosopher would ever be assured that Providence did not reserve pains for

the wicked and rewards for the good. For if they ask me who told me that

God punishes? I shall ask them who has told them that God does not punish.

In fine, I maintain that these philosophers, far from contradicting me, will

help me. Would you like to be a philosopher?

  BAMBABEF:

  Willingly; but do not tell the fakirs.

  OUANG:

  Let us think above all that, if a philosopher wishes to be useful to human

society, he must announce a God.


  FOOTNOTES:

  [6] A li is 124 paces.    FREE-WILL


  Ever since men have reasoned, the philosophers have obscured this matter:

but the theologians have rendered it unintelligible by absurd subtleties about

grace. Locke is perhaps the first man to find a thread in this labyrinth; for he

is the first who, without having the arrogance of trusting in setting out from a

general principle, examined human nature by analysis. For three thousand

years people have disputed whether or no the will is free. In the "Essay on the

Human Understanding," chapter on "Power," Locke shows first of all that the

question is absurd, and that liberty can no more belong to the will than can

colour and movement.

  What is the meaning of this phrase "to be free"? it means "to be able," or

assuredly it has no sense. For the will "to be able" is as ridiculous at bottom

as to say that the will is yellow or blue, round or square. To will is to wish,

and to be free is to be able. Let us note step by step the chain of what passes

in us, without obfuscating our minds by any terms of the schools or any

antecedent principle.

  It is proposed to you that you mount a horse, you must absolutely make a

choice, for it is quite clear that you either will go or that you will not go.

There is no middle way. It is therefore of absolute necessity that you wish yes

or no. Up to there it is demonstrated that the will is not free. You wish to

mount the horse; why? The reason, an ignoramus will say, is because I wish

it. This answer is idiotic, nothing happens or can happen without a reason, a

cause; there is one therefore for your wish. What is it? the agreeable idea of

going on horseback which presents itself in your brain, the dominant idea, the

determinant idea. But, you will say, can I not resist an idea which dominates

me? No, for what would be the cause of your resistance? None. By your will

you can obey only an idea which will dominate you more.

  Now you receive all your ideas; therefore you receive your wish, you wish

therefore necessarily. The word "liberty" does not therefore belong in any

way to your will.

  You ask me how thought and wish are formed in us. I answer you that I

have not the remotest idea. I do not know how ideas are made any more than

how the world was made. All that is given to us is to grope for what passes inour incomprehensible machine.

  The will, therefore, is not a faculty that one can call free. A free will is an

expression absolutely void of sense, and what the scholastics have called will

of indifference, that is to say willing without cause, is a chimera unworthy of

being combated.

  Where will be liberty then? in the power to do what one wills. I wish to

leave my study, the door is open, I am free to leave it.

  But, say you, if the door is closed, and I wish to stay at home, I stay there

freely.  Let  us  be  explicit.  You  exercise  then  the  power  that  you  have  of

staying; you have this power, but you have not that of going out.

  The liberty about which so many volumes have been written is, therefore,

reduced to its accurate terms, only the power of acting.

  In what sense then must one utter the phrase-"Man is free"? in the same

sense that one utters the words, health, strength, happiness. Man is not always

strong, always healthy, always happy.

  A great passion, a great obstacle, deprive him of his liberty, his power of

action.

  The word "liberty," "free-will," is therefore an abstract word, a general

word, like beauty, goodness, justice. These terms do not state that all men are

always beautiful, good and just; similarly, they are not always free.

  Let us go further: this liberty being only the power of acting, what is this

power? It is the effect of the constitution and present state of our organs.

Leibnitz wishes to resolve a geometrical problem, he has an apoplectic fit, he

certainly has not liberty to resolve his problem. Is a vigorous young man,

madly in love, who holds his willing mistress in his arms, free to tame his

passion? undoubtedly not. He has the power of enjoying, and has not the

power of refraining. Locke was therefore very right to call liberty "power."

When  is  it  that  this  young  man  can  refrain  despite  the  violence  of  his

passion? when a stronger idea determines in a contrary sense the activity of

his body and his soul.

  But what! the other animals will have the same liberty, then, the same

power? Why not? They have senses, memory, feeling, perceptions, as we

have. They act with spontaneity as we act. They must have also, as we have,the power of acting by virtue of their perceptions, by virtue of the play of

their organs.

  Someone cries: "If it be so, everything is only machine, everything in the

universe is subjected to eternal laws." Well! would you have everything at the

pleasure of a million blind caprices? Either everything is the sequence of the

necessity of the nature of things, or everything is the effect of the eternal

order of an absolute master; in both cases we are only wheels in the machine

of the world.

  It is a vain witticism, a commonplace to say that without the pretended

liberty of the will, all pains and rewards are useless. Reason, and you will

come to a quite contrary conclusion.

  If  a  brigand  is  executed,  his  accomplice  who  sees  him  expire  has  the

liberty of not being frightened at the punishment; if his will is determined by

itself, he will go from the foot of the scaffold to assassinate on the broad

highway;  if  his  organs,  stricken  with  horror,  make  him  experience  an

unconquerable  terror,  he  will  stop  robbing.  His  companion's  punishment

becomes useful to him and an insurance for society only so long as his will is

not free.

  Liberty then is only and can be only the power to do what one will. That is

what philosophy teaches us. But if one considers liberty in the theological

sense, it is a matter so sublime that profane eyes dare not raise themselves to

it.[7]


  FOOTNOTES:

  [7] See "Liberty."


  FRENCH


  The French language did not begin to have any form until towards the

tenth century; it was born from the ruins of Latin and Celtic, mixed with a

few Germanic words. This language was first of all the romanum rusticum,

rustic Roman, and the Germanic language was the court language up to the

time of Charles the Bald; Germanic remained the sole language of Germanyafter the great epoch of the partition of 843. Rustic Roman, the Romance

language, prevailed in Western France; the people of the country of Vaud, of

the Valais, of the Engadine valley, and of a few other cantons, still retain to-

day manifest vestiges of this idiom.

  At the end of the tenth century French was formed; people wrote in French

at the beginning of the eleventh; but this French still retained more of Rustic

Roman than the French of to-day. The romance of Philomena, written in the

tenth century in rustic Roman, is not in a tongue very different from that of

the Norman laws. One still remarks Celtic, Latin and German derivations.

The words signifying the parts of the human body, or things of daily use, and

which have nothing in common with Latin or German, are in old Gaulish or

Celtic,  such  as  tête,  jambe,  sabre,  pointe,  aller,  parler,  écouter,  regarder,

aboyer, crier, coutume, ensemble, and many others of this kind. Most of the

terms of war were Frank or German: Marche, halte, maréchal, bivouac, reitre,

lansquenet.  All  the  rest  is  Latin;  and  all  the  Latin  words  were  abridged,

according to the custom and genius of the nations of the north; thus from

palatium, palais; from lupus, loup; from Auguste, août; from Junius, juin;

from unctus, oint; from purpura, pourpre; from pretium, prix, etc. Hardly

were there left any vestiges of the Greek tongue, which had been so long

spoken at Marseilles.

  In the twelfth century there began to be introduced into the language some

of the terms of Aristotle's philosophy; and towards the sixteenth century one

expressed by Greek terms all the parts of the human body, their diseases,

their  remedies;  whence  the  words  cardiaque,  céphalique,  podagre,

apoplectique, asthmatique, iliaque, empyème, and so many others. Although

the language then enriched itself from the Greek, and although since Charles

VIII.  it  had  drawn  much  aid  from  Italian  already  perfected,  the  French

language had not yet taken regular consistence. François Ier abolished the

ancient custom of pleading, judging, contracting in Latin; custom which bore

witness to the barbarism of a language which one did not dare use in public

documents, a pernicious custom for citizens whose lot was regulated in a

language they did not understand. One was obliged then to cultivate French;

but  the  language  was  neither  noble  nor  regular.  The  syntax  was  left  to

caprice.  The  genius  for  conversation  being  turned  to  pleasantries,  the

language became very fertile in burlesque and naïve expressions, and verysterile in noble and harmonious terms: from this it comes that in rhyming

dictionaries one finds twenty terms suitable for comic poetry, for one for

more exalted use; and it is, further, a reason why Marot never succeeded in a

serious  style,  and  why  Amyot  could  render  Plutarch's  elegance  only  with

naïveté.

  French  acquired  vigour  beneath  the  pen  of  Montaigne;  but  it  still  had

neither nobility nor harmony. Ronsard spoiled the language by bringing into

French  poetry  the  Greek  compounds  which  the  doctors  and  philosophers

used. Malherbe repaired Ronsard's mischief somewhat. The language became

more noble and more harmonious with the establishment of the Académie

Française, and acquired finally, in the reign of Louis XIV., the perfection

whereby it might be carried into all forms of composition.

  The genius of this language is order and clarity; for each language has its

genius, and this genius consists in the facility which the language gives for

expressing oneself more or less happily, for using or rejecting the familiar

twists of other languages. French having no declensions, and being always

subject to the article, cannot adopt Greek and Latin inversions; it obliges

words to arrange themselves in the natural order of ideas. Only in one way

can one say "Plancus a pris soin des affaires de César." That is the only

arrangement one can give to these words. Express this phrase in Latin-Res

Cæsaris Plancus diligenter curavit: one can arrange these words in a hundred

and  twenty  ways,  without  injuring  the  sense  and  without  troubling  the

language.  The  auxiliary  verbs  which  eke  out  and  enervate  the  phrases  in

modern languages, still render the French tongue little suited to the concise

lapidary  style.  The  auxiliary  verbs,  its  pronouns,  its  articles,  its  lack  of

declinable participles, and finally its uniform gait, are injurious to the great

enthusiasm of poetry, in which it has less resources than Italian and English;

but this constraint and this bondage render it more suitable for tragedy and

comedy  than  any  language  in  Europe.  The  natural  order  in  which  one  is

obliged to express one's thoughts and construct one's phrases, diffuses in this

language a sweetness and easiness that is pleasing to all peoples; and the

genius of the nation mingling with the genius of the language has produced

more agreeably written books than can be seen among any other people.

  The  pleasure  and  liberty  of  society  having  been  long  known  only  in

France, the language has received therefrom a delicacy of expression and afinesse  full  of  simplicity  barely  to  be  found  elsewhere.  This  finesse  has

sometimes been exaggerated, but people of taste have always known how to

reduce it within just limits.

  Many  persons  have  thought  that  the  French  language  has  become

impoverished since the time of Amyot and Montaigne: one does indeed find

in many authors expressions which are no longer admissible; but they are for

the  most  part  familiar  expressions  for  which  equivalents  have  been

substituted. The language has been enriched with a quantity of noble and

energetic expressions; and without speaking here of the eloquence of things,

it has acquired the eloquence of words. It is in the reign of Louis XIV., as has

been  said,  that  this  eloquence  had  its  greatest  splendour,  and  that  the

language was fixed. Whatever changes time and caprice prepare for it, the

good authors of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries will always serve as

models.


  FRIENDSHIP


  Friendship  is  the  marriage  of  the  soul;  and  this  marriage  is  subject  to

divorce. It is a tacit contract between two sensitive and virtuous persons. I say

"sensitive," because a monk, a recluse can be not wicked and live without

knowing what friendship is. I say "virtuous," because the wicked have only

accomplices;  voluptuaries  have  companions  in  debauch,  self-seekers  have

partners,  politicians  get  partisans;  the  generality  of  idle  men  have

attachments;  princes  have  courtiers;  virtuous  men  alone  have  friends.

Cethegus  was  the  accomplice  of  Catilina,  and  Maecenas  the  courtier  of

Octavius; but Cicero was the friend of Atticus.


  GOD


  During  the  reign  of  Arcadius,  Logomacos,  lecturer  in  theology  of

Constantinople, went to Scythia and halted at the foot of the Caucasus, in the

fertile plains of Zephirim, on the frontier of Colchis. That good old man

Dondindac was in his great lower hall, between his sheepfold and his vast

barn; he was kneeling with his wife, his five sons and five daughters, hiskindred and his servants, and after a light meal they were all singing God's

praises. "What do you there, idolator?" said Logomacos to him.

  "I am not an idolator," answered Dondindac.

  "You  must  be  an  idolator,"  said  Logomacos,  "seeing  that  you  are  not

Greek. Tell me, what was that you were singing in your barbarous Scythian

jargon?"

  "All tongues are equal in the ears of God," answered the Scythian. "We

were singing His praises."

  "That's very extraordinary," returned the theologian. "A Scythian family

who  pray  God  without  having  been  taught  by  us!"  He  soon  engaged

Dondindac the Scythian in conversation, for he knew a little Scythian, and

the  other  a  little  Greek.  The  following  conversation  was  found  in  a

manuscript preserved in the library of Constantinople.


  LOGOMACOS:

  Let us see if you know your catechism. Why do you pray God?

    DONDINDAC:

  Because it is right to worship the Supreme Being from whom we hold

everything.

  LOGOMACOS:

  Not bad for a barbarian! And what do you ask of Him?

    DONDINDAC:

  I thank Him for the benefits I enjoy, and even for the ills with which He

tries me; but I take good care not to ask Him for anything; He knows better

than us what we need, and besides, I am afraid to ask Him for good weather

when my neighbour is asking for rain.

  LOGOMACOS:

  Ah!  I  thought  he  was  going  to  say  something  silly.  Let  us  start  again

farther back. Barbarian, who has told you there is a God?

    DONDINDAC:  The whole of nature.

  LOGOMACOS:

  That does not suffice. What idea have you of God?

    DONDINDAC:

  The idea of my creator, of my master, who will reward me if I do good,

and who will punish me if I do ill.

  LOGOMACOS:

  Trash,  nonsense  all  that!  Let  us  come  to  essentials.  Is  God  infinite

secundum quid, or in essence?

    DONDINDAC:

  I don't understand you.

  LOGOMACOS:

  Brutish fool! Is God in one place, beyond all places, or in all places?

    DONDINDAC:

  I have no idea ... just as you please.

  LOGOMACOS:

  Dolt! Is it possible for what has been not to have been, and can a stick not

have two ends? Does He see the future as future or as present? how does He

draw the being out of non-existence, and how annihilate the being?

    DONDINDAC:

  I have never examined these things.

  LOGOMACOS:

  What  a  blockhead!  Come,  one  must  humble  oneself,  see  things  in

proportion. Tell me, my friend, do you think that matter can be eternal?

    DONDINDAC:

  What does it matter to me whether it exists from all eternity or not? I do

not exist from all eternity. God is always my master; He has given me the

notion of justice, I must follow it; I do not want to be a philosopher, I want to

be a man.  LOGOMACOS:

  These blockheads are troublesome. Let us go step by step. What is God?

    DONDINDAC:

  My sovereign, my judge, my father.

  LOGOMACOS:

  That's not what I'm asking you. What is His nature?

    DONDINDAC:

  To be potent and good.

  LOGOMACOS:

  But, is He corporeal or spiritual?

    DONDINDAC:

  How should I know?

  LOGOMACOS:

  What! you don't know what a spirit is?

    DONDINDAC:

  Not in the least: of what use would it be to me? should I be more just?

should I be a better husband, a better father, a better master, a better citizen?

  LOGOMACOS:

  It is absolutely essential you should learn what a spirit is. It is, it is, it is ...

I will tell you another time.

    DONDINDAC:

  I'm very much afraid that you may tell me less what it is than what it is

not. Allow me to put a question to you in my turn. I once saw one of your

temples; why do you depict God with a long beard?

  LOGOMACOS:

  That's a very difficult question which needs preliminary instruction.

    DONDINDAC:

  Before receiving your instruction, I must tell you what happened to meone day. I had just built a closet at the end of my garden; I heard a mole

arguing with a cockchafer. "That's a very fine building," said the mole. "It

must have been a very powerful mole who did that piece of work."

  "You're joking," said the cockchafer. "It was a cockchafer bubbling over

with genius who is the architect of this building." From that time I resolved

never to argue.


  HELVETIA


  Happy Helvetia! to what charter do you owe your liberty? to your courage,

to your resolution, to your mountains.

  "But I am your emperor."

  "But I do not want you any longer."

  "But your fathers were my father's slaves."

  "It is for that very reason that their children do not wish to serve you."

  "But I had the right belonging to my rank."

  "And we have the right of nature."

  Why is liberty so rare?

  Because it is the chiefest good.


  HISTORY


  Definition

  History is the recital of facts given as true, in contradistinction to the fable,

which is the recital of facts given as false.

  There is the history of opinions which is hardly anything but a collection

of human errors.

  The history of the arts can be the most useful of all when it joins to the

knowledge of the invention and the progress of the arts the description of

their mechanism.  Natural history, improperly called history, is an essential part of natural

philosophy. The history of events has been divided into sacred history and

profane history; sacred history is a series of divine and miraculous operations

whereby it pleased God once on a time to lead the Jewish nation, and to-day

to exercise our faith.

  First Foundations of History

  The first foundations of all history are the recitals of the fathers to the

children, transmitted afterward from one generation to another; at their origin

they are at the very most probable, when they do not shock common sense,

and they lose one degree of probability in each generation. With time the

fable grows and the truth grows less; from this it comes that all the origins of

peoples are absurd. Thus the Egyptians had been governed by the gods for

many centuries; then they had been governed by demi-gods; finally they had

had kings for eleven thousand three hundred and forty years; and in that

space of time the sun had changed four times from east to west.

  The Phœnicians of Alexander's time claimed to have been established in

their country for thirty thousand years; and these thirty thousand years were

filled  with  as  many  prodigies  as  the  Egyptian  chronology.  I  avow  that

physically  it  is  very  possible  that  Phœnicia  has  existed  not  merely  thirty

thousand  years,  but  thirty  thousand  milliards  of  centuries,  and  that  it

experienced like the rest of the world thirty million revolutions. But we have

no knowledge of it.

  One knows what a ridiculously marvellous state of affairs ruled in the

ancient history of the Greeks.

  The Romans, for all that they were serious, did not any the less envelop

the history of their early centuries in fables. This nation, so recent compared

with the Asiatic peoples, was five hundred years without historians. It is not

surprising, therefore, that Romulus was the son of Mars, that a she-wolf was

his foster mother, that he marched with a thousand men of his village of

Rome against twenty-five thousand combatants of the village of the Sabines:

that later he became a god; that Tarquin, the ancient, cut a stone with a razor,

and that a vestal drew a ship to land with her girdle, etc.

  The  early  annals  of  all  our  modern  nations  are  no  less  fabulous;  the

prodigious and improbable things must sometimes be reported, but as proofsof human credulity: they enter the history of opinions and foolishnesses; but

the field is too vast.

  Of Records

  In order to know with a little certainty something of ancient history, there

is only one means, it is to see if any incontestable records remain. We have

only three in writing: the first is the collection of astronomical observations

made for nineteen hundred consecutive years at Babylon, sent by Alexander

to Greece. This series of observations, which goes back to two thousand two

hundred  and  thirty-four  years  before  our  era,  proves  invincibly  that  the

Babylonians existed as a body of people several centuries before; for the arts

are only the work of time, and men's natural laziness leaves them for some

thousands of years without other knowledge and without other talents than

those of feeding themselves, of defending themselves against the injuries of

the air, and of slaughtering each other. Let us judge by the Germans and by

the  English  in  Cæsar's  time,  by  the  Tartars  to-day,  by  the  two-thirds  of

Africa, and by all the peoples we have found in America, excepting in some

respects the kingdoms of Peru and of Mexico, and the republic of Tlascala.

Let us remember that in the whole of this new world nobody knew how to

read or write.

  The second record is the central eclipse of the sun, calculated in China two

thousand one hundred and fifty-five years before our era, and recognized true

by our astronomers. Of the Chinese the same thing must be said as of the

peoples of Babylon; they already comprised a vast civilized empire without a

doubt. But what puts the Chinese above all the peoples of the earth is that

neither their laws, nor their customs, nor the language spoken among them by

their  lettered  mandarins  has  changed  for  about  four  thousand  years.

Nevertheless, this nation and the nation of India, the most ancient of all those

that exist to-day, which possess the vastest and the most beautiful country,

which invented almost all the arts before we had learned any of them, have

always been omitted right to our days in all so-called universal histories. And

when a Spaniard and a Frenchman took a census of the nations, neither one

nor the other failed to call his country the first monarchy in the world, and his

king the greatest king in the world, flattering himself that his king would give

him a pension as soon as he had read his book.  The third record, very inferior to the two others, exists in the Arundel

marbles: the chronicle of Athens is graved there two hundred and sixty-three

years before our era; but it goes back only to Cecrops, thirteen hundred and

nineteen  years  beyond  the  time  when  it  was  engraved.  In  the  history  of

antiquity those are the sole incontestable epochs that we have.

  Let us give serious attention to these marbles brought back from Greece

by  Lord  Arundel.  Their  chronicle  begins  fifteen  hundred  and  eighty-two

years before our era. That is to-day (1771) an antiquity of 3,353 years, and

you  do  not  see  there  a  single  fact  touching  on  the  miraculous,  on  the

prodigious. It is the same with the Olympiads; it is not there that one should

say  Græcia  mendax,  lying  Greece.  The  Greeks  knew  very  well  how  to

distinguish between history and fable, between real facts and the tales of

Herodotus: just as in their serious affairs their orators borrowed nothing from

the speeches of the sophists or from the images of the poets.

  The  date  of  the  taking  of  Troy  is  specified  in  these  marbles;  but  no

mention is made of Apollo's arrows, or of the sacrifice of Iphigenia, or of the

ridiculous combats of the gods. The date of the inventions of Triptolemy and

Ceres is found there; but Ceres is not called goddess. Mention is made of a

poem on the abduction of Prosperine; it is not said that she is the daughter of

Jupiter and a goddess, and that she is wife of the god of the infernal regions.

  Hercules is initiated into the mysteries of Eleusis; but not a word on his

twelve labours, nor on his passage into Africa in his cup, nor on his divinity,

nor on the big fish by which he was swallowed, and which kept him in its

belly three days and three nights, according to Lycophron.

  Among us, on the contrary, a standard is brought from heaven by an angel

to the monks of Saint-Denis; a pigeon brings a bottle of oil to a church in

Rheims; two armies of snakes give themselves over to a pitched battle in

Germany; an archbishop of Mayence is besieged and eaten by rats; and, to

crown  everything,  great  care  has  been  taken  to  mark  the  year  of  these

adventures.

  All history is recent. It is not astonishing that we have no ancient profane

history beyond about four thousand years. The revolutions of this globe, the

long and universal ignorance of that art which transmits facts by writing are

the cause of it. This art was common only among a very small number ofcivilized nations; and was in very few hands even. Nothing rarer among the

French and the Germans than to know how to write; up to the fourteenth

century of our era nearly all deeds were only attested by witnesses. It was, in

France, only under Charles VII., in 1454, that one started to draft in writing

some of the customs of France. The art of writing was still rarer among the

Spanish, and from that it results that their history is so dry and so uncertain,

up to the time of Ferdinand and Isabella. One sees by that to what extent the

very small number of men who knew how to write could deceive, and how

easy it was to make us believe the most enormous absurdities.

  There  are  nations  which  have  subjugated  a  part  of  the  world  without

having the usage of characters. We know that Gengis-khan conquered a part

of Asia at the beginning of the thirteenth century, but it is not through either

him or the Tartars that we know it. Their history, written by the Chinese and

translated by Father Gaubil, states that these Tartars had not at that time the

art of writing.

  This art cannot have been less unknown to the Scythian Oguskan, named

Madies by the Persians and the Greeks, who conquered a part of Europe and

Asia so long before the reign of Cyrus. It is almost certain that at that time of

a hundred nations there were hardly two or three who used characters. It is

possible that in an ancient world destroyed, men knew writing and the other

arts; but in ours they are all very recent.

  There remain records of another kind, which serve to establish merely the

remote antiquity of certain peoples, and which precede all the known epochs,

and all the books; these are the prodigies of architecture, like the pyramids

and the palaces of Egypt, which have resisted time. Herodotus, who lived two

thousand two hundred years ago, and who had seen them, was not able to

learn from the Egyptian priests at what time they had been erected.

  It is difficult to give to the most ancient of the pyramids less than four

thousand years of antiquity; but one must consider that these efforts of the

ostentation  of  the  kings  could  only  have  been  commenced  long  after  the

establishment of the towns. But to build towns in a land inundated every year,

let us always remark that it was first necessary to raise the land of the towns

on piles in this land of mud, and to render them inaccessible to the flood; it

was essential, before taking this necessary course, and before being in a stateto  attempt  these  great  works,  for  the  people  to  have  practised  retreating

during the rising of the Nile, amid the rocks which form two chains right and

left of this river. It was necessary for these mustered peoples to have the

instruments for tilling, those of architecture, a knowledge of surveying, with

laws and a police. All this necessarily requires a prodigious space of time.

We see by the long details which face every day the most necessary and the

smallest of our undertakings, how difficult it is to do great things, and it

needs not only indefatigable stubbornness, but several generations animated

with this stubbornness.

  However, whether it be Menes, Thaut or Cheops, or Rameses who erected

one or two of these prodigious masses, we shall not be the more instructed of

the history of ancient Egypt: the language of this people is lost. We therefore

know nothing but that before the most ancient historians there was matter for

making an ancient history.


    IGNORANCE


  I am ignorant of how I was formed, and of how I was born. For a quarter

of my life I was absolutely ignorant of the reasons for all that I saw, heard

and felt, and I was nothing but a parrot at whom other parrots chattered.

  When I looked round me and within me, I conceived that something exists

for all eternity; since there are beings who exist to-day, I concluded that there

is a being who is necessary and necessarily eternal. Thus, the first step I took

to emerge from my ignorance crossed the boundaries of all the centuries.

  But when I tried to walk in this infinite quarry open before me, I could

neither find a single path, nor discern plainly a single object; and from the

leap I made to contemplate eternity, I fell back again into the abyss of my

ignorance.

  I saw what was called "matter," from the star Sirius and the stars of the

Milky Way, as distant from Sirius as Sirius is from us, right to the last atom

that can be perceived with the microscope, and I am ignorant as to what

matter is.

  The light which let me see all these beings is unknown to me; I can, withthe help of a prism, dissect this light, and divide it into seven pencils of rays;

but I cannot divide these pencils; I am ignorant of what they are composed.

Light  is  of  the  nature  of  matter,  since  it  has  movement  and  makes  an

impression on objects; but it does not tend toward a centre like all bodies: on

the contrary, it escapes invincibly from the centre, whereas all matter bears

towards its centre. Light seems penetrable, and matter is impenetrable. Is this

light matter? is it not matter? with what innumerable properties can it be

endowed? I am ignorant thereof.

  Is this substance which is so brilliant, so swift and so unknown, are these

other substances which roll in the immensity of space, eternal as they seem

infinite? I have no idea. Has a necessary being, of sovereign intelligence,

created them out of nothing, or has he arranged them? did he produce this

order in Time or before Time? What even is this Time of which I speak? I

cannot define it. O God! Teach me, for I am enlightened neither by other

men's darkness nor by my own.

  What  is  sensation?  How  have  I  received  it?  what  connection  is  there

between the air which strikes my ear and the sensation of sound? between

this body and the sensation of colour? I am profoundly ignorant thereof, and I

shall always be ignorant thereof.

  What is thought? where does it dwell? how is it formed? who gives me

thought during my sleep? is it by virtue of my will that I think? But always

during my sleep, and often while I am awake, I have ideas in spite of myself.

These ideas, long forgotten, long relegated to the back shop of my brain,

issue from it without my interfering, and present themselves to my memory,

which makes vain efforts to recall them.

  External objects have not the power to form ideas in me, for one does not

give oneself what one has not; I am too sensible that it is not I who give them

to  me,  for  they  are  born  without  my  orders.  Who  produces  them  in  me?

whence  do  they  come?  whither  do  they  go?  Fugitive  phantoms,  what

invisible hand produces you and causes you to disappear?

  Why, alone of all animals, has man the mania for dominating his fellow-

men?

  Why and how has it been possible that of a hundred thousand million men

more than ninety-nine have been immolated to this mania?  How is reason so precious a gift that we would not lose it for anything in

the world? and how has this reason served only to make us the most unhappy

of all beings?

  Whence comes it that loving truth passionately, we are always betrayed to

the most gross impostures?

  Why is life still loved by this crowd of Indians deceived and enslaved by

the  bonzes,  crushed  by  a  Tartar's  descendants,  overburdened  with  work,

groaning in want, assailed by disease, exposed to every scourge?

  Whence comes evil, and why does evil exist?

  O atoms of a day! O my companions in infinite littleness, born like me to

suffer everything and to be ignorant of everything, are there enough madmen

among you to believe that they know all these things? No, there are not; no,

at the bottom of your hearts you feel your nonentity as I render justice to

mine. But you are arrogant enough to want people to embrace your vain

systems; unable to be tyrants over our bodies, you claim to be tyrants over

our souls.


  THE IMPIOUS


  Who are the impious? those who give a white beard, feet and hands to the

Being of beings, to the great Demiourgos, to the eternal intelligence by which

nature  is  governed.  But  they  are  only  excusably  impious,  poor  impious

people against whom one must not grow wroth.

  If even they paint the great incomprehensible Being born on a cloud which

can bear nothing; if they are foolish enough to put God in a mist, in the rain,

or  on  a  mountain,  and  to  surround  him  with  little  chubby,  flushed  faces

accompanied by two wings; I laugh and I pardon them with all my heart.

  The impious persons who attribute to the Being of beings preposterous

predictions and injustices would anger me if this great Being had not given

me a reason which quells my wrath. The silly fanatic repeats to me, after

others, that it is not for us to judge what is reasonable and just in the great

Being, that His reason is not like our reason, that His justice is not like our

justice. Eh! how, you mad demoniac, do you want me to judge justice andreason otherwise than by the notions I have of them? do you want me to walk

otherwise than with my feet, and to speak otherwise than with my mouth?

  The  impious  man  who  supposes  the  great  Being  jealous,  arrogant,

malignant, vindictive, is more dangerous. I would not want to sleep under the

same roof as this man.

  But how would you treat the impious man who says to you: "See only

through my eyes, do not think; I announce to you a tyrannical God who has

made me to be your tyrant; I am his well-beloved: during all eternity he will

torture millions of his creatures whom he detests in order to gladden me; I

shall be your master in this world, and I shall laugh at your torments in the

other."

  Do you not feel an itching to thrash this cruel, impious fellow? If you are

born  gentle,  will  you  not  run  with  all  your  might  to  the  west  when  this

barbarian utters his atrocious reveries in the east?


  JOAN OF ARC


  It is meet that the reader should be acquainted with the true history of Joan

of  Arc  surnamed  "the  Maid."  The  details  of  her  adventure  are  very  little

known and may give readers pleasure; here they are.

  Paul Jove says that the courage of the French was stimulated by this girl,

and takes good care not to believe her inspired. Neither Robert, Gaguin, Paul

Emile, Polydore Vergile, Genebrard, Philip of Bergamo, Papyre Masson, nor

even Mariana, say that she was sent by God; and even though Mariana the

Jesuit had said it, that would not deceive me.

  Mézerai relates "that the prince of the celestial militia appeared to her." I

am sorry for Mézerai, and I ask pardon of the prince of the celestial militia.

  Most of our historians, who copy each other, suppose that the Maid uttered

prophecies, and that her prophecies were accomplished. She is made to say

that "she will drive the English out of the kingdom," and they were still there

five years after her death. She is said to have written a long letter to the King

of England, and assuredly she could neither read nor write; such an education

was not given to an inn servant in the Barois; and the information laid againsther states that she could not sign her name.

  But, it is said, she found a rusted sword, the blade of which was engraved

with five golden fleurs-de-lis; and this sword was hidden in the church of

Sainte Catherine de Fierbois at Tours. There, certainly is a great miracle!

  Poor  Joan  of  Arc  having  been  captured  by  the  English,  despite  her

prophecies and her miracles, maintained first of all in her cross-examination

that  St.  Catherine  and  St.  Marguerite  had  honoured  her  with  many

revelations. I am astonished that she never said anything of her talks with the

prince of the celestial militia. These two saints apparently liked talking better

than St. Michael. Her judges thought her a sorceress, she thought herself

inspired.

  One great proof that Charles VII.'s captains made use of the marvellous in

order to encourage the soldiers, in the deplorable state to which France was

reduced, is that Saintrailles had his shepherd, as the Comte de Dunois had his

shepherdess.  The  shepherd  made  prophecies  on  one  side,  while  the

shepherdess made them on the other.

  But unfortunately the Comte de Dunois' prophetess was captured at the

siege of Compiègne by a bastard of Vendôme, and Saintrailles' prophet was

captured by Talbot. The gallant Talbot was far from having the shepherd

burned.  This  Talbot  was  one  of  those  true  Englishmen  who  scorn

superstition, and who have not the fanaticism for punishing fanatics.

  This, it seems to me, is what the historians should have observed, and

what they have neglected.

  The Maid was taken to Jean de Luxembourg, Comte de Ligny. She was

shut up in the fortress of Beaulieu, then in that of Beaurevoir, and from there

in that of Crotoy in Picardy.

  First of all Pierre Cauchon, Bishop of Beauvais, who was of the King of

England's  party  against  his  own  legitimate  king,  claims  the  Maid  as  a

sorceress arrested on the limits of his diocese. He wishes to judge her as a

sorceress. He supported the right he claimed by a downright lie. Joan had

been captured on the territory of the bishopric of Noyon: and neither the

Bishop  of  Beauvais,  nor  the  Bishop  of  Noyon  assuredly  had  the  right  of

condemning anybody, and still less of committing to death a subject of theDuke of Lorraine, and a warrior in the pay of the King of France.

  There  was  at  that  time  (who  would  believe  it?)  a  vicar-general  of  the

Inquisition in France, by name Brother Martin.[8] It was one of the most

horrible effects of the total subversion of that unfortunate country. Brother

Martin claimed the prisoner as smelling of heresy (odorantem hæresim). He

called upon the Duke of Burgundy and the Comte de Ligny, "by the right of

his office, and of the authority given to him by the Holy See, to deliver Joan

to the Holy Inquisition."

  The Sorbonne hastened to support Brother Martin, and wrote to the Duke

of Burgundy and to Jean de Luxembourg-"You have used your noble power

to apprehend this woman who calls herself the Maid, by means of whom the

honour of God has been immeasurably offended, the faith exceedingly hurt,

and the Church too greatly dishonoured; for by reason of her, idolatry, errors,

bad doctrine, and other inestimable evils have ensued in this kingdom ... but

what this woman has done would be of small account, if did not ensue what

is  meet  for  satisfying  the  offence  perpetrated  by  her  against  our  gentle

Creator  and  His  faith,  and  the  Holy  Church  with  her  other  innumerable

misdeeds ... and it would be intolerable offence against the divine majesty if

it happened that this woman were freed."[9]

  Finally, the Maid was awarded to Jean Cauchon whom people called the

unworthy bishop, the unworthy Frenchman, and the unworthy man. Jean de

Luxembourg sold the Maid to Cauchon and the English for ten thousand

livres, and the Duke of Bedford paid them. The Sorbonne, the bishop and

Brother Martin, then presented a new petition to this Duke of Bedford, regent

of France, "in honour of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, for that the said

Joan may be briefly put into the hands of the Church." Joan was led to Rouen.

The  archbishopric  was  vacant  at  that  time,  and  the  chapter  permitted  the

Bishop of Beauvais to work in the town. (Besogner is the term which was

used.) He chose as assessors nine doctors of the Sorbonne with thirty-five

other  assistants,  abbots  or  monks.  The  vicar  of  the  Inquisition,  Martin,

presided with Cauchon; and as he was only a vicar, he had but second place.

  Joan underwent fourteen examinations; they are singular. She said that she

saw St. Catherine and St. Marguerite at Poitiers. Doctor Beaupère asks her

how  she  recognized  the  saints.  She  answers  that  it  was  by  their  way  ofbowing. Beaupère asks her if they are great chatterboxes. "Go look on the

register," she says. Beaupère asks her if, when she saw St. Michael, he was

naked.  She  answers:  "Do  you  think  our  Lord  had  nothing  to  clothe  him

with?"

  The curious will carefully observe here that Joan had long been directed

with other religious women of the populace by a rogue named Richard,[10]

who performed miracles, and who taught these girls to perform them. One

day he gave communion three times in succession to Joan, in honour of the

Trinity. It was then the custom in matters of importance and in times of great

peril. The knights had three masses said, and communicated three times when

they went to seek fortune or to fight in a duel. It is what has been observed on

the part of the Chevalier Bayard.

  The  workers  of  miracles,  Joan's  companions,  who  were  submissive  to

Richard, were named Pierrone and Catherine. Pierrone affirmed that she had

seen that God appeared to her in human form as a friend to a friend. God was

"clad in a long white robe, etc."

  Up to the present the ridiculous; here now is the horrible.

  One of Joan's judges, doctor of theology and priest, by name Nicholas the

Bird-Catcher, comes to confess her in prison. He abuses the sacrament to the

point of hiding behind a piece of serge two priests who transcribed Joan of

Arc's confession. Thus did the judges use sacrilege in order to be murderers.

And an unfortunate idiot, who had had enough courage to render very great

services to the king and the country, was condemned to be burned by forty-

four French priests who immolated her for the English faction.

  It is sufficiently well-known how someone had the cunning and meanness

to put a man's suit beside her to tempt her to wear this suit again, and with

what  absurd  barbarism  this  transgression  was  claimed  as  a  pretext  for

condemning her to the flames, as if in a warrior girl it was a crime worthy of

the fire, to put on breeches instead of a skirt. All this wrings the heart, and

makes common sense shudder. One cannot conceive how we dare, after the

countless horrors of which we have been guilty, call any nation by the name

of barbarian.

  Most of our historians, lovers of the so-called embellishments of history

rather than of truth, say that Joan went fearlessly to the torture; but as thechronicles of the times bear witness, and as the historian Villaret admits, she

received her sentence with cries and tears; a weakness pardonable in her sex,

and perhaps in ours, and very compatible with the courage which this girl had

displayed amid the dangers of war; for one can be fearless in battle, and

sensitive on the scaffold.

  I must add that many persons have believed without any examination that

the Maid of Orleans was not burned at Rouen at all, although we have the

official report of her execution. They have been deceived by the account we

still have of an adventuress who took the name of the "Maid," deceived Joan

of Arc's brothers, and under cover of this imposture, married in Lorraine a

nobleman of the house of Armoise. There were two other rogues who also

passed themselves off as the "Maid of Orleans." All three claimed that Joan

was not burned at all, and that another woman had been substituted for her.

Such stories can be admitted only by those who want to be deceived.


  FOOTNOTES:

  [8] Beuchot says: There was at that time in France an Inquisitor-General,

named Brother Jean or Jacques le Graverend. His vice-inquisitor or vicar,

who took part in Joan's trial, was not called Brother Martin, but Brother Jean

Magistri or the Master.

  [9] This is a translation of the Latin of the Sorbonne, made long after.

  [10] Beuchot says that Berriat Saint-Prix, in his "Jeanne d'Arc," proves,

page 341 et seq., that the imputations against Brother Richard are groundless,

and that he could exercise no influence at the trial.


  KISSING


  I ask pardon of the boys and the girls; but maybe they will not find here

what they will seek. This article is only for scholars and serious persons for

whom it is barely suitable.

  There is but too much question of kissing in the comedies of Molière's

time. Champagne, in the comedy of "La Mère Coquette" by Quinault, asks

kisses of Laurette; she says to him-"You are not content, then; really it isshameful;  I  have  kissed  you  twice."  Champagne  answers  her-"What!  you

keep account of your kisses?" (Act I. Sc. 1.).

  The valets always used to ask kisses of the soubrettes; people kissed each

other on the stage. Usually it was very dull and very intolerable, particularly

in the case of ugly actors, who were nauseating.

  If the reader wants kisses, let him look for them in the "Pastor Fido"; there

is one entire chorus where nothing but kisses is mentioned; and the piece is

founded solely on a kiss that Mirtillo gave one day to Amarilli, in a game of

blind man's buff, un bacio molto saporito.

  Everyone  knows  the  chapter  on  kisses,  in  which  Jean  de  la  Casa,

Archbishop of Benevento, says that people can kiss each other from head to

foot. He pities the people with big noses who can only approach each other

with difficulty; and he counsels ladies with long noses to have flat-nosed

lovers.

  The kiss was a very ordinary form of salutation throughout ancient times.

Plutarch recalls that the conspirators, before killing Cæsar, kissed his face,

hand and breast. Tacitus says that when Agricola, his father-in-law, returned

from Rome, Domitian received him with a cold kiss, said nothing to him, and

left him confounded in the crowd. The inferior who could not succeed in

greeting his superior by kissing him, put his mouth to his own hand, and sent

him a kiss that the other returned in the same way if he so wished.

  This sign was used even for worshipping the gods. Job, in his parable

(Chap. xxxi.), which is perhaps the oldest of known books, says that he has

not worshipped the sun and the moon like the other Arabs, that he has not

carried his hand to his mouth as he looked at the stars.

  In our Occident nothing remains of this ancient custom but the puerile and

genteel civility that is still taught to children in some small towns, of kissing

their right hands when someone has given them some sweets.

  It was a horrible thing to betray with a kiss; it was that that made Cæsar's

assassination still more hateful. We know all about Judas' kisses; they have

become proverbial.

  Joab,  one  of  David's  captains,  being  very  jealous  of  Amasa,  another

captain, says to him (2 Sam. xx. 9): "Art thou in health, my brother? And hetook Amasa by the beard with the right hand to kiss him," and with his other

hand drew his sword and "smote him therewith in the fifth rib, and shed out

his bowels on the ground."

  No other kiss is to be found in the other fairly frequent assassinations

which were committed among the Jews, unless it be perhaps the kisses which

Judith gave to the captain Holophernes, before cutting off his head while he

was in bed asleep; but no mention is made of them, and the thing is merely

probable.

  In one of Shakespeare's tragedies called "Othello," this Othello, who is a

black,  gives  two  kisses  to  his  wife  before  strangling  her.  That  seems

abominable  to  honourable  people;  but  Shakespeare's  partisans  say  it  is

beautifully natural, particularly in a black.

  When Giovanni Galeas Sforza was assassinated in Milan Cathedral, on St.

Stephen's day, the two Medici in the Reparata church; Admiral Coligny, the

Prince  of  Orange,  the  Maréchal  d'Ancre,  the  brothers  Witt,  and  so  many

others; at least they were not kissed.

  There was among the ancients I know not what of symbolic and sacred

attached to the kiss, since one kissed the statues of the gods and their beards,

when the sculptors had shown them with a beard. Initiates kissed each other

at the mysteries of Ceres, as a sign of concord.

  The early Christians, men and women, kissed each other on the mouth at

their agapæ. This word signified "love-feast." They gave each other the holy

kiss, the kiss of peace, the kiss of brother and sister, ἄγιον φίλημα. This

custom  lasted  for  more  than  four  centuries,  and  was  abolished  at  last  on

account of its consequences. It was these kisses of peace, these agapæ of

love, these names of "brother" and "sister," that long drew to the little-known

Christians, those imputations of debauchery with which the priests of Jupiter

and the priestesses of Vesta charged them. You see in Petronius, and in other

profane authors, that the libertines called themselves "brother" and "sister." It

was thought that among the Christians the same names signified the same

infamies.  They  were  innocent  accomplices  in  spreading  these  accusations

over the Roman empire.

  There were in the beginning seventeen different Christian societies, just as

there were nine among the Jews, including the two kinds of Samaritans. Thesocieties which flattered themselves at being the most orthodox accused the

others of the most inconceivable obscenities. The term of "gnostic," which

was  at  first  so  honourable,  signifying  "learned,"  "enlightened,"  "pure,"

became a term of horror and scorn, a reproach of heresy. Saint Epiphanius, in

the third century, claimed that they used first to tickle each other, the men and

the women; that then they gave each other very immodest kisses, and that

they judged the degree of their faith by the voluptuousness of these kisses;

that the husband said to his wife, in presenting a young initiate to her: "Have

an agape with my brother," and that they had an agape.

  We do not dare repeat here, in the chaste French tongue,[11] what Saint

Epiphanius adds in Greek (Epiphanius, contra hæres, lib. I., vol. ii). We will

say  merely  that  perhaps  this  saint  was  somewhat  imposed  upon;  that  he

allowed himself to be too carried away by zeal, and that all heretics are not

hideous debauchees.

  The sect of Pietists, wishing to imitate the early Christians, to-day give

each other kisses of peace on leaving the assembly, calling each other "my

brother, my sister"; it is what, twenty years ago, a very pretty and very human

Pietist lady avowed to me. The ancient custom was to kiss on the mouth; the

Pietists have carefully preserved it.

  There was no other manner of greeting dames in France, Germany, Italy,

England; it was the right of cardinals to kiss queens on the mouth, and in

Spain even. What is singular is that they had not the same prerogative in

France, where ladies always had more liberty than anywhere else, but "every

country has its ceremonies," and there is no usage so general that chance and

custom have not provided exceptions. It would have been an incivility, an

affront, for an honourable woman, when she received a lord's first visit, not to

have kissed him, despite his moustaches. "It is a displeasing custom," says

Montaigne (Book III., chap. v.), "and offensive to ladies, to have to lend their

lips to whoever has three serving-men in his suite, disagreeable though he

be." This custom was, nevertheless, the oldest in the world.

  If it is disagreeable for a young and pretty mouth to stick itself out of

courtesy to an old and ugly mouth, there was a great danger between fresh,

red  mouths  of  twenty  to  twenty-five  years  old;  and  that  is  what  finally

brought about the abolition of the ceremony of kissing in the mysteries andthe agapæ. It is what caused women to be confined among the Orientals, so

that they might kiss only their fathers and their brothers; custom long since

introduced into Spain by the Arabs.

  Behold the danger: there is one nerve of the fifth pair which goes from the

mouth to the heart, and thence lower down, with such delicate industry has

nature prepared everything! The little glands of the lips, their spongy tissue,

their  velvety  paps,  the  fine  skin,  ticklish,  gives  them  an  exquisite  and

voluptuous sensation, which is not without analogy with a still more hidden

and still more sensitive part. Modesty may suffer from a lengthily savoured

kiss between two Pietists of eighteen.

  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  human  species,  the  turtledoves  and  the

pigeons alone are acquainted with kisses; thence came among the Latins the

word columbatìm, which our language has not been able to render. There is

nothing of which abuse has not been made. The kiss, designed by nature for

the mouth, has often been prostituted to membranes which do not seem made

for this usage. One knows of what the templars were accused.

  We cannot honestly treat this interesting subject at greater length, although

Montaigne  says:  "One  should  speak  thereof  shamelessly:  brazenly  do  we

utter 'killing,' 'wounding,' 'betraying,' but of that we dare not speak but with

bated breath."


  FOOTNOTES:

  [11] Or the English-Translator.


  LANGUAGES


  There is no complete language, no language which can express all our

ideas and all our sensations; their shades are too numerous, too imperceptible.

Nobody can make known the precise degree of sensation he experiences. One

is obliged, for example, to designate by the general names of "love" and

"hate" a thousand loves and a thousand hates all different from each other; it

is the same with our pleasures and our pains. Thus all languages are, like us,

imperfect.  They have all been made successively and by degrees according to our

needs. It is the instinct common to all men which made the first grammars

without perceiving it. The Lapps, the Negroes, as well as the Greeks, needed

to express the past, the present and the future; and they did it: but as there has

never been an assembly of logicians who formed a language, no language has

been able to attain a perfectly regular plan.

  All  words,  in  all  possible  languages,  are  necessarily  the  images  of

sensations. Men have never been able to express anything but what they felt.

Thus everything has become metaphor; everywhere the soul is enlightened,

the heart burns, the mind wanders. Among all peoples the infinite has been

the negation of the finite; immensity the negation of measure. It is evident

that our five senses have produced all languages, as well as all our ideas. The

least imperfect are like the laws: those in which there is the least that is

arbitrary are the best. The most complete are necessarily those of the peoples

who have cultivated the arts and society. Thus the Hebraic language should

be one of the poorest languages, like the people who used to speak it. How

should the Hebrews have had maritime terms, they who before Solomon had

not a boat? how the terms of philosophy, they who were plunged in such

profound ignorance up to the time when they started to learn something in

their migration to Babylon? The language of the Phœnicians, from which the

Hebrews drew their jargon, should be very superior, because it was the idiom

of an industrious, commercial, rich people, distributed all over the earth.

  The  most  ancient  known  language  should  be  that  of  the  nation  most

anciently gathered together as a body of people. It should be, further, that of

the  people  which  has  been  least  subjugated,  or  which,  having  been

subjugated, has civilized its conquerors. And in this respect, it is constant that

Chinese and Arabic are the most ancient of all those that are spoken to-day.

  There is no mother-tongue. All neighbouring nations have borrowed from

each other: but one has given the name of "mother-tongue" to those from

which some known idioms are derived. For example, Latin is the mother-

tongue in respect of Italian, Spanish and French: but it was itself derived

from Tuscan; and Tuscan was derived from Celtic and Greek.

  The most beautiful of all languages must be that which is at once, the most

complete,  the  most  sonorous,  the  most  varied  in  its  twists  and  the  mostregular in its progress, that which has most compound words, that which by

its  prosody  best  expresses  the  soul's  slow  or  impetuous  movements,  that

which most resembles music.

  Greek has all these advantages: it has not the roughness of Latin, in which

so many words end in um, ur, us. It has all the pomp of Spanish, and all the

sweetness of Italian. It has above all the living languages of the world the

expression of music, by long and short syllables, and by the number and

variety of its accents. Thus all disfigured as it is to-day in Greece, it can still

be regarded as the most beautiful language in the universe.

  The most beautiful language cannot be the most widely distributed, when

the people which speaks it is oppressed, not numerous, without commerce

with other nations, and when these other nations have cultivated their own

languages.  Thus  Greek  should  be  less  diffused  than  Arabic,  and  even

Turkish.

  Of all European languages French should be the most general, because it

is the most suited to conversation: it has taken its character from that of the

people which speaks it.

  The French have been, for nearly a hundred and fifty years, the people

which has best known society, which the first discarded all embarrassment,

and  the  first  among  whom  women  were  free  and  even  sovereign,  when

elsewhere they were only slaves. The always uniform syntax of this language,

which admits no inversions, is a further facility barely possessed by other

tongues; it is more current coin than others, even though it lacks weight. The

prodigious  quantity  of  agreeably  frivolous  books  which  this  nation  has

produced is a further reason for the favour which its language has obtained

among all nations.

  Profound books will not give vogue to a language: they will be translated;

people will learn Newton's philosophy; but they will not learn English in

order to understand it.

  What  makes  French  still  more  common  is  the  perfection  to  which  the

drama  has  been  carried  in  this  tongue.  It  is  to  "Cinna,"  "Phèdre,"  the

"Misanthrope" that it owes its vogue, and not to the conquests of Louis XIV.

  It is not so copious and so flexible as Italian, or so majestic as Spanish, orso energetic as English; and yet it has had more success than these three

languages from the sole fact that it is more suited to intercourse, and that

there are more agreeable books in it than elsewhere. It has succeeded like the

cooks of France, because it has more flattered general taste.

  The same spirit which has led the nations to imitate the French in their

furniture, in the arrangement of rooms, in gardens, in dancing, in all that

gives charm, has led them also to speak their language. The great art of good

French writers is precisely that of the women of this nation, who dress better

than the other women of Europe, and who, without being more beautiful,

appear to be so by the art with which they adorn themselves, by the noble and

simple charm they give themselves so naturally.

  It is by dint of good breeding that this language has managed to make the

traces of its former barbarism disappear. Everything would bear witness to

this barbarism to whosoever should look closely. One would see that the

number vingt comes from viginti, and that formerly this g and this t were

pronounced with a roughness characteristic of all the northern nations; of the

month of Augustus has been made the month of août. Not so long ago a

German  prince  thinking  that  in  France  one  never  pronounced  the  term

Auguste otherwise, called King Auguste of Poland King Août. All the letters

which have been suppressed in pronunciation, but retained in writing, are our

former barbarous clothes.

  It was when manners were softened that the language also was softened:

before François Ier summoned women to his court, it was as clownish as we

were. It would have been as good to speak old Celtic as the French of the

time of Charles VIII. and Louis XII.: German was not more harsh.

  It has taken centuries to remove this rust. The imperfections which remain

would still be intolerable, were it not for the continual care one takes to avoid

them,  as  a  skilful  horseman  avoids  stones  in  the  road.  Good  writers  are

careful to combat the faulty expressions which popular ignorance first brings

into vogue, and which, adopted by bad authors, then pass into the gazettes

and the pamphlets. Roastbeef signifies in English roasted ox, and our waiters

talk to us nowadays of a "roastbeef of mutton." Riding-coat means a coat for

going  on  horseback;  of  it  people  have  made  redingote,  and  the  populace

thinks it an ancient word of the language. It has been necessary to adopt thisexpression with the people because it signifies an article of common use.

  In matters of arts and crafts and necessary things, the common people

subjugated the court, if one dare say so; just as in matters of religion those

who most despise the common run of people are obliged to speak and to

appear to think like them.

  To call things by the names which the common people has imposed on

them  is  not  to  speak  badly;  but  one  recognizes  a  people  naturally  more

ingenious than another by the proper names which it gives to each thing.

  It  is  only  through  lack  of  imagination  that  a  people  adapts  the  same

expression to a hundred different ideas. It is a ridiculous sterility not to have

known how to express otherwise an arm of the sea, a scale arm, an arm of a

chair; there is poverty of thought in saying equally the head of a nail, the

head of an army.

  Ignorance has introduced another custom into all modern languages. A

thousand  terms  no  longer  signify  what  they  should  signify.  Idiot  meant

solitary, to-day it means foolish; epiphany signified appearance, to-day it is

the festival of three kings; baptize is to dip in water, we say baptize with the

name of John or James.

  To these defects in almost all languages are added barbarous irregularities.

Venus is a charming name, venereal is abominable. Another result of the

irregularity of these languages composed at hazard in uncouth times is the

quantity of compound words of which the simple form does not exist any

more. They are children who have lost their father. We have architects and no

tects; there are things which are ineffable and none which are effable. One is

intrepid, one is not trepid. There are impudent fellows, insolent fellows, but

neither pudent fellows nor solent fellows. All languages more or less retain

some of these defects; they are all irregular lands from which the hand of the

adroit artist knows how to derive advantage.

  Other defects which make a nation's character evident always slip into

languages. In France there are fashions in expressions as in ways of doing the

hair. A fashionable invalid or doctor will take it into his head to say that he

has had a soupçon of fever to signify that he has had a slight attack; soon the

whole  nation  has  soupçons  of  colics,  soupçons  of  hatred,  love,  ridicule.

Preachers in the pulpit tell you that you must have at least a soupçon of God'slove. After a few months this fashion gives place to another.

  What does most harm to the nobility of the language is not this passing

fashion  with  which  people  are  soon  disgusted,  not  the  solecisms  of

fashionable people into which good authors do not fall, but the affectation of

mediocre  authors  in  speaking  of  serious  things  in  a  conversational  style.

Everything conspires to corrupt a language that is rather widely diffused;

authors  who  spoil  the  style  by  affectation;  those  who  write  to  foreign

countries,  and  who  almost  always  mingle  foreign  expressions  with  their

natural  tongue;  merchants  who  introduce  into  conversation  their  business

terms.

  All languages being imperfect, it does not follow that one should change

them. One must adhere absolutely to the manner in which the good authors

have  spoken  them;  and  when  one  has  a  sufficient  number  of  approved

authors,  a  language  is  fixed.  Thus  one  can  no  longer  change  anything  in

Italian,  Spanish,  English,  French,  without  corrupting  them;  the  reason  is

clear: it is that one would soon render unintelligible the books which provide

the instruction and the pleasure of the nations.


  LAWS


  Sheep live very placidly in community, they are considered very easy-

going, because we do not see the prodigious quantity of animals they devour.

It is even to be believed that they eat them innocently and without knowing it,

like  us  when  we  eat  a  Sassenage  cheese.  The  republic  of  the  sheep  is  a

faithful representation of the golden age.

  A chicken-run is visibly the most perfect monarchic state. There is no king

comparable to a cock. If he marches proudly in the midst of his people, it is

not out of vanity. If the enemy approaches, he does not give orders to his

subjects to go to kill themselves for him by virtue of his certain knowledge

and plenary power; he goes to battle himself, ranges his chickens behind him

and fights to the death. If he is the victor, he himself sings the Te Deum. In

civil life there is no one so gallant, so honest, so disinterested. He has all the

virtues. Has he in his royal beak a grain of corn, a grub, he gives it to the first

lady among his subjects who presents herself. Solomon in his harem did notcome near a poultry-yard cock.

  If it be true that the bees are governed by a queen to whom all her subjects

make love, that is a still more perfect government.

  The  ants  are  considered  to  be  an  excellent  democracy.  Democracy  is

above  all  the  other  States,  because  there  everyone  is  equal,  and  each

individual works for the good of all.

  The republic of the beavers is still superior to that of the ants, at least if we

judge by their masonry work.

  The monkeys resemble strolling players rather than a civilized people; and

they do not appear to be gathered together under fixed, fundamental laws,

like the preceding species.

  We  resemble  the  monkeys  more  than  any  other  animal  by  the  gift  of

imitation, the frivolity of our ideas, and by our inconstancy which has never

allowed us to have uniform and durable laws.

  When nature formed our species and gave us instincts, self-esteem for our

preservation,  benevolence  for  the  preservation  of  others,  love  which  is

common to all the species, and the inexplicable gift of combining more ideas

than all the animals together; when she had thus given us our portion, she

said to us: "Do as you can."

  There is no good code in any country. The reason for this is evident; the

laws have been made according to the times, the place and the need, etc.

  When  the  needs  have  changed,  the  laws  which  have  remained,  have

become ridiculous. Thus the law which forbade the eating of pig and the

drinking of wine was very reasonable in Arabia, where pig and wine are

injurious; it is absurd at Constantinople.

  The law which gives the whole fee to the eldest son is very good in times

of anarchy and pillage. Then the eldest son is the captain of the castle which

the brigands will attack sooner or later; the younger sons will be his chief

officers,  the  husbandmen  his  soldiers.  All  that  is  to  be  feared  is  that  the

younger son may assassinate or poison the Salian lord his elder brother, in

order to become in his turn the master of the hovel; but these cases are rare,

because nature has so combined our instincts and our passions that we have

more horror of assassinating our elder brother than we have of being enviousof  his  position.  But  this  law,  suitable  for  the  owners  of  dungeons  in

Chilperic's time is detestable when there is question of sharing stocks in a

city.

  To the shame of mankind, one knows that the laws of games are the only

ones which everywhere are just, clear, inviolable and executed. Why is the

Indian who gave us the rules of the game of chess willingly obeyed all over

the world, and why are the popes' decretals, for example, to-day an object of

horror  and  scorn?  the  reason  is  that  the  inventor  of  chess  combined

everything  with  precision  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  players,  and  that  the

popes, in their decretals, had nothing in view but their own interest. The

Indian wished to exercise men's minds equally, and give them pleasure; the

popes wished to besot men's minds. Also, the essence of the game of chess

has  remained  the  same  for  five  thousand  years,  it  is  common  to  all  the

inhabitants  of  the  earth;  and  the  decretals  are  known  only  at  Spoletto,

Orvieto,  Loretto,  where  the  shallowest  lawyer  secretly  hates  and  despises

them.

  But I delight in thinking that there is a natural law independent of all

human conventions: the fruit of my work must belong to me; I must honour

my father and my mother; I have no right over my fellow's life, and my

fellow has none over mine, etc. But when I think that from Chedorlaomer to

Mentzel,[12] colonel of hussars, everyone loyally kills and pillages his fellow

with a licence in his pocket, I am very afflicted.

  I am told that there are laws among thieves, and also laws of war. I ask

what are these laws of war. I learn that they mean hanging a brave officer

who has held fast in a bad post without cannon against a royal army; that they

mean having a prisoner hanged, if the enemy has hanged one of yours; that

they mean putting to the fire and the sword villages which have not brought

their sustenance on the appointed day, according to the orders of the gracious

sovereign of the district. "Good," say I, "that is the 'Spirit of the Laws.'"

  It seems to me that most men have received from nature enough common

sense to make laws, but that everyone is not just enough to make good laws.


  FOOTNOTES:

  [12]  Chedorlaomer  was  king  of  the  Elamites,  and  contemporary  withAbraham. See Genesis ch. xiv.


  Mentzel was a famous chief of Austrian partisans in the war of 1741. At

the head of five thousand men, he made Munich capitulate on February 13th,

1742.


  LIBERTY


  Either  I  am  very  much  mistaken,  or  Locke  the  definer  has  very  well

defined  liberty  as  "power."  I  am  mistaken  again,  or  Collins,  celebrated

London magistrate, is the only philosopher who has really sifted this idea,

and Clark's answer to him was merely that of a theologian. But of all that has

been written in France on liberty, the following little dialogue seems to me

the most clear.


  A: There is a battery of guns firing in your ears, have you the liberty to

hear them or not to hear them?

  B: Without doubt, I cannot stop myself hearing them.

  A: Do you want this gun to carry off your head and the heads of your wife

and daughter, who are walking with you?

  B: What are you talking about? as long as I am of sound mind, I cannot

want such a thing; it is impossible.

  A: Good; you hear this gun necessarily, and you wish necessarily that

neither you nor your family shall die from a cannon shot while you are out

for a walk; you have not the power either of not hearing or of wishing to

remain here?

  B: Clearly.

  A: You have consequently taken some thirty steps in order to be sheltered

from the gun, you have had the power to walk these few steps with me?

  B: Again very clearly.

  A: And if you had been a paralytic, you could not have avoided being

exposed to this battery, you would necessarily have heard and received a gunshot; and you would be dead necessarily?

  B: Nothing is more true.

  A: In what then does your liberty consist, unless it be in the power that

your self has exercised in performing what your will required of absolute

necessity?

  B: You embarrass me; liberty then is nothing but the power of doing what

I want to do?

  A: Think about it, and see if liberty can be understood otherwise.

  B: In that case my hunting dog is as free as I am; he has necessarily the

will to run when he sees a hare, and the power of running if he has not a pain

in his legs. I have then nothing above my dog; you reduce me to the state of

the beasts.

  A:  What  poor  sophistry  from  the  poor  sophists  who  have  taught  you.

Indeed you are in a bad way to be free like your dog! Do you not eat, sleep,

propagate like him, even almost to the attitude? Do you want the sense of

smell  other  than  through  your  nose?  Why  do  you  want  to  have  liberty

otherwise than your dog has?

  B: But I have a soul which reasons much, and my dog reasons hardly at

all. He has almost only simple ideas, and I have a thousand metaphysical

ideas.

  A: Well, you are a thousand times freer than he is; that is, you have a

thousand times more power of thinking than he has; but you do not think

otherwise than he does.

  B: What! I am not free to wish what I wish?

  A: What do you mean by that?

  B: I mean what everyone means. Doesn't one say every day, wishes are

free?

  A: A proverb is not a reason; explain yourself more clearly.

  B: I mean that I am free to wish as I please.

  A:  With  your  permission,  that  has  no  sense;  do  you  not  see  that  it  is

ridiculous to say, I wish to wish? You wish necessarily, as a result of theideas that have offered themselves to you. Do you wish to be married; yes or

no?

  B: But if I tell you that I want neither the one nor the other?

  A: You will be answering like someone who says: "Some believe Cardinal

Mazarin to be dead, others believe him to be alive, and as for me I believe

neither the one nor the other."

  B: Well, I want to be married.

  A: Ah! that is an answer. Why do you want to be married?

  B: Because I am in love with a beautiful, sweet, well-bred young girl, who

is fairly rich and sings very well, whose parents are very honest people, and

because I flatter myself I am loved by her, and very welcome to her family.

  A: That is a reason. You see that you cannot wish without reason. I declare

to you that you are free to marry; that is, that you have the power to sign the

contract, have your nuptials, and sleep with your wife.

  B: How now! I cannot wish without reason? And what will become of that

other proverb: Sit pro ratione voluntas; my will is my reason, I wish because I

wish?

  A: That is absurd, my dear fellow; there would be in you an effect without

a cause.

  B: What! When I play at odds and evens, I have a reason for choosing

evens rather than odds?

  A: Yes, undoubtedly.

  B: And what is that reason, if you please?

  A:  The  reason  is  that  the  idea  of  even  rather  than  the  opposite  idea

presents itself to your mind. It would be comic that there were cases where

you wished because there was a cause of wishing, and that there were cases

where you wished without any cause. When you wish to be married, you

evidently feel the dominating reason; you do not feel it when you are playing

at odds and evens; and yet there certainly must be one.

  B: But, I repeat, I am not free then?

  A: Your will is not free, but your actions are. You are free to act, whenyou have the power to act.

  B: But all the books I have read on the liberty of indifference....

  A: What do you mean by the liberty of indifference?

  B: I mean the liberty of spitting on the right or on the left, of sleeping on

my right side or on my left, of taking a walk of four turns or five.

  A: Really the liberty you would have there would be a comic liberty! God

would have given you a fine gift! It would really be something to boast of! Of

what use to you would be a power which was exercised only on such futile

occasions? But the fact is that it is ridiculous to suppose the will to wish to

spit on the right. Not only is this will to wish absurd, but it is certain that

several  trifling  circumstances  determine  you  in  these  acts  that  you  call

indifferent.  You  are  no  more  free  in  these  acts  than  in  the  others.  But,  I

repeat, you are free at all times, in all places, as soon as you do what you

wish to do.

  B: I suspect you are right. I will think about it.[13]


  FOOTNOTES:

  [13] See "Free-Will."


  LIBRARY


  A big library has this in it of good, that it dismays those who look at it.

Two  hundred  thousand  volumes  discourage  a  man  tempted  to  print;  but

unfortunately he at once says to himself: "People do not read all those books,

and  they  may  read  mine."  He  compares  himself  to  a  drop  of  water  who

complains of being lost in the ocean and ignored: a genius had pity on it; he

caused it to be swallowed by an oyster; it became the most beautiful pearl in

the Orient, and was the chief ornament in the throne of the Great Mogul.

Those who are only compilers, imitators, commentators, splitters of phrases,

usurious critics, in short, those on whom a genius has no pity, will always

remain drops of water.

  Our man works in his garret, therefore, in the hope of becoming a pearl.  It is true that in this immense collection of books there are about a hundred

and ninety-nine thousand which will never be read, from cover to cover at

least; but one may need to consult some of them once in a lifetime. It is a

great advantage for whoever wishes to learn to find at his hand in the king's

palace the volume and page he seeks, without being kept waiting a moment.

It is one of the most noble institutions. No expense is more magnificent and

more useful.

  The public library of the King of France is the finest in the whole world,

less on account of the number and rarity of the volumes than of the ease and

courtesy with which the librarians lend them to all scholars. This library is

incontestably the most precious monument there is in France.

  This astounding multitude of books should not scare. We have already

remarked that Paris contains about seven hundred thousand men, that one

cannot live with them all, and that one chooses three or four friends. Thus

must one no more complain of the multitude of books than of the multitude

of citizens.

  A man who wishes to learn a little about his existence, and who has no

time  to  waste,  is  quite  embarrassed.  He  wishes  to  read  simultaneously

Hobbes, Spinoza, Bayle who wrote against them, Leibnitz who disputed with

Bayle, Clarke who disputed with Leibnitz, Malebranche who differed from

them all, Locke who passed as having confounded Malebranche, Stillingfleet

who thought he had vanquished Locke, Cudworth who thinks himself above

them because he is understood by no one. One would die of old age before

having thumbed the hundredth part of the metaphysical romances.

  One is very content to have the most ancient books, as one inquires into

the most ancient medals. It is that which makes the honour of a library. The

oldest books in the world are the "Kings" of the Chinese, the "Shastabad" of

the Brahmins, of which Mr. Holwell has brought to our knowledge admirable

passages,  what  remains  of  the  ancient  Zarathustra,  the  fragments  of

Sanchoniathon  which  Eusebius  has  preserved  for  us  and  which  bears  the

characteristics  of  the  most  remote  antiquity.  I  do  not  speak  of  the

"Pentateuch" which is above all one could say of it.

  We still have the prayer of the real Orpheus, which the hierophant recited

in the old Greek mysteries. "Walk in the path of justice, worship the solemaster of the universe. He is one; He is sole by Himself. All beings owe Him

their existence; He acts in them and by them. He sees everything, and never

has been seen by mortal eyes."

  St. Clement of Alexandria, the most learned of the fathers of the Church,

or rather the only scholar in profane antiquity, gives him almost always the

name of Orpheus of Thrace, of Orpheus the Theologian, to distinguish him

from those who wrote later under his name.

  We have no longer anything either of Museus or of Linus. A few passages

from these predecessors of Homer would well be an adornment to a library.

  Augustus had formed the library called the Palatine. The statue of Apollo

presided over it. The emperor embellished it with busts of the best authors.

One saw in Rome twenty-nine great public libraries. There are now more

than four thousand important libraries in Europe. Choose which suits you,

and try not to be bored.


  LIMITS OF THE HUMAN MIND


  Someone asked Newton one day why he walked when he wanted to, and

how his arm and his hand moved at his will. He answered manfully that he

had no idea. "But at least," his interlocutor said to him, "you who understand

so  well  the  gravitation  of  the  planets  will  tell  me  why  they  turn  in  one

direction rather than in another!" And he again confessed that he had no idea.

  Those who taught that the ocean was salt for fear that it might become

putrid, and that the tides were made to bring our ships into port (The Abbé

Pluche in "The Spectacle of Nature"), were somewhat ashamed when the

reply  was  made  to  them  that  the  Mediterranean  has  ports  and  no  ebb.

Musschenbroeck himself fell into this inadvertence.

  Has anyone ever been able to say precisely how a log is changed on the

hearth into burning carbon, and by what mechanism lime is kindled by fresh

water?

  Is the first principle of the movement of the heart in animals properly

understood? does one know clearly how generation is accomplished? has one

guessed what gives us sensations, ideas, memory? We do not understand theessence of matter any more than the children who touch its surface.

  Who will teach us by what mechanism this grain of wheat that we throw

into the ground rises again to produce a pipe laden with an ear of corn, and

how the same soil produces an apple at the top of this tree, and a chestnut on

its neighbour? Many teachers have said-"What do I not know?" Montaigne

used to say-"What do I know?"

  Ruthlessly trenchant fellow, wordy pedagogue, meddlesome theorist, you

seek the limits of your mind. They are at the end of your nose.


  LOCAL CRIMES


  Traverse  the  whole  earth,  you  will  find  that  theft,  murder,  adultery,

calumny  are  regarded  as  crimes  which  society  condemns  and  curbs;  but

should what is approved in England, and condemned in Italy, be punished in

Italy as an outrage against the whole of humanity? That is what I call a local

crime.  Does  not  that  which  is  criminal  only  in  the  enclosure  of  some

mountains, or between two rivers, demand of judges more indulgence than

those outrages which are held in horror in all countries? Should not the judge

say to himself: "I should not dare punish at Ragusa what I punish at Loretto"?

Should not this reflection soften in his heart the hardness that it is only too

easy to contract during the long exercise of his office?

  You know the kermesses in Flanders; in the last century they were carried

to  a  point  of  indecency  which  might  revolt  eyes  unaccustomed  to  these

spectacles. This is how Christmas was celebrated in some towns. First there

appeared a young man half naked, with wings on his back; he recited the Ave

Maria to a young girl who answered him fiat, and the angel kissed her on the

mouth: then a child enclosed in a great cardboard cock cried, imitating the

cock's cry: Puer natus est nobis. A big ox bellowed ubi, which it pronounced

oubi; a sheep bleated Bethlehem. An ass cried hihanus, to signify eamus; a

long procession, preceded by four fools with baubles and rattles, closed the

performance. There remain to-day traces of these popular devotions, which

among  more  educated  peoples  would  be  taken  for  profanations.  A  bad-

tempered Swiss, more drunk maybe than those who played the rôles of ox

and ass, came to words with them in Louvain; blows were given; the peoplewanted to hang the Swiss, who escaped with difficulty.

  The same man had a violent quarrel at the Hague in Holland for having

stoutly taken Barneveldt's part against an extravagant Gomarist. He was put

into  prison  in  Amsterdam  for  having  said  that  priests  are  the  scourge  of

humanity and the source of all our misfortunes. "What!" he said. "If one

believes that good works make for salvation, one finds oneself in a dungeon;

if one laughs at a cock and an ass, one risks being hanged." This adventure,

burlesque though it is, makes it quite clear that one can be reprehensible on

one or two points in our hemisphere, and be absolutely innocent in the rest of

the world. 


  LOVE


  There  are  so  many  sorts  of  love  that  one  does  not  know  to  whom  to

address oneself for a definition of it. The name of "love" is given boldly to a

caprice lasting a few days, a sentiment without esteem, gallants' affectations,

a frigid habit, a romantic fantasy, relish followed by prompt disrelish: people

give this name to a thousand chimeras.

  If  philosophers  want  to  probe  to  the  bottom  this  barely  philosophical

matter,  let  them  meditate  on  the  banquet  of  Plato,  in  which  Socrates,

honourable lover of Alcibiades and Agathon, converses with them on the

metaphysics of love.

  Lucretius speaks of it more as a natural philosopher: Virgil follows in the

steps of Lucretius; amor omnibus idem.

  It is the stuff of nature broidered by nature. Do you want an idea of love?

look at the sparrows in your garden; look at your pigeons; look at the bull

which is brought to the heifer; look at this proud horse which two of your

grooms  lead  to  the  quiet  mare  awaiting  him;  she  draws  aside  her  tail  to

welcome him; see how her eyes sparkle; hark to the neighing; watch the

prancing,  the  curvetting,  the  ears  pricked,  the  mouth  opening  with  little

convulsions, the swelling nostrils, the flaring breath, the manes rising and

floating, the impetuous movement with which he hurls himself on the object

which nature has destined for him; but be not jealous of him, and think of the

advantages of the human species; in love they compensate for all those thatnature has given to the animals-strength, beauty, nimbleness, speed.

  There are animals, even, who have no enjoyment in possession. Scale fish

are deprived of this delight: the female throws millions of eggs on the mud;

the male coming across them passes over them, and fertilizes them with his

seed, without troubling about the female to whom they belong.

  Most animals that pair, taste pleasure only by a single sense, and as soon

as the appetite is satisfied, everything is extinguished. No animal, apart from

you, knows what kissing is; the whole of your body is sensitive; your lips

especially  enjoy  a  voluptuousness  that  nothing  can  tire;  and  this  pleasure

belongs to no species but yours: you can give yourself up to love at any time,

and the animals have but a fixed time. If you reflect on these superiorities,

you will say with the Count of Rochester-"In a country of atheists love would

cause the Deity to be worshipped."

  As men have received the gift of perfecting all that nature accords them,

they have perfected love. Cleanliness, the care of oneself, by rendering the

skin more delicate, increase the pleasure of contact; and attention to one's

health  renders  the  organs  of  voluptuousness  more  sensitive.  All  the  other

sentiments that enter into that of love, just like metals which amalgamate

with gold: friendship, regard, come to help; the faculties of mind and body

are still further chains.

  Self-love above all tightens all these bonds. One applauds oneself for one's

choice, and a crowd of illusions form the decoration of the building of which

nature has laid the foundations.

  That  is  what  you  have  above  the  animals.  But  if  you  taste  so  many

pleasures unknown to them, how many sorrows too of which the beasts have

no idea! What is frightful for you is that over three-fourths of the earth nature

has poisoned the pleasures of love and the sources of life with an appalling

disease to which man alone is subject, and which infects in him the organs of

generation alone.

  It is in no wise with this plague as with so many other maladies that are

the  result  of  our  excesses.  It  was  not  debauch  that  introduced  it  into  the

world. Phryne, Lais, Flora, Messalina and those like them, were not attacked

by it; it was born in some islands where men lived in innocence, and thence

spread itself over the ancient world.  If ever one could accuse nature of despising her work, of contradicting her

plans, of acting against her designs, it is in this detestable scourge which has

soiled the earth with horror and filth. Is that the best of all possible worlds?

What! if Cæsar, Antony, Octavius never had this disease, was it not possible

for it not to cause the death of François I.? "No," people say, "things were

ordered thus for the best." I want to believe it; but it is sad for those to whom

Rabelais dedicated his book.

  Erotic philosophers have often debated the question of whether Heloïse

could still really love Abelard when he was a monk and emasculate? One of

these qualities did very great harm to the other.

  But console yourself, Abelard, you were loved; the root of the hewn tree

still retains a remnant of sap; the imagination aids the heart. One can still be

happy at table even though one eats no longer. Is it love? is it simply a

memory? is it friendship? All that is composed of something indescribable. It

is an obscure feeling resembling the fantastic passions retained by the dead in

the Elysian fields. The heroes who, during their lifetime, shone in the chariot

races, drove imaginary chariots when they were dead. Heloïse lived with you

on illusions and supplements. She kissed you sometimes, and with all the

more pleasure that having taken a vow at the Paraclet monastery to love you

no longer, her kisses thereby became more precious as more guilty. A woman

can  barely  be  seized  with  a  passion  for  a  eunuch:  but  she  can  keep  her

passion for her lover become eunuch, provided that he remains lovable.

  It is not the same, ladies, for a lover who has grown old in service; the

externals subsist no longer; the wrinkles horrify; the white eyebrows shock;

the lost teeth disgust; the infirmities estrange: all that one can do is to have

the virtue of being nurse, and of tolerating what one has loved. It is burying a

dead man.


  LUXURY


  People have declaimed against luxury for two thousand years, in verse and

in prose, and people have always delighted in it.

  What has not been said of the early Romans when these brigands ravagedand pillaged the harvests; when, to enlarge their poor village, they destroyed

the poor villages of the Volscians and the Samnites? They were disinterested,

virtuous  men;  they  had  not  yet  been  able  to  steal  either  gold,  silver,  or

precious stones, because there were not any in the little towns they plundered.

Their woods and their marshes produced neither pheasants nor partridges,

and people praise their temperance.

  When gradually they had pillaged everything, stolen everything from the

far end of the Adriatic Gulf to the Euphrates, and when they had enough

intelligence to enjoy the fruit of their plundering; when they cultivated the

arts,  when  they  tasted  of  all  pleasures,  and  when  they  even  made  the

vanquished taste of them, they ceased then, people say, to be wise and honest

men.

  All these declamations reduce themselves to proving that a robber must

never either eat the dinner he has taken, or wear the coat he has pilfered, or

adorn himself with the ring he has filched. He should throw all that, people

say, in the river, so as to live like an honest man. Say rather that he should

not have stolen. Condemn brigands when they pillage; but do not treat them

as senseless when they enjoy. Honestly, when a large number of English

sailors enriched themselves at the taking of Pondicherry and Havana, were

they wrong to enjoy themselves later in London, as the price of the trouble

they had had in the depths of Asia and America?

  The  declaimers  want  one  to  bury  in  the  ground  the  wealth  one  has

amassed  by  the  fortune  of  arms,  by  agriculture,  by  commerce  and  by

industry. They cite Lacedæmon; why do they not cite also the republic of San

Marino? What good did Sparto to Greece? Did she ever have Demosthenes,

Sophocles, Apelles, Phidias? The luxury of Athens produced great men in

every sphere; Sparta had a few captains, and in less number even than other

towns. But how fine it is that as small a republic as Lacedæmon retains its

poverty.[14]

  One arrives at death as well by lacking everything as by enjoying what can

make life pleasant. The Canadian savage subsists, and comes to old age like

the English citizen who has an income of fifty thousand guineas. But who

will ever compare the land of the Iroquois to England?

  Let the republic of Ragusa and the canton of Zug make sumptuary laws,they are right, the poor man must not spend beyond his powers; but I have

read somewhere:

  "Learn that luxury enriches a great state, even if it ruins a small."[15]

  If by luxury you understand excess, everyone knows that excess in any

form is pernicious, in abstinence as in gluttony, in economy as in generosity.

I do not know how it has happened that in my village where the land is

ungrateful, the taxes heavy, the prohibition against exporting the corn one has

sown intolerable, there is nevertheless barely a cultivator who has not a good

cloth coat, and who is not well shod and well fed. If this cultivator toiled in

his fields in his fine coat, with white linen, his hair curled and powdered,

there, certainly, would be the greatest luxury, and the most impertinent; but

that a bourgeois of Paris or London should appear at the theatre clad like a

peasant, there would be the most vulgar and ridiculous niggardliness.

  When  scissors,  which  are  certainly  not  of  the  remotest  antiquity,  were

invented, what did people not say against the first men who pared their nails,

and who cut part of the hair which fell on their noses? They were treated,

without a doubt, as fops and prodigals, who bought an instrument of vanity at

a high price, in order to spoil the Creator's handiwork. What an enormous sin

to cut short the horn which God made to grow at the end of our fingers! It

was an outrage against the Deity! It was much worse when shirts and socks

were  invented.  One  knows  with  what  fury  the  aged  counsellors  who  had

never worn them cried out against the young magistrates who were addicted

to this disastrous luxury.[16]


  FOOTNOTES:


  [14] Lacedæmon avoided luxury only by preserving the community or

equality of property; but she did not preserve either the one or the other save

by having the land cultivated by an enslaved people. The existence of the

equality  or  community  of  property  supposes  the  existence  of  an  enslaved

people. The Spartans had virtue, just like highwaymen, inquisitors and all

classes of men whom habit has familiarized with a species of crime, to the

point of committing them without remorse.

  [15] The sumptuary laws are by their nature a violation of the right ofproperty. If in a little state there is not a great inequality of fortune, there will

be no luxury; if this inequality exists, luxury is the remedy for it. It is her

sumptuary laws that have lost Geneva her liberty.

  [16] If by luxury one understands everything that is beyond the necessary,

luxury is a natural consequence of the progress of the human species; and to

reason consequently every enemy of luxury should believe with Rousseau

that the state of happiness and virtue for man is that, not of the savage, but of

the orang-outang. One feels that it would be absurd to regard as an evil the

comforts which all men would enjoy: also, does one not generally give the

name of luxury to the superfluities which only a small number of individuals

can  enjoy.  In  this  sense,  luxury  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  property,

without  which  no  society  can  subsist,  and  of  a  great  inequality  between

fortunes which is the consequence, not of the right of property, but of bad

laws. Moralists should address their sermons to the legislators, and not to

individuals, because it is in the order of possible things that a virtuous and

enlightened man may have the power to make reasonable laws, and it is not

in human nature for all the rich men of a country to renounce through virtue

procuring for themselves for money the enjoyments of pleasure or vanity.


  GENERAL REFLECTION ON MAN


  It needs twenty years to lead man from the plant state in which he is

within his mother's womb, and the pure animal state which is the lot of his

early childhood, to the state when the maturity of the reason begins to appear.

It has needed thirty centuries to learn a little about his structure. It would

need eternity to learn something about his soul. It takes an instant to kill him.


  MAN IN THE IRON MASK


  The author of the "Siècle de Louis XIV."[17] is the first to speak of the

man in the iron mask in an authenticated history. The reason is that he was

very well informed about the anecdote which astonishes the present century,

which will astonish posterity, and which is only too true. He was deceived

about the date of the death of this singularly unfortunate unknown. The dateof  his  burial  at  St.  Paul  was  March  3rd,  1703,  and  not  1704.  (Note.-

According to a certificate reported by Saint-Foix, the date was November

20th, 1703.)

  He was imprisoned first of all at Pignerol before being so on St. Margaret's

Islands, and later in the Bastille; always under the same man's guard, Saint-

Mars,  who  saw  him  die.  Father  Griffet,  Jesuit,  has  communicated  to  the

public the diary of the Bastille, which testifies to the dates. He had this diary

without difficulty, for he held the delicate position of confessor of prisoners

imprisoned in the Bastille.

  The man in the iron mask is a riddle to which everyone wishes to guess

the  answer.  Some  say  that  he  was  the  Duc  de  Beaufort:  but  the  Duc  de

Beaufort was killed by the Turks at the defence of Candia, in 1669; and the

man in the iron mask was at Pignerol, in 1662. Besides, how would one have

arrested the Duc de Beaufort surrounded by his army? how would one have

transferred him to France without anybody knowing anything about it? and

why should he have been put in prison, and why this mask?

  Others have considered the Comte de Vermandois, natural son of Louis

XIV., who died publicly of the small-pox in 1683, with the army, and was

buried in the town of Arras.

  Later it was thought that the Duke of Monmouth, whose head King James

II. had cut off publicly in London in 1685, was the man in the iron mask. It

would have been necessary for him to be resuscitated, and then for him to

change the order of the times, for him to put the year 1662 in place of 1685;

for  King  James  who  never  pardoned  anyone,  and  who  on  that  account

deserved all his misfortunes, to have pardoned the Duke of Monmouth, and

to have caused the death, in his place, of a man exactly like him. It would

have been necessary to find this double who would have been so kind as to

have his neck cut off in public in order to save the Duke of Monmouth. It

would have been necessary for the whole of England to have been under a

misapprehension; for James then to have sent his earnest entreaties to Louis

XIV. to be so good as to serve as his constable and gaoler. Then Louis XIV.

having done King James this little favour, would not have failed to have the

same consideration for King William and for Queen Anne, with whom he

was at war; and he would carefully have preserved in these two monarchs'consideration his dignity of gaoler, with which King James had honoured

him.

  All these illusions being dissipated, it remains to be learned who was this

prisoner who was always masked, the age at which he died, and under what

name he was buried. It is clear that if he was not allowed to pass into the

courtyard of the Bastille, if he was not allowed to speak to his doctor, unless

covered by a mask, it was for fear that in his features might be recognized

some too striking resemblance. He might show his tongue, and never his face.

As regards his age, he himself said to the Bastille apothecary, a few days

before his death, that he thought he was about sixty; and Master Marsolan,

surgeon to the Maréchal de Richelieu, and later to the Duc d'Orléans, regent,

son-in-law of this apothecary, has repeated it to me more than once.

  Finally, why give him an Italian name? he was always called Marchiali!

He who writes this article knows more about it, maybe, than Father Griffet,

and will not say more.


  Publishers Note[18]

  It  is  surprising  to  see  so  many  scholars  and  so  many  intelligent  and

sagacious writers torment themselves with guessing who can have been the

famous  man  in  the  iron  mask,  without  the  simplest,  most  natural,  most

probable idea ever presenting itself to them. Once the fact as M. de Voltaire

reports it is admitted, with its circumstances; the existence of a prisoner of so

singular a species, put in the rank of the best authenticated historical truths; it

seems that not only is nothing easier than to imagine who this prisoner was,

but that it is even difficult for there to be two opinions on the subject. The

author of this article would have communicated his opinion earlier, if he had

not believed that this idea must already have come to many others, and if he

were not persuaded that it was not worth while giving as a discovery what,

according to him, jumps to the eyes of all who read this anecdote.

  However, as for some time past this event has divided men's minds, and as

quite recently the public has again been given a letter in which it is claimed

as proved that this celebrated prisoner was a secretary of the Duke of Mantua

(which cannot be reconciled with the great marks of respect shown by M. de

Saint-Mars to his prisoner), the author has thought it his duty to tell at lastwhat has been his opinion for many years. Maybe this conjecture will put an

end to all other researches, unless the secret be revealed by those who can be

its guardians, in such a way as to remove all doubts.

  He will not amuse himself with refuting those who have imagined that this

prisoner could be the Comte de Vermandois, the Duc de Beaufort, or the

Duke of Monmouth. The scholarly and very wise author of this last opinion

has well refuted the others; but he had based his own opinion essentially

merely on the impossibility of finding in Europe some other prince whose

detention it would have been of the very highest importance should not be

known. M. de Saint-Foix is right, if he means to speak only of princes whose

existence was known; but why has nobody yet thought of supposing that the

iron mask might have been an unknown prince, brought up in secret, and

whose existence it was important should remain unknown?

  The  Duke  of  Monmouth  was  not  for  France  a  prince  of  such  great

importance; and one does not see even what could have engaged this power,

at least after the death of this duke and of James II., to make so great a secret

of his detention, if indeed he was the iron mask. It is hardly probable either

that M. de Louvois and M. de Saint-Mars would have shown the Duke of

Monmouth the profound respect which M. de Voltaire assures they showed

the iron mask.

  The author conjectures, from the way that M. de Voltaire has told the

facts, that this celebrated historian is as persuaded as he is of the suspicion

which he is going, he says, to bring to light; but that M. de Voltaire, as a

Frenchman, did not wish, he adds, to publish point-blank, particularly as he

had said enough for the answer to the riddle not to be difficult to guess. Here

it is, he continues, as I see it.

  "The iron mask was undoubtedly a brother and an elder brother of Louis

XIV., whose mother had that taste for fine linen on which M. de Voltaire lays

stress. It was in reading the Memoirs of that time, which report this anecdote

about the queen, that, recalling this same taste in the iron mask, I doubted no

longer that he was her son: a fact of which all the other circumstances had

persuaded me already.

  "It is known that Louis XIII. had not lived with the queen for a long time;

that  the  birth  of  Louis  XIV.  was  due  only  to  a  happy  chance  skilfullyinduced; a chance which absolutely obliged the king to sleep in the same bed

with the queen. This is how I think the thing came to pass.

  "The queen may have thought that it was her fault that no heir was born to

Louis XIII. The birth of the iron mask will have undeceived her. The cardinal

to whom she will have confided the fact will have known, for more than one

reason, how to turn the secret to account; he will have thought of making use

of this event for his own benefit and for the benefit of the state. Persuaded by

this example that the queen could give the king children, the plan which

produced the chance of one bed for the king and the queen was arranged in

consequence.  But  the  queen  and  the  cardinal,  equally  impressed  with  the

necessity of hiding from Louis XIII. the iron mask's existence, will have had

him brought up in secret. This secret will have been a secret for Louis XIV.

until Cardinal Mazarin's death.

  "But this monarch learning then that he had a brother, and an elder brother

whom his mother could not disacknowledge, who further bore maybe the

marked  features  which  betrayed  his  origin,  reflecting  that  this  child  born

during  marriage  could  not,  without  great  inconvenience  and  a  horrible

scandal, be declared illegitimate after Louis XIII.'s death, Louis XIV. will

have judged that he could not use a wiser or juster means than the one he

employed in order to assure his own tranquillity and the peace of the state;

means which relieved him of committing a cruelty which policy would have

represented  as  necessary  to  a  monarch  less  conscientious  and  less

magnanimous than Louis XIV.

  "It seems to me, our author continues, that the more one knows of the

history  of  those  times,  the  more  one  must  be  struck  by  these  assembled

circumstances which are in favour of such a supposition."


  FOOTNOTES:


  [17] Voltaire.

  [18]  This  note,  given  as  a  publisher's  note  in  the  1771  edition,  passes

among many men of letters as being by Voltaire himself. He knew of this

edition, and he never contradicted the opinion there advanced on the subject

of the man in the iron mask.  He  was  the  first  to  speak  of  this  man.  He  always  combated  all  the

conjectures made about the mask: he always spoke as though better informed

than others on the subject, and as though unwilling to tell all he knew.


  There is a letter in circulation from Mlle. de Valois, written to the Duke,

afterward Maréchal de Richelieu, where she boasts of having learned from

the Duc d'Orléans, her father, under strange conditions, who the man in the

iron mask was; this man, she says, was a twin brother of Louis XIV., born a

few hours after him.


  Either this letter, which it was so useless, so indecent, so dangerous to

read, is a supposititious letter, or the regent, in giving his daughter the reward

she  had  so  nobly  acquired,  thought  to  weaken  the  danger  there  was  in

revealing a state secret, by altering the facts, so as to make of this prince a

younger son without right to the throne, instead of the heir-apparent to the

crown.


  But  Louis  XIV.,  who  had  a  brother;  Louis  XIV.,  whose  soul  was

magnanimous; Louis XIV., who prided himself even on a scrupulous probity,

whom history has reproached with no crime, who indeed committed no crime

apart from letting himself be too swayed by the counsels of Louvois and the

Jesuits;  Louis  XIV.  would  never  have  detained  one  of  his  brothers  in

perpetual prison, in order to forestall the evils announced by an astrologer, in

whom he did not believe. He needed more important motives. Eldest son of

Louis XIII., acknowledged by this prince, the throne belonged to him; but a

son born of Anne of Austria, unknown to her husband, had no rights, and

could, nevertheless, try to make himself acknowledged, rend France with a

long civil war, win maybe over Louis XIII.'s son, by alleging the right of

primogeniture, and substitute a new race for the old race of the Bourbons.

These motives, if they did not entirely justify Louis XIV.'s rigour, serve at

least to excuse him; and the prisoner, too well-informed of his fate, could be

grateful to him for not having listened to more rigorous counsels, counsels

which politics have often employed against those who had pretensions tothrones occupied by their competitors.


  From his youth Voltaire was connected with the Duc de Richelieu, who

was not discreet: if Mlle. de Valois' letter is authentic, he knew of it; but,

possessed of a just mind, he felt the error, and sought other information. He

was in a position to obtain it; he rectified the truth altered in the letter, as he

rectified so many other errors.


  MARRIAGE


  I came across a reasoner who said: "Engage your subjects to marry as soon

as possible; let them be exempt from taxes the first year, and let their tax be

distributed over those who at the same age are celibate.

  "The more married men you have, the less crime there will be. Look at the

frightful records of your registers of crime; you will find there a hundred

bachelors hanged or wheeled for one father of a family.

  "Marriage makes man wiser and more virtuous. The father of a family,

near to committing a crime, is often stopped by his wife whose blood, less

feverish than his, makes her gentler, more compassionate, more fearful of

theft and murder, more timorous, more religious.

  "The father of a family does not want to blush before his children. He

fears to leave them a heritage of shame.

  "Marry  your  soldiers,  they  will  not  desert  any  more.  Bound  to  their

families, they will be bound also to their fatherland. A bachelor soldier often

is nothing but a vagabond, to whom it is indifferent whether he serves the

king of Naples or the king of Morocco."

  The  Roman  warriors  were  married;  they  fought  for  their  wives  and

children; and they enslaved the wives and children of other nations.

  A  great  Italian  politician,  who  further  was  very  learned  in  oriental

languages, a very rare thing among our politicians, said to me in my youth:

"Caro figlio, remember that the Jews have never had but one good institution,

that  of  having  a  horror  of  virginity."  If  this  little  race  of  superstitious

intermediaries had not considered marriage as the first law of man, if therehad been among them convents of nuns, they were irreparably lost.


  MASTER

  SECTION I


  "Unfortunate that I am to have been born!" said Ardassan Ougli, young

page of the great Sultan of the Turks. "If it were only the great Sultan on

whom I am dependent; but I am subject to the chief of my oda, to the capigi

pasha;  and  when  I  receive  my  pay,  I  have  to  bow  down  to  one  of  the

tefterdar's clerks who deducts half of it. Before I was seven years old I had

cut off, in spite of myself, in ceremony, the end of my prepuce, and it made

me ill for a fortnight. The dervish who prays for us is my master; an iman is

still more my master; the mollah is still more my master than the iman. The

cadi is another master; the cadi-leskier is master still more; the mufti is much

more master than all these together. The grand vizier's kaia can with a word

have me thrown into the canal; and the grand vizier, finally, can have my

neck wrung at his pleasure, and stuff the skin of my head, without anybody

even taking notice.

  "How many masters, great God! even if I had as many bodies and as many

souls as I have duties to accomplish, I could not attend to everything. Oh,

Allah! if only you had made me a screech-owl! I should live free in my hole,

and I should eat mice at my ease without masters or servants. That assuredly

is man's real destiny; only since he was perverted has he masters. No man

was made to serve another man continuously. Each would have charitably

aided his fellow, if things were as they should be. The man with eyes would

have led the blind man, the active man would have acted as crutch to the

cripple. This world would have been the paradise of Mohammed; and it is the

hell which is exactly under the pointed bridge."

  Thus did Ardassan Ougli speak, after receiving the stirrup-leather from

one of his masters.

  After a few years Ardassan Ougli became pasha with three tails. He made

a prodigious fortune, and he firmly believed that all men, excepting the Great

Turk and the Grand Vizier, were born to serve him, and all women to give

him pleasure in accordance with his caprice.  SECTION II


  How has it been possible for one man to become another man's master,

and by what species of incomprehensible magic has he been able to become

the master of many other men? On this phenomenon a great number of good

volumes  have  been  written;  but  I  give  the  preference  to  an  Indian  fable,

because it is short, and because the fables have said everything.

  Adimo, the father of all the Indians, had two sons and two daughters by

his  wife  Procriti.  The  elder  son  was  a  giant,  the  younger  was  a  little

hunchback,  the  two  daughters  were  pretty.  As  soon  as  the  giant  was

conscious of his strength, he lay with his two sisters, and made the little

hunchback serve him. Of his two sisters, one was his cook, the other his

gardener. When the giant wanted to sleep, he started by chaining his little

hunchback brother to a tree; and when the brother escaped, he caught him in

four strides, and gave him twenty strokes with a length of ox sinew.

  The hunchback became submissive and the best subject in the world. The

giant, satisfied to see him fulfilling his duties as subject, permitted him to lie

with one of his sisters for whom he himself had taken a distaste. The children

who  came  of  this  marriage  were  not  entirely  hunchbacked;  but  they  had

sufficiently misshapen forms. They were reared in fear of God and the giant.

They received an excellent education; they were taught that their great uncle

was giant by divine right, that he could do with his family as pleased him;

that if he had a pretty niece or great-niece, she was for him alone without a

doubt, and that no one could lie with her until he wanted her no longer.

  The giant having died, his son, who was not by a long way as strong and

as big as he, thought nevertheless that he, like his father, was giant by divine

right. He claimed to make all the men work for him, and to lie with all the

women. The family leagued itself against him, he was beaten to death, and

the others turned themselves into a republic.

  The  Siamese,  on  the  contrary,  maintain  that  the  family  had  started  by

being republican, and that the giant did not come until after a great number of

years and dissensions; but all the authors of Benares and Siam agree that

mankind lived an infinity of centuries before having the intelligence to makelaws; and they prove it by an unanswerable reason, which is that even to-day

when everyone plumes himself on his intelligence, no way has been found of

making a score of passably good laws.

  It is indeed still an insoluble question in India whether republics were

established  before  or  after  monarchies,  whether  confusion  appeared  more

horrible to mankind than despotism. I do not know what happened in order of

time; but in that of nature it must be agreed that all men being born equal,

violence and adroitness made the first masters, the laws made the last.


  MEN OF LETTERS


  In our barbarous times, when the Franks, the Germans, the Bretons, the

Lombards, the Spanish Muzarabs, knew not how either to read or write, there

were  instituted  schools,  universities,  composed  almost  entirely  of

ecclesiastics who, knowing nothing but their own jargon, taught this jargon to

those  who  wished  to  learn  it;  the  academies  came  only  a  long  time

afterwards; they despised the foolishness of the schools, but did not always

dare to rise against them, because there are foolishnesses that are respected

provided that they concern respectable things.

  The men of letters who have rendered the greatest services to the small

number of thinking beings spread over the world, are the isolated writers, the

true scholars shut in their studies, who have neither argued on the benches of

the universities, nor told half-truths in the academies; and almost all of them

have been persecuted. Our wretched species is so made that those who walk

on the well-trodden path always throw stones at those who are showing a new

road.

  Montesquieu says that the Scythians rent their slaves' eyes, so that they

might be less distracted while they were churning their butter; that is just how

the inquisition functions, and in the land where this monster reigns almost

everybody is blind. In England people have had two eyes for more than two

hundred years; the French are starting to open one eye; but sometimes there

are men in power who do not want the people to have even this one eye open.

  These  poor  persons  in  power  are  like  Doctor  Balouard  of  the  Italian

Comedy, who does not want to be served by anyone but the dolt Harlequin,and who is afraid of having too shrewd a valet.

  Compose  some  odes  in  praise  of  My  Lord  Superbus  Fadus,  some

madrigals for his mistress; dedicate a book on geography to his door-keeper,

you will be well-received; enlighten mankind, you will be exterminated.

  Descartes  was  forced  to  leave  his  country,  Gassendi  was  calumniated,

Arnauld dragged out his days in exile; every philosopher is treated as the

prophets were among the Jews.

  Who  would  believe  that  in  the  eighteenth  century  a  philosopher  was

dragged before the secular tribunals, and treated as impious by the tribunals

of arguments, for having said that men could not practise the arts if they had

no hands? I do not despair that soon the first person who is so insolent as to

say  that  men  could  not  think  if  they  had  no  heads  will  be  immediately

condemned to the galleys; "for," some young graduate will say to him, "the

soul is a pure spirit, the head is only matter; God can put the soul in the heel,

as well as in the brain; therefore I denounce you as impious."

  The greatest misfortune of a man of letters is not perhaps being the object

of his confrères' jealousy, the victim of the cabal, the despised of the men of

power; but of being judged by fools. Fools go far sometimes, particularly

when bigotry is added to ineptitude, and to ineptitude the spirit of vengeance.

The  further  great  misfortune  of  a  man  of  letters  is  that  ordinarily  he  is

unattached. A bourgeois buys himself a small position, and there he is backed

by his colleagues. If he suffers an injustice, he finds defenders at once. The

man of letters is unsuccoured; he resembles a flying-fish; if he rises a little,

the birds devour him; if he dives, the fish eat him.

  Every public man pays tribute to malignity, but he is paid in honours and

gold.


    METAMORPHOSIS, METEMPSYCHOSIS


  Is it not very natural that all the metamorphoses with which the world is

covered should have made people imagine in the Orient, where everything

has  been  imagined,  that  our  souls  passed  from  one  body  to  another?  An

almost imperceptible speck becomes a worm, this worm becomes a butterfly;an acorn transforms itself into an oak; an egg into a bird; water becomes

cloud and thunder; wood is changed into fire and ash; everything in nature

appears, in fine, metamorphosed. Soon people attributed to souls, which were

regarded as light figures, what they saw in more gross bodies. The idea of

metempsychosis is perhaps the most ancient dogma of the known universe,

and it still reigns in a large part of India and China.


  MILTON, ON THE REPROACH OF PLAGIARISM AGAINST


  Some  people  have  accused  Milton  of  having  taken  his  poem  from  the

tragedy of "The Banishment of Adam" by Grotius, and from the "Sarcotis" of

the Jesuit Masenius, printed at Cologne in 1654 and in 1661, long before

Milton gave his "Paradise Lost."

  As regards Grotius, it was well enough known in England that Milton had

carried into his epic English poem a few Latin verses from the tragedy of

"Adam." It is in no wise to be a plagiarist to enrich one's language with the

beauties of a foreign language. No one accused Euripides of plagiarism for

having imitated in one of the choruses of "Iphigenia" the second book of the

Iliad; on the contrary, people were very grateful to him for this imitation,

which they regarded as a homage rendered to Homer on the Athenian stage.

  Virgil never suffered a reproach for having happily imitated, in the Æneid,

a hundred verses by the first of Greek poets.

  Against Milton the accusation was pushed a little further. A Scot, Will

Lauder by name, very attached to the memory of Charles I., whom Milton

had insulted with the most uncouth animosity, thought himself entitled to

dishonour the memory of this monarch's accuser. It was claimed that Milton

was guilty of an infamous imposture in robbing Charles I. of the sad glory of

being the author of the "Eikon Basilika," a book long dear to the royalists,

and which Charles I., it was said, had composed in his prison to serve as

consolation for his deplorable adversity.

  Lauder, therefore, about the year of 1752, wanted to begin by proving that

Milton was only a plagiarist, before proving that he had acted as a forger

against  the  memory  of  the  most  unfortunate  of  kings;  he  procured  some

editions of the poem of the "Sarcotis." It seemed evident that Milton hadimitated some passages of it, as he had imitated Grotius and Tasso.

  But Lauder did not rest content there; he unearthed a bad translation in

Latin verse of the "Paradise Lost" of the English poet; and joining several

verses of this translation to those by Masenius, he thought thereby to render

the accusation more grave, and Milton's shame more complete. It was in that,

that he was badly deceived; his fraud was discovered. He wanted to make

Milton pass for a forger, and he was himself convicted of forging. No one

examined Masenius' poem of which at that time there were only a few copies

in Europe. All England, convinced of the Scot's poor trick, asked no more

about it. The accuser, confounded, was obliged to disavow his manœuvre,

and ask pardon for it.

  Since then a new edition of Masenius was printed in 1757. The literary

public was surprised at the large number of very beautiful verses with which

the Sarcotis was sprinkled. It is in truth nothing but a long declamation of the

schools on the fall of man: but the exordium, the invocation, the description

of the garden of Eden, the portrait of Eve, that of the devil, are precisely the

same as in Milton. Further, it is the same subject, the same plot, the same

catastrophe. If the devil wishes, in Milton, to be revenged on man for the

harm which God has done him, he has precisely the same plan in the work of

the  Jesuit  Masenius;  and  he  manifests  it  in  verses  worthy  maybe  of  the

century of Augustus. ("Sarcotis," I., 271 et seq.)

  One finds in both Masenius and Milton little episodes, trifling digressions

which are absolutely alike; both speak of Xerxes who covered the sea with

his ships. Both speak in the same tone of the Tower of Babel; both give the

same description of luxury, of pride, of avarice, of gluttony.

  What most persuaded the generality of readers of Milton's plagiarism was

the perfect resemblance of the beginning of the two poems. Many foreigners,

after reading the exordium, had no doubt but that the rest of Milton's poem

was taken from Masenius. It is a very great error and easy to recognize.

  I do not think that the English poet imitated in all more than two hundred

of the Jesuit of Cologne's verses; and I dare say that he imitated only what

was worthy of being imitated. These two hundred verses are very beautiful;

so are Milton's; and the total of Masenius' poem, despite these two hundred

beautiful verses, is not worth anything at all.  Molière took two whole scenes from the ridiculous comedy of the "Pédant

Joué" by Cyrano de Bergerac. "These two scenes are good," he said as he was

jesting with his friends. "They belong to me by right: I recover my property."

After that anyone who treated the author of "Tartufe" and "Le Misanthrope"

as a plagiarist would have been very badly received.

  It is certain that generally Milton, in his "Paradise", has in imitating flown

on his own wings; and it must be agreed that if he borrowed so many traits

from Grotius and from the Jesuit of Cologne, they are blended in the crowd

of original things which are his; in England he is always regarded as a very

great poet.

  It is true that he should have avowed having translated two hundred of a

Jesuit's verses; but in his time, at the court of Charles II., people did not

worry themselves with either the Jesuits, or Milton, or "Paradise Lost", or

"Paradise Regained". All those things were either scoffed at, or unknown.


    MOHAMMEDANS


  I tell you again, ignorant imbeciles, whom other ignoramuses have made

believe that the Mohammedan religion is voluptuous and sensual, there is not

a word of truth in it; you have been deceived on this point as on so many

others.

  Canons, monks, vicars even, if a law were imposed on you not to eat or

drink from four in the morning till ten at night, during the month of July,

when Lent came at this period; if you were forbidden to play at any game of

chance under pain of damnation; if wine were forbidden you under the same

pain; if you had to make a pilgrimage into the burning desert; if it were

enjoined on you to give at least two and a half per cent. of your income to the

poor; if, accustomed to enjoy possession of eighteen women, the number

were  cut  down  suddenly  by  fourteen;  honestly,  would  you  dare  call  that

religion sensual?

  The Latin Christians have so many advantages over the Mussulmans, I do

not  say  in  the  matter  of  war,  but  in  the  matter  of  doctrines;  the  Greek

Christians have so beaten them latterly from 1769 to 1773, that it is not worth

the trouble to indulge in unjust reproaches against Islam.  Try to retake from the Mohammedans all that they usurped; but it is easier

to calumniate them.

  I hate calumny so much that I do not want even to impute foolishness to

the Turks, although I detest them as tyrants over women and enemies of the

arts.

  I  do  not  know  why  the  historian  of  the  Lower  Empire  maintains  that

Mohammed speaks in his Koran of his journey into the sky: Mohammed does

not say a word about it; we have proved it.

  One must combat ceaselessly. When one has destroyed an error, there is

always someone who resuscitates it.


  MOUNTAIN


  It is a very old, very universal fable that tells of the mountain which,

having frightened all the countryside by its outcry that it was in labour, was

hissed  by  all  present  when  it  brought  into  the  world  a  mere  mouse.  The

people  in  the  pit  were  not  philosophers.  Those  who  hissed  should  have

admired. It was as fine for the mountain to give birth to a mouse, as for the

mouse to give birth to a mountain. A rock which produces a rat is a very

prodigious thing; and never has the world seen anything approaching this

miracle. All the globes of the universe could not call a fly into existence.

Where the vulgar laugh, the philosopher admires; and he laughs where the

vulgar open their big, stupid eyes in astonishment.


    NAKEDNESS


  Why should one lock up a man or a woman who walked stark naked in the

street? and why is no one shocked by absolutely nude statues, by pictures of

the Madonna and of Jesus that may be seen in some churches?

  It is probably that the human species lived long without being clothed.

  People  unacquainted  with  clothing  have  been  found  in  more  than  one

island and in the American continent.  The  most  civilized  hide  the  organs  of  generation  with  leaves,  woven

rushes, feathers.

  Whence comes this form of modesty? is it the instinct for lighting desires

by hiding what it gives pleasure to discover?

  Is it really true that among slightly more civilized nations, such as the

Jews and half-Jews, there have been entire sects who would not worship God

save by stripping themselves of all their clothes? such were, it is said, the

Adamites and the Abelians. They gathered quite naked to sing the praises of

God: St. Epiphanius and St. Augustine say so. It is true that they were not

contemporary, and that they were very far from these people's country. But at

all events this madness is possible: it is not even more extraordinary, more

mad than a hundred other madnesses which have been round the world one

after the other.

  We have said elsewhere that to-day even the Mohammedans still have

saints who are madmen, and who go naked like monkeys. It is very possible

that some fanatics thought it was better to present themselves to the Deity in

the state in which He formed them, than in the disguise invented by man. It is

possible that they showed everything out of piety. There are so few well-

made persons of both sexes, that nakedness might have inspired chastity, or

rather disgust, instead of increasing desire.

  It is said particularly that the Abelians renounced marriage. If there were

any fine lads and pretty lasses among them, they were at least comparable to

St. Adhelme and to blessed Robert d'Arbrisselle, who slept with the prettiest

persons, that their continence might triumph all the more.

  But I avow that it would have been very comic to see a hundred Helens

and Parises singing anthems, giving each other the kiss of peace, and making

agapæ.

  All  of  which  shows  that  there  is  no  singularity,  no  extravagance,  no

superstition which has not passed through the heads of mankind. Happy the

day when these superstitions do not trouble society and make of it a scene of

disorder, hatred and fury! It is better without doubt to pray God stark naked,

than to stain His altars and the public places with human blood.  NATURAL LAW


  B: What is natural law?

  A: The instinct which makes us feel justice.

  B: What do you call just and unjust?

  A: What appears such to the entire universe.

  B: The universe is composed of many heads. It is said that in Lacedæmon

were applauded thefts for which people in Athens were condemned to the

mines.

  A:  Abuse  of  words,  logomachy,  equivocation;  theft  could  not  be

committed at Sparta, when everything was common property. What you call

"theft" was the punishment for avarice.

  B: It was forbidden to marry one's sister in Rome. It was allowed among

the Egyptians, the Athenians and even among the Jews, to marry one's sister

on the father's side. It is but with regret that I cite that wretched little Jewish

people, who should assuredly not serve as a rule for anyone, and who (putting

religion aside) was never anything but a race of ignorant and fanatic brigands.

But still, according to their books, the young Thamar, before being ravished

by her brother Amnon, says to him:-"Nay, my brother, do not thou this folly,

but speak unto the king; for he will not withhold me from thee." (2 Samuel

xiii. 12, 13.)

  A: Conventional law all that, arbitrary customs, fashions that pass: the

essential remains always. Show me a country where it was honourable to rob

me of the fruit of my toil, to break one's promise, to lie in order to hurt, to

calumniate, to assassinate, to poison, to be ungrateful towards a benefactor, to

beat one's father and one's mother when they offer you food.

  B: Have you forgotten that Jean-Jacques, one of the fathers of the modern

Church, has said that "the first man who dared enclose and cultivate a piece

of  land"  was  the  enemy  "of  the  human  race,"  that  he  should  have  been

exterminated, and that "the fruits of the earth are for all, and that the land

belongs  to  none"?  Have  we  not  already  examined  together  this  lovely

proposition which is so useful to society (Discourse on Inequality, second

part)?  A: Who is this Jean-Jacques? he is certainly not either John the Baptist,

nor John the Evangelist, nor James the Greater, nor James the Less[19]; it

must be some Hunnish wit who wrote that abominable impertinence or some

poor joker bufo magro who wanted to laugh at what the entire world regards

as  most  serious.  For  instead  of  going  to  spoil  the  land  of  a  wise  and

industrious  neighbour,  he  had  only  to  imitate  him;  and  every  father  of  a

family  having  followed  this  example,  behold  soon  a  very  pretty  village

formed. The author of this passage seems to me a very unsociable animal.

  B: You think then that by outraging and robbing the good man who has

surrounded  his  garden  and  chicken-run  with  a  live  hedge,  he  has  been

wanting in respect towards the duties of natural law?

  A: Yes, yes, once again, there is a natural law, and it does not consist

either in doing harm to others, or in rejoicing thereat.

  B: I imagine that man likes and does harm only for his own advantage.

But so many people are led to look for their own interest in the misfortune of

others, vengeance is so violent a passion, there are such disastrous examples

of it; ambition, still more fatal, has inundated the world with so much blood,

that when I retrace for myself the horrible picture, I am tempted to avow that

man is a very devil. In vain have I in my heart the notion of justice and

injustice; an Attila courted by St. Leo, a Phocas flattered by St. Gregory with

the most cowardly baseness, an Alexander VI. sullied with so many incests,

so many murders, so many poisonings, with whom the weak Louis XII., who

is  called  "the  good,"  makes  the  most  infamous  and  intimate  alliance;  a

Cromwell whose protection Cardinal Mazarin seeks, and for whom he drives

out of France the heirs of Charles I., Louis XIV.'s first cousins, etc., etc.; a

hundred like examples set my ideas in disorder, and I know no longer where I

am.

  A: Well, do storms stop our enjoyment of to-day's beautiful sun? Did the

earthquake which destroyed half the city of Lisbon stop your making the

voyage to Madrid very comfortably? If Attila was a brigand and Cardinal

Mazarin a rogue, are there not princes and ministers who are honest people?

Has it not been remarked that in the war of 1701, Louis XIV.'s council was

composed of the most virtuous men? The Duc de Beauvilliers, the Marquis

de Torci, the Maréchal de Villars, Chamillart lastly who passed for beingincapable,  but  never  for  dishonest.  Does  not  the  idea  of  justice  subsist

always? It is upon that idea that all laws are founded. The Greeks called them

"daughters of heaven," which only means daughters of nature. Have you no

laws in your country?

  B: Yes, some good, some bad.

  A: Where, if it was not in the notions of natural law, did you get the idea

that every man has within himself when his mind is properly made? You

must have obtained it there, or nowhere.

  B: You are right, there is a natural law; but it is still more natural to many

people to forget it.

  A:  It  is  natural  also  to  be  one-eyed,  hump-backed,  lame,  deformed,

unhealthy; but one prefers people who are well made and healthy.

  B: Why are there so many one-eyed and deformed minds?

  A: Peace! But go to the article on "Power."


  FOOTNOTES:

  [19] Jean=John: Jacques=James.


  NATURE


  Dialogue between the Philosopher and Nature

  THE PHILOSOPHER:

  Who are you, Nature? I live in you; for fifty years have I been seeking

you, and I have not found you yet.

  NATURE:

  The ancient Egyptians, who lived, it is said, some twelve hundred years,

made me the same reproach. They called me Isis; they put a great veil on my

head, and they said that nobody could lift it.

  THE PHILOSOPHER:

  That is what makes me address myself to you. I have been able to measuresome of your globes, know their paths, assign the laws of motion; but I have

not been able to learn who you are.

  Are you always active? are you always passive? did your elements arrange

themselves, as water deposits itself on sand, oil on water, air on oil? have you

a mind which directs all your operations, as councils are inspired as soon as

they are assembled, although their members are sometimes ignoramuses? I

pray you tell me the answer to your riddle.

  NATURE:

  I  am  the  great  everything.  I  know  no  more  about  it.  I  am  not  a

mathematician;  and  everything  is  arranged  in  my  world  according  to

mathematical laws. Guess if you can how it is all done.

  THE PHILOSOPHER:

  Certainly, since your great everything does not know mathematics, and

since all your laws are most profoundly geometrical, there must be an eternal

geometer who directs you, a supreme intelligence who presides over your

operations.

  NATURE:

  You are right; I am water, earth, fire, atmosphere, metal, mineral, stone,

vegetable, animal. I feel indeed that there is in me an intelligence; you have

an intelligence, you do not see it. I do not see mine either; I feel this invisible

power; I cannot know it: why should you, who are but a small part of me,

want to know what I do not know?

  THE PHILOSOPHER:

  We are curious. I want to know how being so crude in your mountains, in

your deserts, in your seas, you appear nevertheless so industrious in your

animals, in your vegetables?

  NATURE:

  My poor child do you want me to tell you the truth? It is that I have been

given a name which does not suit me; my name is "Nature", and I am all art.

  THE PHILOSOPHER:

  That word upsets all my ideas. What! nature is only art?  NATURE:

  Yes, without any doubt. Do you not know that there is an infinite art in

those seas and those mountains that you find so crude? do you not know that

all those waters gravitate towards the centre of the earth, and mount only by

immutable laws; that those mountains which crown the earth are the immense

reservoirs of the eternal snows which produce unceasingly those fountains,

lakes and rivers without which my animal species and my vegetable species

would perish? And as for what are called my animal kingdom, my vegetable

kingdom and my mineral kingdom, you see here only three; learn that I have

millions of kingdoms. But if you consider only the formation of an insect, of

an ear of corn, of gold, of copper, everything will appear as marvels of art.

  THE PHILOSOPHER:

  It is true. The more I think about it, the more I see that you are only the art

of  I  know  not  what  most  potent  and  industrious  great  being,  who  hides

himself and who makes you appear. All reasoners since Thales, and probably

long before him, have played at blind man's buff with you; they have said: "I

have you!" and they had nothing. We all resemble Ixion; he thought he was

kissing Juno, and all that he possessed was a cloud.

  NATURE:

  Since I am all that is, how can a being such as you, so small a part of

myself, seize me? Be content, atoms my children, with seeing a few atoms

that surround you, with drinking a few drops of my milk, with vegetating for

a few moments on my breast, and with dying without having known your

mother and your nurse.

  THE PHILOSOPHER:

  My dear mother, tell me something of why you exist, of why there is

anything.

  NATURE:

  I will answer you as I have answered for so many centuries all those who

have interrogated me about first principles: I KNOW NOTHING ABOUT

THEM.

  THE PHILOSOPHER:  Would not non-existence be better than this multitude of existences made

in  order  to  be  continually  dissolved,  this  crowd  of  animals  born  and

reproduced  in  order  to  devour  others  and  to  be  devoured,  this  crowd  of

sentient beings formed for so many painful sensations, that other crowd of

intelligences  which  so  rarely  hear  reason.  What  is  the  good  of  all  that,

Nature?

  NATURE:

  Oh! go and ask Him who made me.


  NECESSARY


  OSMIN:

  Do you not say that everything is necessary?

  SELIM:

  If  everything  were  not  necessary,  it  would  follow  that  God  had  made

useless things.

  OSMIN:

  That is to say that it was necessary to the divine nature to make all that it

has made?

  SELIM:

  I think so, or at least I suspect it; there are people who think otherwise; I

do not understand them; maybe they are right. I am afraid of disputes on this

subject.

  OSMIN:

  It is also of another necessary that I want to talk to you.

  SELIM:

  What! of what is necessary to an honest man that he may live? of the

misfortune to which one is reduced when one lacks the necessary?

  OSMIN:

  No; for what is necessary to one is not always necessary to the other: it isnecessary for an Indian to have rice, for an Englishman to have meat; a fur is

necessary to a Russian, and a gauzy stuff to an African; this man thinks that

twelve coach-horses are necessary to him, that man limits himself to a pair of

shoes, a third walks gaily barefoot: I want to talk to you of what is necessary

to all men.

  SELIM:

  It seems to me that God has given all that is necessary to this species: eyes

to  see  with,  feet  for  walking,  a  mouth  for  eating,  an  œsophagus  for

swallowing,  a  stomach  for  digesting,  a  brain  for  reasoning,  organs  for

producing one's fellow creature.

  OSMIN:

  How  does  it  happen  then  that  men  are  born  lacking  a  part  of  these

necessary things?

  SELIM:

  It is because the general laws of nature have brought about some accidents

which have made monsters to be born; but generally man is provided with

everything that is necessary to him in order to live in society.

  OSMIN:

  Are there notions common to all men which serve to make them live in

society?

  SELIM:

  Yes. I have travelled with Paul Lucas, and wherever I went, I saw that

people  respected  their  father  and  their  mother,  that  people  believed

themselves to be obliged to keep their promises, that people pitied oppressed

innocents, that they hated persecution, that they regarded liberty of thought as

a rule of nature, and the enemies of this liberty as enemies of the human race;

those  who  think  differently  seemed  to  me  badly  organized  creatures,

monsters like those who are born without eyes and hands.

  OSMIN:

  Are these necessary things in all time and in all places?

  SELIM:  Yes, if they were not they would not be necessary to the human species.

  OSMIN:

  So a belief which is new is not necessary to this species. Men could very

well live in society and accomplish their duty to God, before believing that

Mahomet had frequent interviews with the angel Gabriel.

  SELIM:

  Nothing  is  clearer;  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  think  that  man  could  not

accomplish his duty to God before Mahomet came into the world; it was not

at all necessary for the human species to believe in the Alcoran: the world

went along before Mahomet just as it goes along to-day. If Mahometanism

had been necessary to the world, it would have existed in all places; God who

has  given  us  all  two  eyes  to  see  the  sun,  would  have  given  us  all  an

intelligence to see the truth of the Mussulman religion. This sect is therefore

only like the positive laws that change according to time and place, like the

fashions, like the opinions of the natural philosophers which follow one after

the other.

  The Mussulman sect could not be essentially necessary to mankind.

  OSMIN:

  But since it exists, God has permitted it?

  SELIM:

  Yes,  as  he  permits  the  world  to  be  filled  with  foolishness,  error  and

calamity; that is not to say that men are all essentially made to be fools and

miscreants. He permits that some men be eaten by snakes; but one cannot

say-"God made man to be eaten by snakes."

  OSMIN:

  What do you mean when you say "God permits"? can nothing happen

without His order? permit, will and do, are they not the same thing for Him?

  SELIM:

  He permits crime, but He does not commit it.

  OSMIN:

  Committing a crime is acting against divine justice, it is disobeying God.Well, God cannot disobey Himself, He cannot commit crime; but He has

made man in such a way that man may commit many crimes: where does that

come from?

  SELIM:

  There  are  people  who  know,  but  I  do  not;  all  that  I  know  is  that  the

Alcoran is ridiculous, although from time to time it has some tolerably good

things; certainly the Alcoran was not at all necessary to man; I stick by that: I

see clearly what is false, and I know very little that is true.

  OSMIN:

  I thought you would instruct me, and you teach me nothing.

  SELIM:

  Is it not a great deal to recognize people who deceive you, and the gross

and dangerous errors which they retail to you?

  OSMIN:

  I should have ground for complaint against a doctor who showed me all

the harmful plants, and who did not show me one salutary plant.

  SELIM:

  I am not a doctor, and you are not ill; but it seems to me I should be giving

you a very good prescription if I said to you: "Put not your trust in all the

inventions of charlatans, worship God, be an honest man, and believe that

two and two make four."


  NEW NOVELTIES


  It  seems  that  the  first  words  of  Ovid's  "Metamorphoses,"  In  nova  fert

animus, are the motto of the human race. Nobody is touched by the admirable

spectacle of the sun which rises, or rather seems to rise, every day; everybody

runs to see the smallest little meteor which appears for an instant in that

accumulation of vapours, called the sky, that surround the earth.

  An  itinerant  bookseller  does  not  burden  himself  with  a  Virgil,  with  a

Horace, but with a new book, even though it be detestable. He draws youaside and says to you: "Sir, do you want some books from Holland?"

  From  the  beginning  of  the  world  women  have  complained  of  the

fickleness that is imputed to them in favour of the first new object which

presents itself, and whose novelty is often its only merit. Many ladies (it must

be confessed, despite the infinite respect we have for them) have treated men

as  they  complain  they  have  themselves  been  treated;  and  the  story  of

Gioconda is much older than Ariosto.

  Perhaps this universal taste for novelty is one of nature's favours. People

cry to us: "Be content with what you have, desire nothing that is beyond your

estate, restrain your curiosity, tame your intellectual disquiet." These are very

good maxims; but if we had always followed them, we should still be eating

acorns, we should be sleeping in the open air, and we should not have had

Corneille, Racine, Molière, Poussin, Lebrun, Lemoine or Pigalle.


    PHILOSOPHER


  Philosopher, lover of wisdom, that is to say, of truth. All philosophers

have had this dual character; there is not one in antiquity who has not given

mankind  examples  of  virtue  and  lessons  in  moral  truths.  They  have  all

contrived to be deceived about natural philosophy; but natural philosophy is

so little necessary for the conduct of life, that the philosophers had no need of

it.  It  has  taken  centuries  to  learn  a  part  of  nature's  laws.  One  day  was

sufficient for a wise man to learn the duties of man.

  The  philosopher  is  not  enthusiastic;  he  does  not  set  himself  up  as  a

prophet; he does not say that he is inspired by the gods. Thus I shall not put

in the rank of philosophers either the ancient Zarathustra, or Hermes, or the

ancient Orpheus, or any of those legislators of whom the nations of Chaldea,

Persia,  Syria,  Egypt  and  Greece  boasted.  Those  who  styled  themselves

children of the gods were the fathers of imposture; and if they used lies for

the teaching of truths, they were unworthy of teaching them; they were not

philosophers; they were at best very prudent liars.

  By what fatality, shameful maybe for the Western peoples, is it necessary

to go to the far Orient to find a wise man who is simple, unostentatious, free

from imposture, who taught men to live happily six hundred years before ourvulgar era, at a time when the whole of the North was ignorant of the usage

of  letters,  and  when  the  Greeks  were  barely  beginning  to  distinguish

themselves by their wisdom?

  This wise man is Confucius, who being legislator never wanted to deceive

men. What more beautiful rule of conduct has ever been given since him in

the whole world?

  "Rule a state as you rule a family; one can only govern one's family well

by setting the example.

  "Virtue should be common to both husbandman and monarch.

  "Apply thyself to the trouble of preventing crimes in order to lessen the

trouble of punishing them.

  "Under the good kings Yao and Xu the Chinese were good; under the bad

kings Kie and Chu they were wicked.

  "Do to others as to thyself.

  "Love  all  men;  but  cherish  honest  people.  Forget  injuries,  and  never

kindnesses.

  "I have seen men incapable of study; I have never seen them incapable of

virtue."

  Let us admit that there is no legislator who has proclaimed truths more

useful to the human race.

  A host of Greek philosophers have since taught an equally pure moral

philosophy. If they had limited themselves to their empty systems of natural

philosophy, their names would be pronounced to-day in mockery only. If

they are still respected, it is because they were just and that they taught men

to be so.

  One  cannot  read  certain  passages  of  Plato,  and  notably  the  admirable

exordium of the laws of Zaleucus, without feeling in one's heart the love of

honourable and generous actions. The Romans have their Cicero, who alone

is worth perhaps all the philosophers of Greece. After him come men still

more worthy of respect, but whom one almost despairs of imitating; Epictetus

in bondage, the Antonines and the Julians on the throne.

  Which is the citizen among us who would deprive himself, like Julian,Antoninus  and  Marcus  Aurelius,  of  all  the  delicacies  of  our  flabby  and

effeminate lives? who would sleep as they did on the ground? who would

impose on himself their frugality? who, as they did, would march barefoot

and bareheaded at the head of the armies, exposed now to the heat of the sun,

now to the hoar-frost? who would command all their passions as they did?

There are pious men among us; but where are the wise men? where are the

resolute, just and tolerant souls?

  There  have  been  philosophers  of  the  study  in  France;  and  all,  except

Montaigne,  have  been  persecuted.  It  is,  I  think,  the  last  degree  of  the

malignity  of  our  nature,  to  wish  to  oppress  these  very  philosophers  who

would correct it.

  I quite understand that the fanatics of one sect slaughter the enthusiasts of

another sect, that the Franciscans hate the Dominicans, and that a bad artist

intrigues to ruin one who surpasses him; but that the wise Charron should

have been threatened with the loss of his life, that the learned and generous

Ramus  should  have  been  assassinated,  that  Descartes  should  have  been

forced to flee to Holland to escape the fury of the ignorant, that Gassendi

should have been obliged to withdraw several times to Digne, far from the

calumnies of Paris; these things are a nation's eternal shame.


  POWER, OMNIPOTENCE


  I suppose that the man who reads this article is convinced that this world is

formed with intelligence, and that a little astronomy and anatomy suffices to

make this universal and supreme intelligence admired.

  Can he know by himself if this intelligence is omnipotent, that is to say,

infinitely powerful? Has he the least notion of the infinite, to understand what

is an infinite power?

  The  celebrated  historian  philosopher,  David  Hume,  says  in  "Particular

Providence": "A weight of ten ounces is lifted in a balance by another weight;

therefore this other weight is of more than ten ounces; but one can adduce no

reason why it should weigh a hundred ounces."

  One  can  say  likewise:  You  recognize  a  supreme  intelligence  strongenough to form you, to preserve you for a limited time, to reward you, to

punish you. Do you know enough of this power to demonstrate that it can do

still more?

  How can you prove by your reason that this being can do more than he has

done?

  The life of all animals is short. Could he make it longer?

  All animals are the prey of each other: everything is born to be devoured.

Could he form without destroying?

  You do not know what nature is. You cannot therefore know if nature has

not forced him to do only the things he has done.

  This globe is only a vast field of destruction and carnage. Either the great

Being has been able to make of it an eternal abode of delight for all sentient

beings, or He has not been able. If He has been able and if He has not done

so, fear to regard him as malevolent; but if He has not been able, fear not to

look on Him as a very great power, circumscribed by nature in His limits.

  Whether or no His power is infinite does not regard you. It is a matter of

indifference to a subject whether his master possesses five hundred leagues of

land or five thousand; he is subject neither more nor less.

  Which would be the greater insult to this ineffable Being, to say: "He has

made miserable men without being able to dispense with them, or He has

made them for His pleasure?"

  Many sects represent Him as cruel; others, for fear of admitting a wicked

God, have the audacity to deny His existence. Is it not better to say that

probably  the  necessity  of  His  nature  and  the  necessity  of  things  have

determined everything?

  The world is the theatre of moral ill and physical ill; one is only too aware

of it: and the "All is good" of Shaftesbury, Bolingbroke and Pope, is only a

witty paradox, a poor joke.

  The two principles of Zarathustra and Manes, so carefully scrutinized by

Bayle,  are  a  still  poorer  joke.  They  are,  as  has  been  observed  already,

Molière's two doctors, one of whom says to the other: "Grant me the emetic,

and I will grant you the bleeding." Manichæism is absurd; and that is why ithas had so many supporters.

  I admit that I have not been enlightened by all that Bayle says about the

Manichæans and the Paulicians. That is controversy; I would have preferred

pure philosophy. Why discuss our mysteries beside Zarathustra's? As soon as

you dare to treat of our mysteries, which need only faith and no reasoning,

you open precipices for yourself.

  The trash in our scholastic theology has nothing to do with the trash in

Zarathustra's reveries.

  Why debate original sin with Zarathustra? There was never any question

of it save in St. Augustine's time. Neither Zarathustra nor any legislator of

antiquity had ever heard speak of it.

  If you dispute with Zarathustra, put under lock and key the old and the

new Testaments which he did not know, and which one must revere without

desiring to explain them.

  What then should I have said to Zarathustra? My reason cannot admit two

gods who fight, that is good only in a poem where Minerva quarrels with

Mars. My feeble reason is much more content with a single great Being,

whose essence was to make, and who has made all that nature has permitted

Him, than it is satisfied with two great Beings, one of whom spoils the works

of the other. Your bad principle Ahriman, has not been able to upset a single

one of the astronomical and physical laws of the good principle Ormuzd;

everything progresses in the heavens with the greatest regularity. Why should

the wicked Ahriman have had power over this little globe of the world?

  If I had been Ahriman, I should have attacked Ormuzd in his fine grand

provinces of so many suns and stars. I should not have limited myself to

making war on him in a little village.

  There is much evil in this village: but whence have you the knowledge

that this evil is not inevitable?

  You are forced to admit an intelligence diffused over the universe; but (1)

do  you  know,  for  instance,  if  this  power  reaches  right  to  foreseeing  the

future? You have asserted it a thousand times; but you have never been able

either  to  prove  it,  or  to  understand  it.  You  cannot  know  how  any  being

whatever sees what is not. Well, the future is not; therefore no being can seeit.  You  are  reduced  to  saying  that  He  foresees  it;  but  foreseeing  is

conjecturing. This is the opinion of the Socinians.

  Well, a God who, according to you, conjectures, can be mistaken. In your

system He is really mistaken; for if He had foreseen that His enemy would

poison all His works here below, He would not have produced them; He

would  not  have  prepared  for  Himself  the  shame  of  being  continually

vanquished.

  (2) Do I not do Him much more honour by saying that He has made

everything by the necessity of His nature, than you do Him by raising an

enemy who disfigures, who soils, who destroys all His works here below?

  (3) It is not to have an unworthy idea of God to say that, having formed

thousands of millions of worlds where death and evil do not dwell, it was

necessary that evil and death should dwell in this world.

  (4) It is not to disparage God to say that He could not form man without

giving  him  self-esteem;  that  this  self-esteem  could  not  lead  him  without

misguiding him almost always; that his passions are necessary, but that they

are disastrous; that propagation cannot be executed without desire; that desire

cannot animate man without quarrels; that these quarrels necessarily bring

wars in their train, etc.

  (5) When he sees part of the combinations of the animal, vegetable and

mineral  kingdoms,  and  this  globe  pierced  everywhere  like  a  sieve,  from

which escape in crowds so many exhalations, what philosopher will be bold

enough, what scholastic foolish enough to see clearly that nature could stop

the effects of volcanoes, the inclemencies of the atmosphere, the violence of

the winds, the plagues, and all the destructive scourges?

  (6) One must be very powerful, very strong, very industrious, to have

formed lions which devour bulls, and to have produced men who invent arms

to kill at one blow, not only bulls and lions, but even each other. One must be

very powerful to have caused to be born spiders which spin webs to catch

flies; but that is not to be omnipotent, infinitely powerful.

  (7) If the great Being had been infinitely powerful, there is no reason why

He should not have made sentient animals infinitely happy; He has not done

so, therefore He was not able.  (8) All the sects of the philosophers have stranded on the reef of moral and

physical ill. It only remains to avow that God having acted for the best has

not been able to act better.

  (9) This necessity settles all the difficulties and finishes all the disputes.

We have not the impudence to say-"All is good." We say-"All is the least bad

that is possible."

  (10) Why does a child often die in its mother's womb? Why is another

who has had the misfortune to be born, reserved for torments as long as his

life, terminated by a frightful death?

  Why has the source of life been poisoned all over the world since the

discovery  of  America?  why  since  the  seventh  century  of  our  era  does

smallpox carry off the eighth part of the human race? why since all time have

bladders been subject to being stone quarries? why the plague, war, famine,

the inquisition? Turn in every direction, you will find no other solution than

that everything has been necessary.

  I speak here to philosophers only and not to theologians. We know well

that faith is the thread in the labyrinth. We know that the fall of Adam and

Eve,  original  sin,  the  immense  power  given  to  the  devil,  the  predilection

accorded by the great Being to the Jewish people, and the baptism substituted

for the amputation of the prepuce, are the answers which explain everything.

We have argued only against Zarathustra and not against the university of

Conimbre or Coïmbre, to which we submit in our articles.


  PRAYERS


  We do not know any religion without prayers, even the Jews had some,

although there was not among them any public form, until the time when they

sang canticles in their synagogues, which happened very late.

  All men, in their desires and their fears, invoked the aid of a deity. Some

philosophers, more respectful to the Supreme Being, and less condescending

to human frailty, for all prayer desired only resignation. It is indeed what

seems proper as between creature and creator. But philosophy is not made to

govern the world; she rises above the common herd; she speaks a languagethat the crowd cannot understand. It would be suggesting to fishwives that

they should study conic sections.

  Even among the philosophers, I do not believe that anyone apart from

Maximus of Tyre has treated of this matter; this is the substance of Maximus'

ideas.

  The Eternal has His intentions from all eternity. If prayer accords with His

immutable wishes, it is quite useless to ask of Him what He has resolved to

do. If one prays Him to do the contrary of what He has resolved, it is praying

Him to be weak, frivolous, inconstant; it is believing that He is thus, it is to

mock Him. Either you ask Him a just thing; in this case He must do it, and

the thing will be done without your praying Him for it; entreating Him is

even to distrust Him: or the thing is unjust, and then you outrage Him. You

are worthy or unworthy of the grace you implore: if worthy, He knows it

better than you; if unworthy, you commit a crime the more in asking for what

you do not deserve.

  In a word, we pray to God only because we have made Him in our own

image. We treat Him like a pasha, like a sultan whom one may provoke and

appease.

  In short, all nations pray to God: wise men resign themselves and obey

Him.

  Let us pray with the people, and resign ourselves with the wise men.


  PRÉCIS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY


  I have spent nearly forty years of my pilgrimage in two or three corners of

this  world  seeking  the  philosopher's  stone  that  is  called  Truth.  I  have

consulted  all  the  adepts  of  antiquity,  Epicurus  and  Augustine,  Plato  and

Malebranche,  and  I  have  remained  in  my  poverty.  Maybe  in  all  these

philosophers' crucibles there are one or two ounces of gold; but all the rest is

residue, dull mud, from which nothing can be born.

  It seems to me that the Greeks our masters wrote much more to show their

intelligence than that they used their intelligence in order to learn. I do not

see  a  single  author  of  antiquity  who  had  a  coherent  system,  a  clear,methodical system progressing from consequence to consequence.

  When  I  wanted  to  compare  and  combine  the  systems  of  Plato,  of  the

preceptor of Alexander, of Pythagoras and of the Orientals, here, more or

less, is what I was able to gather:

  Chance is a word empty of sense; nothing can exist without a cause. The

world is arranged according to mathematical laws; it is therefore arranged by

an intelligence.

  It is not an intelligent being such as I am, who directed the formation of

this world, for I cannot form a mite; therefore this world is the work of a

prodigiously superior intelligence.

  Does this being, who possesses intelligence and power in so high a degree,

exist necessarily? It must be so, for either the being received existence from

another, or from its own nature. If the being received existence from another,

which is very difficult to imagine, I must have recourse to this other, and this

other will be the prime author. To whichever side I turn I have to admit a

prime  author,  potent  and  intelligent,  who  is  such  necessarily  by  his  own

nature.

  Did  this  prime  author  produce  things  out  of  nothing?  that  is  not

imaginable; to create out of nothing is to change nothing into something. I

must not admit such a production unless I find invincible reasons which force

me to admit what my intelligence can never comprehend.

  All that exists appears to exist necessarily, since it exists. For if to-day

there is a reason for the existence of things, there was one yesterday, there

was one in all time; and this cause must always have had its effect, without

which it would have been during eternity a useless cause.

  But how shall things have always existed, being visibly under the hand of

the prime author? This power therefore must always have acted; in the same

way,  nearly,  that  there  is  no  sun  without  light,  so  there  is  no  movement

without a being that passes from one point of space to another point.

  There is therefore a potent and intelligent being who has always acted; and

if this being had never acted, of what use would his existence have been to

him?

  All things are therefore eternal emanations of this prime author.  But how imagine that stone and mud are emanations of the eternal Being,

potent and intelligent?

  Of  two  things  one,  either  the  matter  of  this  stone  and  this  mud  exist

necessarily  by  themselves,  or  they  exist  necessarily  through  this  prime

author; there is no middle course.

  Thus, therefore, there are only two choices to make, admit either matter

eternal by itself, or matter issuing eternally from the potent, intelligent eternal

Being.

  But, either subsisting by its own nature, or emanated from the producing

Being, it exists from all eternity, because it exists, and there is no reason why

it should not have existed before.

  If matter is eternally necessary, it is therefore impossible, it is therefore

contradictory  that  it  does  not  exist;  but  what  man  can  affirm  that  it  is

impossible,  that  it  is  contradictory  that  this  pebble  and  this  fly  have  not

existence?  One  is,  nevertheless,  forced  to  suppress  this  difficulty  which

astonishes  the  imagination  more  than  it  contradicts  the  principles  of

reasoning.

  In fact, as soon as you have imagined that everything has emanated from

the supreme and intelligent Being, that nothing has emanated from the Being

without reason, that this Being existing always, must always have acted, that

consequently all things must have eternally issued from the womb of His

existence, you should no more refuse to believe in the matter of which this

pebble and this fly, an eternal production, are formed, than you refuse to

imagine light as an eternal emanation from the omnipotent Being.

  Since I am a being with extension and thought, my extension and my

thought are therefore necessary productions of this Being. It is evident to me

that  I  cannot  give  myself  either  extension  or  thought.  I  have  therefore

received both from this necessary Being.

  Can He give me what He has not? I have intelligence and I am in space;

therefore He is intelligent, and He is in space.

  To say that this eternal Being, this omnipotent God, has from all time

necessarily filled the universe with His productions, is not to deprive Him of

His liberty; on the contrary, for liberty is only the power of acting. God hasalways acted to the full; therefore God has always made use of the fullness of

His liberty.

  The liberty that is called liberty of indifference is a phrase without idea, an

absurdity; for it would be determination without reason; it would be an effect

without a cause. Therefore, God cannot have this so-called liberty which is a

contradiction  in  terms.  He  has  therefore  always  acted  through  this  same

necessity which makes His existence.

  It is therefore impossible for the world to be without God, it is impossible

for God to be without the world.

  This world is filled with beings who succeed each other, therefore God has

always produced beings who succeed each other.

  These  preliminary  assertions  are  the  basis  of  the  ancient  Oriental

philosophy  and  of  that  of  the  Greeks.  One  must  except  Democritus  and

Epicurus, whose corpuscular philosophy combated these dogmas. But let us

remark that the Epicureans relied on an entirely erroneous natural philosophy,

and that the metaphysical system of all the other philosophers holds good

with all the systems of natural philosophy. The whole of nature, excepting the

vacuum,  contradicts  Epicurus;  and  no  phenomenon  contradicts  the

philosophy which I have just explained. Well, is not a philosophy which is in

accord with all that passes in nature, and which contents the most careful

minds, superior to all other non-revealed systems?

  After the assertions of the ancient philosophers, which I have reconciled as

far as has been possible for me, what is left to us? a chaos of doubts and

chimeras. I do not think that there has ever been a philosopher with a system

who did not at the end of his life avow that he had wasted his time. It must be

admitted  that  the  inventors  of  the  mechanical  arts  have  been  much  more

useful to mankind than the inventors of syllogisms: the man who invented the

shuttle surpasses with a vengeance the man who imagined innate ideas.


  PREJUDICES


  Prejudice  is  an  opinion  without  judgment.  Thus  all  over  the  world  do

people inspire children with all the opinions they desire, before the childrencan judge.

  There are some universal, necessary prejudices, which even make virtue.

In all countries children are taught to recognize a rewarding and revenging

God; to respect and love their father and their mother; to look on theft as a

crime, selfish lying as a vice before they can guess what is a vice and what a

virtue.

  There  are  then  some  very  good  prejudices;  they  are  those  which  are

ratified by judgment when one reasons.

  Sentiment  is  not  a  simple  prejudice;  it  is  something  much  stronger.  A

mother does not love her son because she has been told she must love him;

she cherishes him happily in spite of herself. It is not through prejudice that

you run to the help of an unknown child about to fall into a precipice, or be

eaten by a beast.

  But it is through prejudice that you will respect a man clad in certain

clothes, walking gravely, speaking likewise. Your parents have told you that

you should bow before this man; you respect him before knowing whether he

merits your respect; you grow in years and in knowledge; you perceive that

this man is a charlatan steeped in arrogance, self-interest and artifice; you

despise  what  you  revered,  and  the  prejudice  cedes  to  judgment.  Through

prejudice  you  have  believed  the  fables  with  which  your  childhood  was

cradled; you have been told that the Titans made war on the gods, and Venus

was amorous of Adonis; when you are twelve you accept these fables as

truths; when you are twenty you look on them as ingenious allegories.

  Let us examine briefly the different sorts of prejudices, so as to set our

affairs in order. We shall be perhaps like those who, at the time of Law's

system, perceived that they had calculated imaginary riches.

  Prejudices of the Senses

  Is it not strange that our eyes always deceive us, even when we have very

good sight, and that on the contrary our ears do not deceive us? Let your

well-informed ear hear "You are beautiful, I love you"; it is quite certain that

someone has not said "I hate you, you are ugly": but you see a smooth mirror;

it is demonstrated that you are mistaken, it has a very uneven surface. You

see the sun as about two feet in diameter; it is demonstrated that it is a milliontimes bigger than the earth.

  It seems that God has put truth in your ears, and error in your eyes; but

study optics, and you will see that God has not deceived you, and that it is

impossible for objects to appear to you otherwise than you see them in the

present state of things.

  Physical Prejudices

  The sun rises, the moon also, the earth is motionless: these are natural

physical prejudices. But that lobsters are good for the blood, because when

cooked they are red; that eels cure paralysis because they wriggle; that the

moon affects our maladies because one day someone observed that a sick

man had an increase of fever during the waning of the moon; these ideas and

a thousand others are the errors of ancient charlatans who judged without

reasoning, and who, being deceived, deceived others.

  Historical Prejudices

  Most historical stories have been believed without examination, and this

belief is a prejudice. Fabius Pictor relates that many centuries before him, a

vestal of the town of Alba, going to draw water in her pitcher, was ravished,

that she gave birth to Romulus and Remus, that they were fed by a she-wolf,

etc. The Roman people believed this fable; they did not examine whether at

that time there were vestals in Latium, whether it were probable that a king's

daughter would leave her convent with her pitcher, whether it were likely that

a she-wolf would suckle two children instead of eating them; the prejudice

established itself.

  A monk writes that Clovis, being in great danger at the battle of Tolbiac,

made a vow to turn Christian if he escaped; but is it natural to address oneself

to a foreign god on such an occasion? is it not then that the religion in which

one was born acts most potently? Which is the Christian who, in a battle

against the Turks, will not address himself to the Holy Virgin rather than to

Mohammed? It is added that a pigeon brought the holy phial in its beak to

anoint Clovis, and that an angel brought the oriflamme to lead him; prejudice

believed all the little stories of this kind. Those who understand human nature

know well that Clovis the usurper and Rolon (or Rol) the usurper turned

Christian in order to govern the Christians more surely, just as the Turkish

usurpers turned Mussulman in order to govern the Mussulmans more surely.  Religious Prejudices

  If your nurse has told you that Ceres rules over the crops, or that Vistnou

and Xaca made themselves men several times, or that Sammonocodom came

to cut down a forest, or that Odin awaits you in his hall near Jutland, or that

Mohammed or somebody else made a journey into the sky; if lastly your tutor

comes to drive into your brain what your nurse has imprinted on it you keep

it  for  life.  If  your  judgment  wishes  to  rise  against  these  prejudices,  your

neighbours  and,  above  all,  your  neighbours'  wives  cry  out  "Impious

reprobate," and dismay you; your dervish, fearing to see his income diminish,

accuses you to the cadi, and this cadi has you impaled if he can, because he

likes ruling over fools, and thinks that fools obey better than others: and that

will  last  until  your  neighbours  and  the  dervish  and  the  cadi  begin  to

understand  that  foolishness  is  good  for  nothing,  and  that  persecution  is

abominable.


  RARE


  Rare in natural philosophy is the opposite of dense. In moral philosophy, it

is the opposite of common.

  This last variety of rare is what excites admiration. One never admires

what is common, one enjoys it.

  An eccentric thinks himself above the rest of wretched mortals when he

has in his study a rare medal that is good for nothing, a rare book that nobody

has the courage to read, an old engraving by Albrecht Durer, badly designed

and badly printed: he triumphs if he has in his garden a stunted tree from

America. This eccentric has no taste; he has only vanity. He has heard say

that  the  beautiful  is  rare;  but  he  should  know  that  all  that  is  rare  is  not

beautiful.

  Beauty is rare in all nature's works, and in all works of art.

  Whatever ill things have been said of women, I maintain that it is rarer to

find women perfectly beautiful than passibly good.

  You will meet in the country ten thousand women attached to their homes,

laborious, sober, feeding, rearing, teaching their children; and you will findbarely one whom you could show at the theatres of Paris, London, Naples, or

in the public gardens, and who would be looked on as a beauty.

  Likewise, in works of art, you have ten thousand daubs and scrawls to one

masterpiece.

  If everything were beautiful and good, it is clear that one would no longer

admire anything; one would enjoy. But would one have pleasure in enjoying?

that is a big question.

  Why have the beautiful passages in "The Cid," "The Horaces," "Cinna,"

had  such  a  prodigious  success?  Because  in  the  profound  night  in  which

people were plunged, they suddenly saw shine a new light that they did not

expect. It was because this beauty was the rarest thing in the world.

  The groves of Versailles were a beauty unique in the world, as were then

certain passages of Corneille. St. Peter's, Rome, is unique.

  But let us suppose that all the churches of Europe were equal to St. Peter's,

Rome,  that  all  statues  were  Venus  dei  Medici,  that  all  tragedies  were  as

beautiful  as  Racine's  "Iphigénie",  all  works  of  poetry  as  well  written  as

Boileau's "Art Poétique", all comedies as good as "Tartufe", and thus in every

sphere;  would  you  then  have  as  much  pleasure  in  enjoying  masterpieces

become common as they made you taste when they were rare? I say boldly

"No!"; and I believe that the ancient school, which so rarely was right, was

right when it said: Ab assuetis non fit passio, habit does not make passion.

  But, my dear reader, will it be the same with the works of nature? Will

you be disgusted if all the maids are so beautiful as Helen; and you, ladies, if

all the lads are like Paris? Let us suppose that all wines are excellent, will you

have less desire to drink? if the partridges, pheasants, pullets are common at

all times, will you have less appetite? I say boldly again "No!", despite the

axiom of the schools, "Habit does not make passion": and the reason, you

know it, is that all the pleasures which nature gives us are always recurring

needs,  necessary  enjoyments,  and  that  the  pleasures  of  the  arts  are  not

necessary. It is not necessary for a man to have groves where water gushes to

a height of a hundred feet from the mouth of a marble face, and on leaving

these  groves  to  go  to  see  a  fine  tragedy.  But  the  two  sexes  are  always

necessary to each other. The table and the bed are necessities. The habit of

being alternately on these two thrones will never disgust you.  In Paris a few years ago people admired a rhinoceros. If there were in one

province ten thousand rhinoceroses, men would run after them only to kill

them. But let there be a hundred thousand beautiful women men will always

run after them to ... honour them.


  REASON


  At the time when all France was mad about Law's system, and Law was

controller-general, there

  came to him in the presence of a great assembly a man who was always

right, who always had reason on his side. Said he to Law:

  "Sir, you are the biggest madman, the biggest fool, or the biggest rogue

who has yet appeared among us; and that is saying a great deal: this is how I

prove it. You have imagined that a state's wealth can be increased tenfold

with  paper;  but  as  this  paper  can  represent  only  the  money  that  is

representative  of  true  wealth,  the  products  of  the  land  and  industry,  you

should have begun by giving us ten times more corn, wine, cloth, canvas, etc.

That is not enough, you must be sure of your market. But you make ten times

as many notes as we have of silver and commodities, therefore you are ten

times  more  extravagant,  or  more  inept,  or  more  of  a  rogue  than  all  the

comptrollers who have preceded you. This is how I prove my major."

  Hardly had he started his major than he was conducted to Saint-Lazare.

  When  he  came  out  of  Saint-Lazare,  where  he  studied  much  and

strengthened his reason, he went to Rome; he asked for a public audience of

the Pope, on condition that he was not interrupted in his harangue; and he

spoke to the Pope in these terms:

  "Holy Father, you are an antichrist and this is how I prove it to Your

Holiness. I call antichrist the man who does the contrary to what Christ did

and commanded. Now Christ was poor, and you are very rich; he paid tribute,

and you exact tribute; he submitted to the powers that were, and you have

become a power; he walked on foot, and you go to Castel-Gandolfo in a

sumptuous equipage; he ate all that one was so good as to give him, and you

want us to eat fish on Friday and Saturday, when we live far from sea andriver; he forbade Simon Barjona to use a sword, and you have swords in your

service, etc., etc., etc. Therefore in this sense Your Holiness is antichrist. In

every  other  sense  I  hold  you  in  great  veneration,  and  I  ask  you  for  an

indulgence in articulo mortis."

  My man was put in the Castello St. Angelo.

  When he came out of the Castello St. Angelo, he rushed to Venice, and

asked to speak to the doge.

  "Your Serenity," he said, "must be a scatter-brain to marry the sea every

year:  for  firstly,  one  only  marries  the  same  person  once;  secondly,  your

marriage resembles Harlequin's which was half made, seeing that it lacked

but the consent of the bride; thirdly, who has told you that one day other

maritime  powers  will  not  declare  you  incapable  of  consummating  the

marriage?"

  He spoke, and was shut up in the Tower of St. Mark's.

  When he came out of the Tower of St. Mark's, he went to Constantinople;

he had audience of the mufti; and spoke to him in these terms:

  "Your religion, although it has some good points, such as worship of the

great  Being,  and  the  necessity  of  being  just  and  charitable,  is  otherwise

nothing but a rehash of Judaism and a tedious collection of fairy tales. If the

archangel Gabriel had brought the leaves of the Koran to Mahomet from

some planet, all Arabia would have seen Gabriel come down: nobody saw

him; therefore Mahomet was a brazen impostor who deceived imbeciles."

  Hardly had he pronounced these words than he was impaled. Nevertheless

he had always been right, and had always had reason on his side.


  RELIGION


  I meditated last night; I was absorbed in the contemplation of nature; I

admired  the  immensity,  the  course,  the  harmony  of  these  infinite  globes

which the vulgar do not know how to admire.

  I admired still more the intelligence which directs these vast forces. I said

to myself: "One must be blind not to be dazzled by this spectacle; one mustbe stupid not to recognize the author of it; one must be mad not to worship

Him. What tribute of worship should I render Him? Should not this tribute be

the same in the whole of space, since it is the same supreme power which

reigns equally in all space? Should not a thinking being who dwells in a star

in the Milky Way offer Him the same homage as the thinking being on this

little globe where we are? Light is uniform for the star Sirius and for us;

moral philosophy must be uniform. If a sentient, thinking animal in Sirius is

born  of  a  tender  father  and  mother  who  have  been  occupied  with  his

happiness, he owes them as much love and care as we owe to our parents. If

someone in the Milky Way sees a needy cripple, if he can relieve him and if

he does not do it, he is guilty toward all globes. Everywhere the heart has the

same duties: on the steps of the throne of God, if He has a throne; and in the

depth of the abyss, if He is an abyss."

  I  was  plunged  in  these  ideas  when  one  of  those  genii  who  fill  the

intermundane spaces came down to me. I recognized this same aerial creature

who had appeared to me on another occasion to teach me how different God's

judgments were from our own, and how a good action is preferable to a

controversy.

  He  transported  me  into  a  desert  all  covered  with  piled  up  bones;  and

between these heaps of dead men there were walks of ever-green trees, and at

the end of each walk a tall man of august mien, who regarded these sad

remains with pity.

  "Alas! my archangel," said I, "where have you brought me?"

  "To desolation," he answered.

  "And who are these fine patriarchs whom I see sad and motionless at the

end of these green walks? they seem to be weeping over this countless crowd

of dead."

  "You shall know, poor human creature," answered the genius from the

intermundane spaces; "but first of all you must weep."

  He  began  with  the  first  pile.  "These,"  he  said,  "are  the  twenty-three

thousand Jews who danced before a calf, with the twenty-four thousand who

were  killed  while  lying  with  Midianitish  women.  The  number  of  those

massacred  for  such  errors  and  offences  amounts  to  nearly  three  hundredthousand.

  "In the other walks are the bones of the Christians slaughtered by each

other for metaphysical disputes. They are divided into several heaps of four

centuries each. One heap would have mounted right to the sky; they had to be

divided."

  "What!" I cried, "brothers have treated their brothers like this, and I have

the misfortune to be of this brotherhood!"

  "Here," said the spirit, "are the twelve million Americans killed in their

fatherland because they had not been baptized."

  "My  God!  why  did  you  not  leave  these  frightful  bones  to  dry  in  the

hemisphere where their bodies were born, and where they were consigned to

so  many  different  deaths?  Why  assemble  here  all  these  abominable

monuments to barbarism and fanaticism?"

  "To instruct you."

  "Since you wish to instruct me," I said to the genius, "tell me if there have

been  peoples  other  than  the  Christians  and  the  Jews  in  whom  zeal  and

religion  wretchedly  transformed  into  fanaticism,  have  inspired  so  many

horrible cruelties."

  "Yes,"  he  said.  "The  Mohammedans  were  sullied  with  the  same

inhumanities,  but  rarely;  and  when  one  asked  amman,  pity,  of  them  and

offered them tribute, they pardoned. As for the other nations there has not

been one right from the existence of the world which has ever made a purely

religious war. Follow me now." I followed him.

  A little beyond these piles of dead men we found other piles; they were

composed of sacks of gold and silver, and each had its label: Substance of the

heretics  massacred  in  the  eighteenth  century,  the  seventeenth  and  the

sixteenth.  And  so  on  in  going  back:  Gold  and  silver  of  Americans

slaughtered,  etc.,  etc.  And  all  these  piles  were  surmounted  with  crosses,

mitres, croziers, triple crowns studded with precious stones.

  "What, my genius! it was then to have these riches that these dead were

piled up?"

  "Yes, my son."  I wept; and when by my grief I had merited to be led to the end of the

green walks, he led me there.

  "Contemplate," he said, "the heroes of humanity who were the world's

benefactors, and who were all united in banishing from the world, as far as

they were able, violence and rapine. Question them."

  I ran to the first of the band; he had a crown on his head, and a little censer

in his hand; I humbly asked him his name. "I am Numa Pompilius," he said to

me. "I succeeded a brigand, and I had brigands to govern: I taught them

virtue and the worship of God; after me they forgot both more than once; I

forbade that in the temples there should be any image, because the Deity

which animates nature cannot be represented. During my reign the Romans

had neither wars nor seditions, and my religion did nothing but good. All the

neighbouring peoples came to honour me at my funeral: that happened to no

one but me."

  I kissed his hand, and I went to the second. He was a fine old man about a

hundred years old, clad in a white robe. He put his middle-finger on his

mouth, and with the other hand he cast some beans behind him. I recognized

Pythagoras. He assured me he had never had a golden thigh, and that he had

never been a cock; but that he had governed the Crotoniates with as much

justice as Numa governed the Romans, almost at the same time; and that this

justice was the rarest and most necessary thing in the world. I learned that the

Pythagoreans examined their consciences twice a day. The honest people!

how far we are from them! But we who have been nothing but assassins for

thirteen hundred years, we say that these wise men were arrogant.

  In order to please Pythagoras, I did not say a word to him and I passed to

Zarathustra, who was occupied in concentrating the celestial fire in the focus

of a concave mirror, in the middle of a hall with a hundred doors which all

led to wisdom. (Zarathustra's precepts are called doors, and are a hundred in

number.) Over the principal door I read these words which are the précis of

all moral philosophy, and which cut short all the disputes of the casuists:

"When in doubt if an action is good or bad, refrain."

  "Certainly," I said to my genius, "the barbarians who immolated all these

victims had never read these beautiful words."

  We then saw the Zaleucus, the Thales, the Aniximanders, and all the sageswho had sought truth and practised virtue.

  When we came to Socrates, I recognized him very quickly by his flat nose.

"Well," I said to him, "here you are then among the number of the Almighty's

confidants! All the inhabitants of Europe, except the Turks and the Tartars of

the  Crimea,  who  know  nothing,  pronounce  your  name  with  respect.  It  is

revered, loved, this great name, to the point that people have wanted to know

those of your persecutors. Melitus and Anitus are known because of you, just

as Ravaillac is known because of Henry IV.; but I know only this name of

Anitus. I do not know precisely who was the scoundrel who calumniated you,

and who succeeded in having you condemned to take hemlock."

  "Since my adventure," replied Socrates, "I have never thought about that

man; but seeing that you make me remember it, I have much pity for him. He

was  a  wicked  priest  who  secretly  conducted  a  business  in  hides,  a  trade

reputed shameful among us. He sent his two children to my school. The other

disciples taunted them with having a father who was a currier; they were

obliged to leave. The irritated father had no rest until he had stirred up all the

priests and all the sophists against me. They persuaded the counsel of the five

hundred that I was an impious fellow who did not believe that the Moon,

Mercury and Mars were gods. Indeed, I used to think, as I think now, that

there is only one God, master of all nature. The judges handed me over to the

poisoner of the republic; he cut short my life by a few days: I died peacefully

at the age of seventy; and since that time I pass a happy life with all these

great men whom you see, and of whom I am the least."

  After enjoying some time in conversation with Socrates, I went forward

with my guide into a grove situated above the thickets where all the sages of

antiquity seemed to be tasting sweet repose.

  I saw a man of gentle, simple countenance, who seemed to me to be about

thirty-five years old. From afar he cast compassionate glances on these piles

of whitened bones, across which I had had to pass to reach the sages' abode. I

was astonished to find his feet swollen and bleeding, his hands likewise, his

side pierced, and his ribs flayed with whip cuts. "Good Heavens!" I said to

him, "is it possible for a just man, a sage, to be in this state? I have just seen

one  who  was  treated  in  a  very  hateful  way,  but  there  is  no  comparison

between his torture and yours. Wicked priests and wicked judges poisonedhim; is it by priests and judges that you have been so cruelly assassinated?"

  He answered with much courtesy-"Yes."

  "And who were these monsters?"

  "They were hypocrites."

  "Ah! that says everything; I understand by this single word that they must

have condemned you to death. Had you then proved to them, as Socrates did,

that the Moon was not a goddess, and that Mercury was not a god?"

  "No, these planets were not in question. My compatriots did not know at

all what a planet is; they were all arrant ignoramuses. Their superstitions

were quite different from those of the Greeks."

  "You wanted to teach them a new religion, then?"

  "Not at all; I said to them simply-'Love God with all your heart and your

fellow-creature as yourself, for that is man's whole duty.' Judge if this precept

is not as old as the universe; judge if I brought them a new religion. I did not

stop telling them that I had come not to destroy the law but to fulfil it; I had

observed all their rites; circumcised as they all were, baptized as were the

most  zealous  among  them,  like  them  I  paid  the  Corban;  I  observed  the

Passover as they did, eating standing up a lamb cooked with lettuces. I and

my friends went to pray in the temple; my friends even frequented this temple

after  my  death;  in  a  word,  I  fulfilled  all  their  laws  without  a  single

exception."

  "What! these wretches could not even reproach you with swerving from

their laws?"

  "No, without a doubt."

  "Why then did they put you in the condition in which I now see you?"

  "What do you expect me to say! they were very arrogant and selfish. They

saw that I knew them; they knew that I was making the citizens acquainted

with them; they were the stronger; they took away my life: and people like

them will always do as much, if they can, to whoever does them too much

justice."

  "But did you say nothing, do nothing that could serve them as a pretext?"  "To the wicked everything serves as pretext.

  ""Did  you  not  say  once  that  you  were  come  not  to  send  peace,  but  a

sword?"

  "It is a copyist's error; I told them that I sent peace and not a sword. I have

never  written  anything;  what  I  said  can  have  been  changed  without  evil

intention."

  "You therefore contributed in no way by your speeches, badly reported,

badly interpreted, to these frightful piles of bones which I saw on my road in

coming to consult you?"

  "It is with horror only that I have seen those who have made themselves

guilty of these murders."

  "And these monuments of power and wealth, of pride and avarice, these

treasures, these ornaments, these signs of grandeur, which I have seen piled

up on the road while I was seeking wisdom, do they come from you?"

  "That is impossible; I and my people lived in poverty and meanness: my

grandeur was in virtue only."

  I was about to beg him to be so good as to tell me just who he was. My

guide warned me to do nothing of the sort. He told me that I was not made to

understand these sublime mysteries. Only did I conjure him to tell me in what

true religion consisted.

  "Have  I  not  already  told  you?  Love  God  and  your  fellow-creature  as

yourself."

  "What! if one loves God, one can eat meat on Friday?"

  "I always ate what was given me; for I was too poor to give anyone food."

  "In loving God, in being just, should one not be rather cautious not to

confide all the adventures of one's life to an unknown man?"

  "That was always my practice."

  "Can I not, by doing good, dispense with making a pilgrimage to St. James

of Compostella?"

  "I have never been in that country."

  "Is it necessary for me to imprison myself in a retreat with fools?"  "As for me, I always made little journeys from town to town."

  "Is it necessary for me to take sides either for the Greek Church or the

Latin?"

  "When I was in the world I never made any difference between the Jew

and the Samaritan."

  "Well, if that is so, I take you for my only master." Then he made me a

sign with his head which filled me with consolation. The vision disappeared,

and a clear conscience stayed with me.


  SECT

  SECTION I


  Every sect, in whatever sphere, is the rallying-point of doubt and error.

Scotist, Thomist, Realist, Nominalist, Papist, Calvinist, Molinist, Jansenist,

are only pseudonyms.

  There are no sects in geometry; one does not speak of a Euclidian, an

Archimedean.

  When the truth is evident, it is impossible for parties and factions to arise.

Never has there been a dispute as to whether there is daylight at noon.

  The branch of astronomy which determines the course of the stars and the

return  of  eclipses  being  once  known,  there  is  no  more  dispute  among

astronomers.

  In England one does not say-"I am a Newtonian, a Lockian, a Halleyan."

Why? Those who have read cannot refuse their assent to the truths taught by

these three great men. The more Newton is revered, the less do people style

themselves Newtonians; this word supposes that there are anti-Newtonians in

England.  Maybe  we  still  have  a  few  Cartesians  in  France;  that  is  solely

because Descartes' system is a tissue of erroneous and ridiculous imaginings.

  It  is  likewise  with  the  small  number  of  truths  of  fact  which  are  well

established. The records of the Tower of London having been authentically

gathered by Rymer, there are no Rymerians, because it occurs to no one to

combat this collection. In it one finds neither contradictions, absurdities norprodigies; nothing which revolts the reason, nothing, consequently, which

sectarians strive to maintain or upset by absurd arguments. Everyone agrees,

therefore, that Rymer's records are worthy of belief.

  You are Mohammedan, therefore there are people who are not, therefore

you might well be wrong.

  What would be the true religion if Christianity did not exist? the religion

in which there were no sects; the religion in which all minds were necessarily

in agreement.

  Well, to what dogma do all minds agree? to the worship of a God and to

integrity. All the philosophers of the world who have had a religion have said

in  all  time-"There  is  a  God,  and  one  must  be  just."  There,  then,  is  the

universal religion established in all time and throughout mankind.

  The point in which they all agree is therefore true, and the systems through

which they differ are therefore false.

  "My sect is the best," says a Brahmin to me. But, my friend, if your sect is

good, it is necessary; for if it were not absolutely necessary you would admit

to me that it was useless: if it is absolutely necessary, it is for all men; how

then can it be that all men have not what is absolutely necessary to them?

How is it possible for the rest of the world to laugh at you and your Brahma?

  When Zarathustra, Hermes, Orpheus, Minos and all the great men say-

"Let us worship God, and let us be just," nobody laughs; but everyone hisses

the man who claims that one cannot please God unless when one dies one is

holding a cow's tail, and the man who wants one to have the end of one's

prepuce cut off, and the man who consecrates crocodiles and onions, and the

man who attaches eternal salvation to the dead men's bones one carries under

one's shirt, or to a plenary indulgence which one buys at Rome for two and a

half sous.

  Whence comes this universal competition in hisses and derision from one

end of the world to the other? It is clear that the things at which everyone

sneers are not of a very evident truth. What shall we say of one of Sejan's

secretaries who dedicated to Petronius a bombastic book entitled-"The Truths

of the Sibylline Oracles, Proved by the Facts"?

  This secretary proves to you first that it was necessary for God to send onearth several sibyls one after the other; for He had no other means of teaching

mankind. It is demonstrated that God spoke to these sibyls, for the word sibyl

signifies God's counsel. They had to live a long time, for it is the very least

that  persons  to  whom  God  speaks  should  have  this  privilege.  They  were

twelve in number, for this number is sacred. They had certainly predicted all

the events in the world, for Tarquinius Superbus bought three of their Books

from an old woman for a hundred crowns. "What incredulous fellow," adds

the secretary, "will dare deny all these evident facts which happened in a

corner  before  the  whole  world?  Who  can  deny  the  fulfilment  of  their

prophecies? Has not Virgil himself quoted the predictions of the sibyls? If we

have not the first examples of the Sibylline Books, written at a time when

people did not know how to read or write, have we not authentic copies?

Impiety must be silent before such proofs." Thus did Houttevillus speak to

Sejan. He hoped to have a position as augur which would be worth an income

of fifty thousand francs, and he had nothing.[20]

  "What my sect teaches is obscure, I admit it," says a fanatic; "and it is

because of this obscurity that it must be believed; for the sect itself says it is

full of obscurities. My sect is extravagant, therefore it is divine; for how

should what appears so mad have been embraced by so many peoples, if it

were not divine?" It is precisely like the Alcoran which the Sonnites say has

an angel's face and an animal's snout; be not scandalized by the animal's

snout, and worship the angel's face. Thus speaks this insensate fellow. But a

fanatic of another sect answers-"It is you who are the animal, and I who am

the angel."

  Well,  who  shall  judge  the  suit?  who  shall  decide  between  these  two

fanatics? The reasonable, impartial man learned in a knowledge that is not

that of words; the man free from prejudice and lover of truth and justice; in

short, the man who is not the foolish animal, and who does not think he is the

angel.


  SECTION II


  Sect and error are synonymous. You are Peripatetic and I Platonician; we

are therefore both wrong; for you combat Plato only because his fantasieshave revolted you, and I am alienated from Aristotle only because it seems to

me that he does not know what he is talking about. If one or the other had

demonstrated the truth, there would be a sect no longer. To declare oneself

for the opinion of the one or the other is to take sides in a civil war. There are

no sects in mathematics, in experimental physics. A man who examines the

relations between a cone and a sphere is not of the sect of Archimedes: he

who sees that the square of the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle is equal

to the square of the two other sides is not of the sect of Pythagoras.

  When you say that the blood circulates, that the air is heavy, that the sun's

rays are pencils of seven refrangible rays, you are not either of the sect of

Harvey, or the sect of Torricelli, or the sect of Newton; you agree merely

with the truth demonstrated by them, and the entire universe will ever be of

your opinion.

  This is the character of truth; it is of all time; it is for all men; it has only

to show itself to be recognized; one cannot argue against it. A long dispute

signifies-"Both parties are wrong."


  FOOTNOTES:

  [20] Reference to the Abbé Houtteville, author of a book entitled-"The

Truth of the Christian Religion, Proved by the Facts."


  SELF-ESTEEM


  Nicole  in  his  "Essais  de  Morale,"  written  after  two  or  three  thousand

volumes of ethics ("Treatise on Charity," Chap. II), says that "by means of

the wheels and gibbets which people establish in common are repressed the

tyrannous thoughts and designs of each individual's self-esteem."

  I shall not examine whether people have gibbets in common, as they have

meadows and woods in common, and a common purse, and if one represses

ideas with wheels; but it seems very strange to me that Nicole should take

highway robbery and assassination for self-esteem. One should distinguish

shades  of  difference  a  little  better.  The  man  who  said  that  Nero  had  his

mother  assassinated  through  self-esteem,  that  Cartouche  had  much  self-esteem, would not be expressing himself very correctly. Self-esteem is not

wickedness, it is a sentiment that is natural to all men; it is much nearer

vanity than crime.

  A beggar in the suburbs of Madrid nobly begged charity; a passer-by says

to him: "Are you not ashamed to practise this infamous calling when you are

able to work?"

  "Sir," answered the beggar, "I ask for money, not advice." And he turned

on his heel with full Castillian dignity.

  This gentleman was a proud beggar, his vanity was wounded by a trifle.

He asked charity out of love for himself, and could not tolerate the reprimand

out of further love for himself.

  A missionary travelling in India met a fakir laden with chains, naked as a

monkey, lying on his stomach, and having himself whipped for the sins of his

compatriots, the Indians, who gave him a few farthings.

  "What self-denial!" said one of the lookers-on.

  "Self-denial!" answered the fakir. "Learn that I have myself flogged in this

world  in  order  to  return  it  in  another,  when  you  will  be  horses  and  I

horseman."

  Those who have said that love of ourselves is the basis of all our opinions

and all our actions, have therefore been quite right in India, Spain, and all the

habitable world: and as one does not write to prove to men that they have

faces, it is not necessary to prove to them that they have self-esteem. Self-

esteem is the instrument of our conservation; it resembles the instrument of

the  perpetuity  of  the  species:  it  is  necessary,  it  is  dear  to  us,  it  gives  us

pleasure, and it has to be hidden.


  SOUL

  SECTION I


  This  is  a  vague,  indeterminate  term,  which  expresses  an  unknown

principle of known effects that we feel in us. The word soul corresponds to

the Latin anima, to the Greek πνεῦμα, to the term of which all nations havemade use to express what they did not understand any better than we do.

  In the proper and literal sense of the Latin and the languages derived from

Latin, it signifies that which animates. Thus people have spoken of the soul

of  men,  of  animals,  sometimes  of  plants,  to  signify  their  principal  of

vegetation and life. In pronouncing this word, people have never had other

than a confused idea, as when it is said in Genesis-"And the Lord God formed

man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life;

and man became a living soul; and the soul of animals is in the blood; and

kill not my soul, etc."

  Thus the soul was generally taken for the origin and the cause of life, for

life itself. That is why all known nations long imagined that everything died

with  the  body.  If  one  can  disentangle  anything  in  the  chaos  of  ancient

histories, it seems that the Egyptians at least were the first to distinguish

between the intelligence and the soul: and the Greeks learned from them to

distinguish their νοῦς, their πνεῦμα, their σκιὰ. The Latins, following their

example, distinguish animus and anima; and we, finally, have also had our

soul and our understanding. But is that which is the principle of our life

different from that which is the principle of our thoughts? is it the same

being?  Does  that  which  directs  us  and  gives  us  sensation  and  memory

resemble that which is in animals the cause of digestion and the cause of their

sensations and of their memory?

  There is the eternal object of the disputes of mankind; I say eternal object;

for  not  having  any  first  notion  from  which  we  can  descend  in  this

examination, we can only rest for ever in a labyrinth of doubt and feeble

conjecture.

  We have not the smallest step where we may place a foot in order to reach

the most superficial knowledge of what makes us live and of what makes us

think. How should we have? we should have had to see life and thought enter

a body. Does a father know how he has produced his son? does a mother how

she conceived him? Has anyone ever been able to divine how he acts, how he

wakes, how he sleeps? Does anyone know how his limbs obey his will? has

anyone discovered by what art ideas are marked out in his brain and issue

from it at his command? Frail automatons moved by the invisible hand which

directs us on this stage of the world, which of us has been able to detect thewire which guides us?

  We dare question whether the soul is "spirit" or "matter"; if it is created

before us, if it issues from non-existence at our birth, if after animating us for

one  day  on  earth,  it  lives  after  us  into  eternity.  These  questions  appear

sublime; what are they? questions of blind men saying to other blind men-

"What is light?"

  When we want to learn something roughly about a piece of metal, we put

it in a crucible in the fire. But have we a crucible in which to put the soul?

"The soul is spirit," says one. But what is spirit? Assuredly no one has any

idea; it is a word that is so void of sense that one is obliged to say what spirit

is not, not being able to say what it is. "The soul is matter," says another. But

what is matter? We know merely some of its appearances and some of its

properties; and not one of these properties, not one of these appearances,

seems to have the slightest connection with thought.

  "Thought is something distinct from matter," say you. But what proof of it

have you? Is it because matter is divisible and figurable, and thought is not?

But who has told you that the first principles of matter are divisible and

figurable? It is very probable that they are not; entire sects of philosophers

maintain that the elements of matter have neither form nor extension. With a

triumphant air you cry-"Thought is neither wood, nor stone, nor sand, nor

metal,  therefore  thought  does  not  belong  to  matter."  Weak,  reckless

reasoners!  gravitation  is  neither  wood,  nor  sand,  nor  metal,  nor  stone;

movement, vegetation, life are not these things either, and yet life, vegetation,

movement, gravitation, are given to matter. To say that God cannot make

matter think is to say the most insolently absurd thing that anyone has ever

dared utter in the privileged schools of lunacy. We are not certain that God

has treated matter like this; we are only certain that He can. But what matters

all that has been said and all that will be said about the soul? what does it

matter that it has been called entelechy, quintessence, flame, ether? that it has

been thought universal, uncreated, transmigrant, etc.?

  In  these  matters  that  are  inaccessible  to  the  reason,  what  do  these

romances of our uncertain imaginations matter? What does it matter that the

Fathers of the first four centuries thought the soul corporeal? What does it

matter that Tertullian, by a contradiction frequent in him, has decided that itis  simultaneously  corporeal,  formed  and  simple?  We  have  a  thousand

witnesses to ignorance, and not one that gives a glimmer of probability.

  How then are we so bold as to assert what the soul is? We know certainly

that we exist, that we feel, that we think. Do we want to take a step beyond?

we fall into a shadowy abyss; and in this abyss we are still so madly reckless

as to dispute whether this soul, of which we have not the least idea, was made

before us or with us, and whether it perishes or is immortal.

  The article SOUL, and all the articles of the nature of metaphysics, must

start by a sincere submission to the incontrovertible dogmas of the Church.

Revelation  is  worth  more,  without  doubt,  than  the  whole  of  philosophy.

Systems exercise the mind, but faith illumines and guides it.

  Do we not often pronounce words of which we have only a very confused

idea, or even of which we have none at all? Is not the word soul an instance?

When the clapper or valve of a bellows is out of order, and when air which is

in the bellows leaves it by some unexpected opening in this valve, so that it is

no  longer  compressed  against  the  two  blades,  and  is  not  thrust  violently

towards the hearth which it has to light, French servants say-"The soul of the

bellows has burst." They know no more about it than that; and this question

in no wise disturbs their peace of mind.

  The gardener utters the phrase "the soul of the plants," and cultivates them

very well without knowing what he means by this term.

  The  violin-maker  poses,  draws  forward  or  back  the  "soul  of  a  violin"

beneath the bridge in the belly of the instrument; a puny piece of wood more

or less gives the violin or takes away from it a harmonious soul.

  We have many industries in which the workmen give the qualification of

"soul" to their machines. Never does one hear them dispute about this word.

Such is not the case with philosophers.

  For  us  the  word  "soul"  signifies  generally  that  which  animates.  Our

ancestors  the  Celts  gave  to  their  soul  the  name  of  seel,  from  which  the

English soul, and the German seel; and probably the ancient Teutons and the

ancient Britons had no quarrels in their universities over this expression.

  The Greeks distinguished three sorts of souls-ψυχὴ, which signified the

sensitive  soul,  the  soul  of  the  senses;  and  that  is  why  Love,  child  ofAphrodite, had so much passion for Psyche, and why Psyche loved him so

tenderly: πνεῦμα, the breath which gives life and movement to the whole

machine, and which we have translated by spiritus, spirit; vague word to

which have been given a thousand different meanings: and finally νοῦς, the

intelligence.

  We possessed therefore three souls, without having the least notion of any

of  them.  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  (Summation  of  St.  Thomas.  Lyons  edition,

1738)  admits  these  three  souls  as  a  peripatetic,  and  distinguishes  each  of

these  three  souls  in  three  parts.  ψυχὴ  was  in  the  breast,  πνεῦμα  was

distributed throughout the body, and νοῦς was in the head. There has been no

other philosophy in our schools up to our day, and woe betide any man who

took one of these souls for the other.

  In  this  chaos  of  ideas  there  was,  nevertheless,  a  foundation.  Men  had

noticed that in their passions of love, hate, anger, fear, their internal organs

were stimulated to movement. The liver and the heart were the seat of the

passions. If one thought deeply, one felt a strife in the organs of the head;

therefore  the  intellectual  soul  was  in  the  head.  Without  respiration  no

vegetation,  no  life;  therefore  the  vegetative  soul  was  in  the  breast  which

receives the breath of air.

  When men saw in dreams their dead relatives or friends, they had to seek

what had appeared to them. It was not the body which had been consumed on

a funeral pyre, or swallowed up in the sea and eaten by the fishes. It was,

however, something, so they maintained; for they had seen it; the dead man

had spoken; the dreamer had questioned him. Was it ψυχὴ, was it πνεῦμα,

was it νοῦς, with whom one had conversed in the dream? One imagined a

phantom, an airy figure: it was σκιὰ, it was δαίμων, a ghost from the shades,

a little soul of air and fire, very unrestricted, which wandered I know not

where.

  Eventually, when one wanted to sift the matter, it became a constant that

this soul was corporeal; and the whole of antiquity never had any other idea.

At last came Plato who so subtilized this soul that it was doubtful if he did

not separate it entirely from matter; but that was a problem that was never

solved until faith came to enlighten us.

  In vain do the materialists quote some of the fathers of the Church who didnot express themselves with precision. St. Irenæus says (liv. v. chaps. vi and

vii)  that  the  soul  is  only  the  breath  of  life,  that  it  is  incorporeal  only  by

comparison with the mortal body, and that it preserves the form of man so

that it may be recognized.

  In vain does Tertullian express himself like this-"The corporeality of the

soul  shines  bright  in  the  Gospel."  (Corporalitas  animæ  in  ipso  Evangelio

relucescit, De Anima, cap. vii.) For if the soul did not have a body, the image

of the soul would not have the image of the body.

  In vain does he record the vision of a holy woman who had seen a very

shining soul, of the colour of air.

  In vain does Tatien say expressly (Oratio ad Græcos, c. xxiii.)-"The soul

of man is composed of many parts."

  In vain is St. Hilarius quoted as saying in later times (St. Hilarius on St.

Matthew)-"There is nothing created which is not corporeal, either in heaven,

or  on  earth,  or  among  the  visible,  or  among  the  invisible:  everything  is

formed of elements; and souls, whether they inhabit a body, or issue from it,

have always a corporeal substance."

  In vain does St. Ambrose, in the sixth century, say (On Abraham, liv. ii.,

ch. viii.)-"We recognize nothing but the material, except the venerable Trinity

alone."

  The body of the entire Church has decided that the soul is immaterial.

These saints fell into an error at that time universal; they were men; but they

were not mistaken over immortality, because that is clearly announced in the

Gospels.

  We have so evident a need of the decision of the infallible Church on these

points of philosophy, that we have not indeed by ourselves any sufficient

notion of what is called "pure spirit," and of what is named "matter." Pure

spirit is an expression which gives us no idea; and we know matter only by a

few phenomena. We know it so little that we call it "substance"; well, the

word  substance  means  "that  which  is  under";  but  what  is  under  will  be

eternally hidden from us. What is under is the Creator's secret; and this secret

of the Creator is everywhere. We do not know either how we receive life, or

how we give it, or how we grow, or how we digest, or how we sleep, or howwe think, or how we feel.

  The great difficulty is to understand how a being, whoever he be, has

thoughts.


  SECTION II


  The author of the article SOUL in the "Encyclopedia" (the Abbé Yvon)

followed  Jaquelot  scrupulously;  but  Jaquelot  teaches  us  nothing.  He  sets

himself also against Locke, because the modest Locke said (liv. iv, ch. iii,

para.  vi.)-"We  possibly  shall  never  be  able  to  know  whether  any  mere

material being thinks or no; it being impossible for us, by the contemplation

of our own ideas without revelation, to discover whether Omnipotency has

not given to some systems of matter, fitly disposed, a power to perceive and

think, or else joined and fixed to matter, so disposed, a thinking immaterial

substance: it being, in respect of our notions, not much more remote from our

comprehension to conceive that God can, if he pleases, superadd to matter a

faculty of thinking, than that he should superadd to it another substance with

a faculty of thinking; since we know not wherein thinking consists, nor to

what sort of substances the Almighty has been pleased to give that power

which cannot be in any created being but merely by the good pleasure and

bounty of the Creator, for I see no contradiction in it, that the first eternal

thinking  Being  should,  if  he  pleased,  give  to  certain  systems  of  created

senseless  matter,  put  together  as  he  thinks  fit,  some  degrees  of  sense,

perception and thought."

  Those are the words of a profound, religious and modest man.

  We know what quarrels he had to undergo on account of this opinion

which appeared bold, but which was in fact in him only a consequence of his

conviction of the omnipotence of God and the weakness of man. He did not

say that matter thought; but he said that we have not enough knowledge to

demonstrate that it is impossible for God to add the gift of thought to the

unknown being called "matter", after according it the gift of gravitation and

the gift of movement, both of which are equally incomprehensible.

  Locke was not assuredly the only one who had advanced this opinion; it

was the opinion of all antiquity, who, regarding the soul as very unrestrictedmatter, affirmed consequently that matter could feel and think.

  It was Gassendi's opinion, as may be seen in his objections to Descartes.

"It  is  true,"  says  Gassendi,  "that  you  know  what  you  think;  but  you  are

ignorant of what species of substance you are, you who think. Thus although

the operation of thought is known to you, the principle of your essence is

hidden from you; and you do not know what is the nature of this substance,

one of the operations of which is to think. You are like a blind man who,

feeling the heat of the sun and being informed that it is caused by the heat of

the sun, thinks he has a clear and distinct idea of this luminary; because if he

were asked what the sun was, he could reply that it is a thing which heats,

etc."

  The same Gassendi, in his "Epicurean Philosophy," repeats several times

that there is no mathematical evidence of the pure spirituality of the soul.

  Descartes, in one of his letters to the Palatine Princess Elisabeth, says to

her-"I confess that by the natural reason alone we can make many conjectures

on the soul, and have gratifying hopes, but no certainty." And in that sentence

Descartes combats in his letters what he puts forward in his works; a too

ordinary contradiction.

  In  fine  we  have  seen  that  all  the  Fathers  of  the  first  centuries  of  the

Church,  while  believing  the  soul  immortal,  believed  it  at  the  same  time

material; they thought that it is as easy for God to conserve as to create. They

said-"God made the soul thinking, He will preserve it thinking."

  Malebranche has proved very well that we have no idea by ourselves, and

that objects are incapable of giving us ideas: from that he concludes that we

see everything in God. That is at the bottom the same thing as making God

the author of all our ideas; for with what should we see in Him, if we had not

instruments for seeing? and these instruments, it is He alone who holds them

and guides them. This system is a labyrinth, one lane of which would lead

you to Spinozism, another to Stoicism, another to chaos.

  When one has had a good argument about spirit and matter, one always

finishes by not understanding each other. No philosopher has been able with

his own strength to lift this veil stretched by nature over all the first principles

of things. Men argue, nature acts.  SECTION III


  Of the Soul of Animals, and of some Empty Ideas

  Before the strange system which supposes animals to be pure machines

without any sensation, men had never thought that the beasts possessed an

immaterial soul; and nobody had pushed recklessness to the point of saying

that an oyster has a spiritual soul. Everyone concurred peaceably in agreeing

that the beasts had received from God feeling, memory, ideas, and no pure

spirit. Nobody had abused the gift of reason to the point of saying that nature

had given the beasts all the organs of feeling so that they might not feel

anything. Nobody had said that they cry when they are wounded, and that

they fly when pursued, without experiencing pain or fear.

  At that time people did not deny the omnipotence of God; He had been

able  to  communicate  to  the  organized  matter  of  animals  pleasure,  pain,

remembrance, the combination of a few ideas; He had been able to give to

several of them, such as the monkey, the elephant, the hunting-dog, the talent

of perfecting themselves in the arts which were taught to them; not only had

He  been  able  to  endow  nearly  all  carnivorous  animals  with  the  talent  of

warring better in their experienced old age than in their too trustful youth; not

only, I say, had He been able to do these things, but He had done them: the

universe bore witness thereto.

  Pereira and Descartes maintained that the universe was mistaken, that God

was  a  juggler,  that  He  had  given  animals  all  the  instruments  of  life  and

sensation,  so  that  they  might  have  neither  life  nor  sensation,  properly

speaking. But I do not know what so-called philosophers, in order to answer

Descartes' chimera, leaped into the opposite chimera; they gave liberally of

pure spirit to the toads and the insects.

  Between these two madnesses, the one refusing feeling to the organs of

feeling,  the  other  lodging  a  pure  spirit  in  a  bug,  somebody  thought  of  a

middle path. It was instinct. And what is instinct? Oh, oh, it is a substantial

form; it is a plastic form; it is I do not know what! it is instinct. I shall be of

your opinion so long as you will call the majority of things, "I do not know

what"; so long as your philosophy begins and ends with "I do not know

what", I shall quote Prior to you in his poem on the vanity of the world.  The author of the article SOUL in the "Encyclopedia" explains himself

like  this:-"I  picture  the  animals'  soul  as  an  immaterial  and  intelligent

substance, but of what species? It must, it seems to me, be an active principle

which has sensations, and which has only that.... If we reflect on the nature of

the soul of animals, it supplies us with groundwork which might lead us to

think that its spirituality will save it from annihilation."

  I  do  not  know  how  one  pictures  an  immaterial  substance.  To  picture

something is to make an image of it; and up till now nobody has been able to

paint the spirit. For the word "picture", I want the author to understand "I

conceive"; speaking for myself, I confess I do not conceive it. I confess still

less that a spiritual soul may be annihilated, because I do not conceive either

creation  or  non-existence;  because  I  have  never  been  present  at  God's

council; because I know nothing at all about the principle of things.

  If I wish to prove that the soul is a real being, someone stops me by telling

me that it is a faculty. If I assert that it is a faculty, and that I have the faculty

of thinking, I am told that I am mistaken; that God, the eternal master of all

nature, does everything in me, and directs all my actions and all my thoughts;

that if I produced my thoughts, I should know the thought I will have in a

minute; that I never know it; that I am only an automaton with sensations and

ideas,  necessarily  dependent,  and  in  the  hands  of  the  Supreme  Being,

infinitely more compliant to Him than clay is to the potter.

  I confess my ignorance, therefore; I avow that four thousand tomes of

metaphysics will not teach us what our soul is.

  An orthodox philosopher said to a heterodox philosopher-"How have you

been able to come to the point of imagining that the soul is mortal by nature,

and eternal only by the pure wish of God?"

  "By my own experience," said the other.

  "How! are you dead?"

  "Yes, very often. I suffered from epilepsy in my youth, and I assure you

that I was completely dead for several hours. No sensation, no remembrance

even of the moment that I fell ill. The same thing happens to me now nearly

every night. I never feel the precise moment that I go to sleep; my sleep is

absolutely dreamless. I cannot imagine by conjecture how long I have slept. Iam dead regularly six hours out of the twenty-four. That is a quarter of my

life."

  The  orthodox  then  asserted  that  he  always  thought  during  his  sleep

without knowing anything about it. The heterodox answered him-"I believe

through revelation that I shall always think in the other life; but I assure you I

think rarely in this one."

  The orthodox was not mistaken in asserting the immortality of the soul,

for  faith  and  reason  demonstrate  this  truth;  but  he  might  be  mistaken  in

asserting that a sleeping man always thinks.

  Locke admitted frankly that he did not always think while he was asleep:

another philosopher has said-"Thought is characteristic of man; but it is not

his essence."

  Let us leave to each man the liberty and consolation of seeking himself,

and of losing himself in his ideas.

  It is good, however, to know, that in 1730 a philosopher[21] suffered a

severe  enough  persecution  for  having  confessed,  with  Locke,  that  his

understanding was not exercised at every moment of the day and night, just

as he did not use his arms and his legs at all moments. Not only did court

ignorance persecute him, but the malignant influence of a few so-called men

of letters was let loose against him. What in England had produced merely a

few philosophical disputes, produced in France the most cowardly atrocities;

a Frenchman suffered by Locke.

  There have always been in the mud of our literature more than one of

these  miscreants  who  have  sold  their  pens,  and  intrigued  against  their

benefactors  even.  This  remark  is  rather  foreign  to  the  article  SOUL;  but

should one miss an opportunity of dismaying those who make themselves

unworthy of the name of men of letters, who prostitute the little mind and

conscience they have to a vile self-interest, to a fantastic policy, who betray

their friends to flatter fools, who in secret powder the hemlock which the

powerful and malicious ignoramus wants to make useful citizens drink?

  In short, while we worship God with all our soul, let us confess always our

profound ignorance of this soul, of this faculty of feeling and thinking which

we  possess  from  His  infinite  goodness.  Let  us  avow  that  our  feeblereasonings can take nothing away from, or add anything to revelation and

faith. Let us conclude in fine that we should use this intelligence, the nature

of which is unknown, for perfecting the sciences which are the object of the

"Encyclopedia"; just as watchmakers use springs in their watches, without

knowing what a spring is.


  SECTION IV


  About the Soul, and About our Little Knowledge

  On  the  testimony  of  our  acquired  knowledge,  we  have  dared  question

whether the soul is created before us, whether it comes from non-existence

into  our  body?  at  what  age  it  came  to  settle  between  a  bladder  and  the

intestines cæcum and rectum? if it brought ideas with it or received them

there, and what are these ideas? if after animating us for a few moments, its

essence  is  to  live  after  us  into  eternity  without  the  intervention  of  God

Himself? if being spirit, and God being spirit, they are both of like nature?

These questions seem sublime; what are they? questions about light by men

born blind.

  What have all the philosophers, ancient and modern, taught us? a child is

wiser than they are; he does not think about things of which he can form no

conception.

  You will say that it is sad for our insatiable curiosity, for our inexhaustible

thirst for happiness, to be thus ignorant of ourselves! I agree, and there are

still sadder things; but I shall answer you:

  Sors tua mortalis, non est mortale quod optas.


  -Ovid, Met. II. 56

  "You have a man's fate, and a god's desires."


  Once again, it seems that the nature of every principle of things is the

Creator's secret. How does the air carry sound? how are animals formed? how

do some of our limbs constantly obey our wills? what hand puts ideas in our

memory, keeps them there as in a register, and pulls them out sometimeswhen we want them and sometimes in spite of ourselves? Our nature, the

nature of the universe, the nature of the least plant, everything for us is sunk

in a shadowy pit.

  Man is an acting, feeling, thinking being: that is all we know of him: it is

not given to us to know what makes us feel and think, or what makes us act,

or what makes us exist. The acting faculty is as incomprehensible for us as

the thinking faculty. The difficulty is less to conceive how a body of mud has

feelings and ideas, than to conceive how a being, whatever it be, has ideas

and feelings.

  Here on one side the soul of Archimedes, on the other the soul of an idiot;

are they of the same nature? If their essence is to think, they think always,

and independently of the body which cannot act without them. If they think

by their own nature, can the species of a soul which cannot do a sum in

arithmetic be the same as that which measured the heavens? If it is the organs

of the body which made Archimedes think, why is it that my idiot, who has a

stronger constitution than Archimedes, who is more vigorous, digests better

and performs all his functions better, does not think at all? It is, you say,

because his brain is not so good. But you are making a supposition; you do

not know at all. No difference has ever been found between healthy brains

that have been dissected. It is even very probable that a fool's cerebellum will

be in better condition than Archimedes', which has worked prodigiously, and

which might be worn out and shrivelled.

  Let us conclude therefore what we have already concluded, that we are

ignoramuses  about  all  first  principles.  As  regards  ignoramuses  who  pride

themselves on their knowledge, they are far inferior to monkeys.

  Now dispute, choleric arguers: present your petitions against each other;

proffer your insults, pronounce your sentences, you who do not know one

word about the matter.


  SECTION V


  Of Warburton's Paradox on the Immortality of the Soul

  Warburton,  editor  and  commentator  of  Shakespeare  and  Bishop  ofGloucester,  making  use  of  English  freedom,  and  abuse  of  the  custom  of

hurling insults at one's adversaries, has composed four volumes to prove that

the immortality of the soul was never announced in the Pentateuch, and to

conclude from this same proof that Moses' mission is divine. Here is the

précis of his book, which he himself gives, pages 7 and 8 of the first volume.

  "1. The doctrine of a life to come, of rewards and punishments after death,

is necessary to all civil society.

  "2.  The  whole  human  race  (and  this  is  where  he  is  mistaken),  and

especially  the  wisest  and  most  learned  nations  of  antiquity,  concurred  in

believing and teaching this doctrine.

  "3. It cannot be found in any passage of the law of Moses; therefore the

law of Moses is of divine origin. Which I am going to prove by the two

following syllogisms:

  First Syllogism

  "Every religion, every society that has not the immortality of the soul for

its basis, can be maintained only by an extraordinary providence; the Jewish

religion had not the immortality of the soul for basis; therefore the Jewish

religion was maintained by an extraordinary providence.

  Second Syllogism

  "All the ancient legislators have said that a religion which did not teach

the immortality of the soul could not be maintained but by an extraordinary

providence;  Moses  founded  a  religion  which  is  not  founded  on  the

immortality of the soul; therefore Moses believed his religion maintained by

an extraordinary providence."

  What is much more extraordinary is this assertion of Warburton's, which

he has put in big letters at the beginning of his book. He has often been

reproached with the extreme rashness and bad faith with which he dares to

say  that  all  the  ancient  legislators  believed  that  a  religion  which  is  not

founded on pains and recompenses after death, can be maintained only by an

extraordinary providence; not one of them ever said it. He does not undertake

even to give any example in his huge book stuffed with a vast number of

quotations, all of which are foreign to his subject. He has buried himself

beneath a pile of Greek and Latin authors, ancient and modern, for fear onemight see through him on the other side of a horrible multitude of envelopes.

When criticism finally probed to the bottom, he was resurrected from among

all these dead men in order to load all his adversaries with insults.

  It is true that towards the end of his fourth volume, after having walked

through a hundred labyrinths, and having fought with everybody he met on

the road, he comes at last to his great question which he had left there. He

lays all the blame on the Book of Job which passes among scholars for an

Arab work, and he tries to prove that Job did not believe in the immortality of

the soul. Later he explains in his own way all the texts of Holy Writ by which

people have tried to combat this opinion.

  All one can say about it is that, if he was right, it was not for a bishop to

be right in such a way. He should have felt that one might draw dangerous

inferences; but everything in this world is a mass of contradiction. This man,

who became accuser and persecutor, was not made bishop by a minister of

state's patronage until immediately after he had written his book.

  At Salamanca, Coimbre or Rome, he would have been obliged to recant

and to ask pardon. In England he became a peer of the realm with an income

of a hundred thousand livres; it was enough to modify his methods.


  SECTION VI


  Of the Need of Revelation

  The greatest benefit we owe to the New Testament is that it has revealed

to us the immortality of the soul. It is in vain, therefore, that this fellow

Warburton  tried  to  cloud  over  this  important  truth,  by  continually

representing in his legation of Moses that "the ancient Jews knew nothing of

this necessary dogma, and that the Sadducees did not admit it in the time of

our Lord Jesus."

  He interprets in his own way the very words that have been put into Jesus

Christ's mouth: "... have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by God,

saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of

Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living" (St. Matt. xxii. 31,

32). He gives to the parable of the wicked rich man a sense contrary to that ofall  the  Churches.  Sherlock,  Bishop  of  London,  and  twenty  other  scholars

refuted him. English philosophers even reproached him with the scandal of

an  Anglican  bishop  manifesting  an  opinion  so  contrary  to  the  Anglican

Church; and after that, this man takes it into his head to treat these persons as

impious: like the character of Arlequin in the comedy of the Dévaliseur de

maisons, who, after throwing the furniture out of the window, sees a man

carrying some of it off, and cries with all his might "Stop thief!"

  One should bless the revelation of the immortality of the soul, and of

rewards  and  punishments  after  death,  all  the  more  that  mankind's  vain

philosophy has always been sceptical of it. The great Cæsar did not believe in

it at all, he made himself quite clear in full senate when, in order to stop

Catalina  being  put  to  death,  he  represented  that  death  left  man  without

sensation, that everything died with him; and nobody refuted this view.

  The  Roman  Empire  was  divided  between  two  principal  sects:  that  of

Epicurus which asserted that deity was useless to the world, and that the soul

perished with the body: and that of the Stoics who regarded the soul as part of

the  Deity,  which  after  death  was  joined  again  to  its  origin,  to  the  great

everything  from  which  it  emanated.  Thus,  whether  one  believed  the  soul

mortal, or whether one believed it immortal, all the sects were agreed in

laughing at pains and punishments after death.

  We still have a hundred monuments of this belief of the Romans. It is by

virtue of this opinion graved profoundly in their hearts, that so many simple

Roman citizens killed themselves without the least scruple; they did not wait

for a tyrant to hand them over to the executioners.

  The most virtuous men even, and those most persuaded of the existence of

a God, hoped for no reward, and feared no punishment. Clement, who later

was Pope and saint, began by himself doubting what the early Christians said

of another life, and consulted St. Peter at Cæsarea. We are far from believing

that St. Clement wrote the history that is attributed to him; but this history

makes evident the need the human race had of a precise revelation. All that

can surprise us is that so repressive and salutary a doctrine has left a prey to

so many horrible crimes men who have so little time to live, and who see

themselves squeezed between two eternities.  SECTION VII


  Souls of Fools and Monsters

  A deformed child is born absolutely imbecile, it has no ideas and lives

without  ideas;  we  have  seen  examples  of  this.  How  shall  this  animal  be

defined? doctors have said that it is something between man and beast; others

have said that it had a sensitive soul, but not an intellectual soul. It eats,

drinks, sleeps, wakes, has sensations; but it does not think.

  Is there another life for this creature, or is there none? The question has

been posed, and has not yet been completely answered.

  Some say that this creature must have a soul, because its father and mother

had one. But by this reasoning one would prove that if it came into the world

without a nose it would be deemed to have one, because its father and its

mother had noses.

  A woman gives birth to child with no chin, its forehead is receding and

rather black, its nose is slim and pointed, its eyes are round, it bears not a bad

resemblance to a swallow; the rest of its body, nevertheless, is made like

ours. The parents have it baptised; by a plurality of votes it is considered a

man and possessor of an immortal soul. But if this ridiculous little figure has

pointed nails and beak-like mouth, it is declared a monster, it has no soul, and

is not baptised.

  It is well known that in London in 1726 there was a woman who gave

birth every week to a rabbit. No difficulty was made about refusing baptism

to this child, despite the epidemic mania there was for three weeks in London

for believing that this poor rogue was making wild rabbits. The surgeon who

attended  her,  St.  André  by  name,  swore  that  nothing  was  more  true,  and

people believed him. But what reason did the credulous have for refusing a

soul  to  this  woman's  children?  she  had  a  soul,  her  children  should  be

provided with souls also; whether they had hands, whether they had paws,

whether they were born with a little snout or with a face; cannot the Supreme

Being bestow the gift of thought and sensation on a little I know not what,

born of a woman, shaped like a rabbit, as well as to a little I know not what,

shaped like a man? Shall the soul that was ready to lodge in this woman's

fœtus go back again into space?  Locke makes the sound observation, about monsters, that one must not

attribute immortality to the exterior of a body; that the form has nothing to do

with it. This immortality, he says, is no more attached to the form of his face

or his chest, than to the way his beard is dressed or his coat cut.

  He  asks  what  is  the  exact  measure  of  deformity  by  which  you  can

recognize whether or no a child has a soul? What is the precise degree at

which it must be declared a monster and deprived of a soul?

  One  asks  still  further  what  would  be  a  soul  which  never  has  any  but

fantastic  ideas?  there  are  some  which  never  escape  from  them.  Are  they

worthy or unworthy? what is to be done with their pure spirit?

  What is one to think of a child with two heads? without deformity apart

from this? Some say that it has two souls because it is provided with two

pineal  glands,  with  two  corpus  callosum,  with  two  sensorium  commune.

Others reply that one cannot have two souls when one has only one chest and

one navel.[22]

  In fine, so many questions have been asked about this poor human soul,

that  if  it  were  necessary  to  answer  them  all,  this  examination  of  its  own

person would cause it the most intolerable boredom. There would happen to

it what happened to Cardinal de Polignac at a conclave. His steward, tired of

never being able to make him settle his accounts, made the journey from

Rome, and came to the little window of his cell burdened with an immense

bundle of papers. He read for nearly two hours. At last, seeing that no reply

was forthcoming, he put his head forward. The cardinal had departed nearly

two hours before. Our souls will depart before their stewards have acquainted

them  with  the  facts:  but  let  us  be  exact  before  God,  whatever  sort  of

ignoramuses we are, we and our stewards.


  FOOTNOTES:

  [21] Voltaire himself.

  [22] The Chevalier d'Angos, learned astronomer, has carefully observed a

two-headed lizard for several days; and he has assured himself that the lizard

had two independent wills, each of which had an almost equal power over the

body. When the lizard was given a piece of bread, in such a way that it couldsee it with only one head, this head wanted to go after the bread, and the

other wanted the body to remain at rest.


  STATES, GOVERNMENTS


  The ins and outs of all governments have been closely examined recently.

Tell  me  then,  you  who  have  travelled,  in  what  state,  under  what  sort  of

government you would choose to be born. I imagine that a great land-owning

lord in France would not be vexed to be born in Germany; he would be

sovereign instead of subject. A peer of France would be very glad to have the

privileges of the English peerage; he would be legislator. The lawyer and the

financier would be better off in France than elsewhere.

  But what country would a wise, free man, a man with a moderate fortune,

and without prejudices, choose?

  A  member  of  the  government  of  Pondicherry,  a  learned  man  enough,

returned to Europe by land with a Brahmin better educated than the ordinary

Brahmin. "What do you think of the government of the Great Mogul?" asked

the councillor.

  "I think it abominable," answered the Brahmin. "How can you expect a

state to be happily governed by the Tartars? Our rajahs, our omrahs, our

nabobs,  are  very  content,  but  the  citizens  are  hardly  so;  and  millions  of

citizens are something."

  Reasoning, the councillor and the Brahmin traversed the whole of Upper

Asia.  "I  make  the  observation,"  said  the  Brahmin,  "that  there  is  not  one

republic in all this vast part of the world."

  "Formerly there was the republic of Tyre," said the councillor, "but it did

not last long; there was still another one in the direction of Arabia Petrea, in a

little corner called Palestine, if one can honour with the name of republic a

horde of thieves and usurers sometimes governed by judges, sometimes by a

species of kings, sometimes by grand-pontiffs, become slave seven or eight

times, and finally driven out of the country which it had usurped."

  "I imagine," said the Brahmin, "that one ought to find very few republics

on the earth. Men are rarely worthy of governing themselves. This happinessshould belong only to little peoples who hide themselves in islands, or among

the mountains, like rabbits who shun carnivorous beasts; but in the long run

they are discovered and devoured."

  When the two travellers reached Asia Minor, the councillor said to the

Brahmin: "Would you believe that a republic was formed in a corner of Italy,

which lasted more than five hundred years, and which owned Asia Minor,

Asia, Africa, Greece, Gaul, Spain and the whole of Italy?"

  "She soon became a monarchy, then," said the Brahmin.

  "You have guessed right," said the other. "But this monarchy fell, and

every day we compose beautiful dissertations in order to find the cause of its

decadence and downfall."

  "You take a deal of trouble," said the Indian. "This empire fell because it

existed. Everything has to fall. I hope as much will happen to the Grand

Mogul's empire."

  "By the way," said the European, "do you consider that there should be

more honour in a despotic state, and more virtue in a republic?"

  The  Indian,  having  had  explained  to  him  what  we  mean  by  honour,

answered that honour was more necessary in a republic, and that one had

more need of virtue in a monarchical state. "For," said he, "a man who claims

to be elected by the people, will not be if he is dishonoured; whereas at the

court  he  could  easily  obtain  a  place,  in  accordance  with  a  great  prince's

maxim, that in order to succeed a courtier should have neither honour nor

character. As regards virtue, one must be prodigiously virtuous to dare to say

the truth. The virtuous man is much more at his ease in a republic; he has no

one to flatter."

  "Do you think," said the man from Europe, "that laws and religions are

made for climates, just as one has to have furs in Moscow, and gauzy stuffs

in Delhi?"

  "Without a doubt," answered the Brahmin. "All the laws which concern

material things are calculated for the meridian one lives in. A German needs

only one wife, and a Persian three or four.

  "The rites of religion are of the same nature. How, if I were Christian,

should I say mass in my province where there is neither bread nor wine? Asregards dogmas, that is another matter; the climate has nothing to do with

them. Did not your religion begin in Asia, whence it was driven out? does it

not exist near the Baltic Sea, where it was unknown?"

  "In what state, under what domination, would you like best to live?" asked

the councillor.

  "Anywhere but where I do live," answered his companion. "And I have

met many Siamese, Tonkinese, Persians and Turks who said as much."

  "But, once again," persisted the European, "what state would you choose?"

  The Brahmin answered: "The state where only the laws are obeyed."

  "That is an old answer," said the councillor.

  "It is none the worse for that," said the Brahmin.

  "Where is that country?" asked the councillor.

  "We must look for it," answered the Brahmin.


  SUPERSTITION


  The  superstitious  man  is  to  the  rogue  what  the  slave  is  to  the  tyrant.

Further, the superstitious man is governed by the fanatic and becomes fanatic.

Superstition born in Paganism, adopted by Judaism, infested the Christian

Church  from  the  earliest  times.  All  the  fathers  of  the  Church,  without

exception, believed in the power of magic. The Church always condemned

magic, but she always believed in it: she did not excommunicate sorcerers as

madmen who were mistaken, but as men who were really in communication

with the devil.

  To-day one half of Europe thinks that the other half has long been and still

is  superstitious.  The  Protestants  regard  the  relics,  the  indulgences,  the

mortifications, the prayers for the dead, the holy water, and almost all the

rites  of  the  Roman  Church,  as  a  superstitious  dementia.  Superstition,

according to them, consists in taking useless practices for necessary practices.

Among  the  Roman  Catholics  there  are  some  more  enlightened  than  their

ancestors, who have renounced many of these usages formerly considered

sacred;  and  they  defend  themselves  against  the  others  who  have  retainedthem, by saying: "They are indifferent, and what is merely indifferent cannot

be an evil."

  It is difficult to mark the limits of superstition. A Frenchman travelling in

Italy  finds  almost  everything  superstitious,  and  is  hardly  mistaken.  The

Archbishop  of  Canterbury  maintains  that  the  Archbishop  of  Paris  is

superstitious; the Presbyterians make the same reproach against His Grace of

Canterbury, and are in their turn treated as superstitious by the Quakers, who

are the most superstitious of all in the eyes of other Christians.

  In Christian societies, therefore, no one agrees as to what superstition is.

The  sect  which  seems  to  be  the  least  attacked  by  this  malady  of  the

intelligence is that which has the fewest rites. But if with few ceremonies it is

still strongly attached to an absurd belief, this absurd belief is equivalent

alone to all the superstitious practices observed from the time of Simon the

magician to that of Father Gauffridi.

  It is therefore clear that it is the fundamentals of the religion of one sect

which is considered as superstition by another sect.

  The  Moslems  accuse  all  Christian  societies  of  it,  and  are  themselves

accused. Who will judge this great matter? Will it be reason? But each sect

claims to have reason on its side. It will therefore be force which will judge,

while awaiting the time when reason will penetrate a sufficient number of

heads to disarm force.

  Up to what point does statecraft permit superstition to be destroyed? This

is a very thorny question; it is like asking up to what point one should make

an incision in a dropsical person, who may die under the operation. It is a

matter for the doctor's discretion.

  Can there exist a people free from all superstitious prejudices? That is to

ask-Can  there  exist  a  nation  of  philosophers?  It  is  said  that  there  is  no

superstition in the magistrature of China. It is probable that none will remain

in the magistrature of a few towns of Europe.

  Then the magistrates will stop the superstition of the people from being

dangerous. These magistrates' example will not enlighten the mob, but the

principal persons of the middle-classes will hold the mob in check. There is

not  perhaps  a  single  riot,  a  single  religious  outrage  in  which  the  middle-classes were not formerly imbrued, because these middle classes were then

the  mob;  but  reason  and  time  will  have  changed  them.  Their  softened

manners will soften those of the lowest and most savage populace; it is a

thing of which we have striking examples in more than one country. In a

word, less superstition, less fanaticism; and less fanaticism, less misery.


  TEARS


  Tears are the mute language of sorrow. But why? What connection is there

between a sad idea and this limpid, salt liquid, filtered through a little gland at

the external corner of the eye, which moistens the conjunctiva and the small

lachrymal points, whence it descends into the nose and mouth through the

reservoir called the lachrymal sack and its ducts?

  Why in women and children, whose organs are part of a frail and delicate

network, are tears more easily excited by sorrow than in grown men, whose

tissue is firmer?

  Did nature wish compassion to be born in us at sight of these tears which

soften us, and lead us to help those who shed them? The woman of a savage

race is as firmly determined to help the child that cries as would be a woman

of  the  court,  and  maybe  more,  because  she  has  fewer  distractions  and

passions.

  In the animal body everything has an object without a doubt. The eyes

especially bear such evident, such proven, such admirable relation to the rays

of light; this mechanism is so divine, that I should be tempted to take for a

delirium of burning fever the audacity which denies the final causes of the

structure of our eyes.

  The use of tears does not seem to have so well determined and striking an

object; but it would be beautiful that nature made them flow in order to stir us

to pity.

  There are women who are accused of weeping when they wish. I am not at

all surprised at their talent. A live, sensitive, tender imagination can fix itself

on  some  object,  on  some  sorrowful  memory,  and  picture  it  in  such

dominating colours that they wring tears from it. It is what happens to manyactors, and principally to actresses, on the stage.

  The women who imitate them in their own homes add to this talent the

petty fraud of appearing to weep for their husbands, whereas in fact they are

weeping for their lovers. Their tears are true, but the object of them is false.

  One asks why the same man who has watched the most atrocious events

dry-eyed, who even has committed cold-blooded crimes, will weep at the

theatre at the representation of these events and crimes? It is that he does not

see them with the same eyes, he sees them with the eyes of the author and the

actor. He is no longer the same man; he was a barbarian, he was agitated by

furious passions when he saw an innocent woman killed, when he stained

himself with his friend's blood. His soul was filled with stormy tumult; it is

tranquil, it is empty; nature returns to it; he sheds virtuous tears. That is the

true merit, the great good of the theatres; there is achieved what can never be

achieved by the frigid declamations of an orator paid to bore the whole of an

audience for an hour.

  David the capitoul, who, without emotion, caused and saw the death of

innocent Calas on the wheel, would have shed tears at the sight of his own

crime in a well-written and well-spoken tragedy.

  It is thus that Pope has said in the prologue to Addison's Cato:-

  "Tyrants no more their savage nature kept;

  And foes to virtue wondered how they wept."


  THEIST


  The theist is a man firmly persuaded of the existence of a Supreme Being

as  good  as  He  is  powerful,  who  has  formed  all  beings  with  extension,

vegetating,  sentient  and  reflecting;  who  perpetuates  their  species,  who

punishes crimes without cruelty, and rewards virtuous actions with kindness.

  The theist does not know how God punishes, how he protects, how he

pardons, for he is not reckless enough to flatter himself that he knows how

God acts, but he knows that God acts and that He is just. Difficulties against

Providence  do  not  shake  him  in  his  faith,  because  they  are  merely  great

difficulties,  and  not  proofs.  He  submits  to  this  Providence,  although  heperceives but a few effects and a few signs of this Providence: and, judging

of the things he does not see by the things he sees, he considers that this

Providence reaches all places and all centuries.

  Reconciled  in  this  principle  with  the  rest  of  the  universe,  he  does  not

embrace any of the sects, all of which contradict each other; his religion is the

most ancient and the most widespread; for the simple worship of a God has

preceded all the systems of the world. He speaks a language that all peoples

understand, while they do not understand one another. He has brothers from

Pekin to Cayenne, and he counts all wise men as his brethren. He believes

that  religion  does  not  consist  either  in  the  opinions  of  an  unintelligible

metaphysic, or in vain display, but in worship and justice. The doing of good,

there  is  his  service;  being  submissive  to  God,  there  is  his  doctrine.  The

Mahometan cries to him-"Have a care if you do not make the pilgrimage to

Mecca!" "Woe unto you," says a Recollet, "if you do not make a journey to

Notre-Dame de Lorette!" He laughs at Lorette and at Mecca; but he succours

the needy and defends the oppressed.


    TOLERANCE


  What is tolerance? it is the consequence of humanity. We are all formed of

frailty and error; let us pardon reciprocally each other's folly-that is the first

law of nature.

  It is clear that the individual who persecutes a man, his brother, because he

is not of the same opinion, is a monster. That admits of no difficulty. But the

government! but the magistrates! but the princes! how do they treat those

who have another worship than theirs? If they are powerful strangers, it is

certain  that  a  prince  will  make  an  alliance  with  them.  François  I.,  very

Christian,  will  unite  with  Mussulmans  against  Charles  V.,  very  Catholic.

François I. will give money to the Lutherans of Germany to support them in

their revolt against the emperor; but, in accordance with custom, he will start

by having Lutherans burned at home. For political reasons he pays them in

Saxony; for political reasons he burns them in Paris. But what will happen?

Persecutions make proselytes? Soon France will be full of new Protestants.

At first they will let themselves be hanged, later they in their turn will hang.There will be civil wars, then will come the St. Bartholomew; and this corner

of the world will be worse than all that the ancients and moderns have ever

told of hell.

  Madmen, who have never been able to give worship to the God who made

you! Miscreants, whom the example of the Noachides, the learned Chinese,

the Parsees and all the sages, has never been able to lead! Monsters, who

need  superstitions  as  crows'  gizzards  need  carrion!  you  have  been  told  it

already, and there is nothing else to tell you-if you have two religions in your

countries, they will cut each other's throat; if you have thirty religions, they

will dwell in peace. Look at the great Turk, he governs Guebres, Banians,

Greek Christians, Nestorians, Romans. The first who tried to stir up tumult

would be impaled; and everyone is tranquil.

  Of  all  religions,  the  Christian  is  without  doubt  the  one  which  should

inspire tolerance most, although up to now the Christians have been the most

intolerant of all men. The Christian Church was divided in its cradle, and was

divided even in the persecutions which under the first emperors it sometimes

endured. Often the martyr was regarded as an apostate by his brethren, and

the  Carpocratian  Christian  expired  beneath  the  sword  of  the  Roman

executioners, excommunicated by the Ebionite Christian, the which Ebionite

was anathema to the Sabellian.

  This horrible discord, which has lasted for so many centuries, is a very

striking lesson that we should pardon each other's errors; discord is the great

ill of mankind; and tolerance is the only remedy for it.

  There  is  nobody  who  is  not  in  agreement  with  this  truth,  whether  he

meditates  soberly  in  his  study,  or  peaceably  examines  the  truth  with  his

friends.  Why  then  do  the  same  men  who  admit  in  private  indulgence,

kindness,  justice,  rise  in  public  with  so  much  fury  against  these  virtues?

Why?  it  is  that  their  own  interest  is  their  god,  and  that  they  sacrifice

everything to this monster that they worship.

  I possess a dignity and a power founded on ignorance and credulity; I

walk on the heads of the men who lie prostrate at my feet; if they should rise

and look me in the face, I am lost; I must bind them to the ground, therefore,

with iron chains.

  Thus  have  reasoned  the  men  whom  centuries  of  bigotry  have  madepowerful. They have other powerful men beneath them, and these have still

others, who all enrich themselves with the spoils of the poor, grow fat on

their blood, and laugh at their stupidity. They all detest tolerance, as partisans

grown rich at the public expense fear to render their accounts, and as tyrants

dread the word liberty. And then, to crown everything, they hire fanatics to

cry at the top of their voices: "Respect my master's absurdities, tremble, pay,

and keep your mouths shut."

  It is thus that a great part of the world long was treated; but to-day when

so many sects make a balance of power, what course to take with them?

Every  sect,  as  one  knows,  is  a  ground  of  error;  there  are  no  sects  of

geometers,  algebraists,  arithmeticians,  because  all  the  propositions  of

geometry, algebra and arithmetic are true. In every other science one may be

deceived. What Thomist or Scotist theologian would dare say seriously that

he is sure of his case?

  If it were permitted to reason consistently in religious matters, it is clear

that we all ought to become Jews, because Jesus Christ our Saviour was born

a  Jew,  lived  a  Jew,  died  a  Jew,  and  that  he  said  expressly  that  he  was

accomplishing, that he was fulfilling the Jewish religion. But it is clearer still

that  we  ought  to  be  tolerant  of  one  another,  because  we  are  all  weak,

inconsistent, liable to fickleness and error. Shall a reed laid low in the mud by

the wind say to a fellow reed fallen in the opposite direction: "Crawl as I

crawl, wretch, or I shall petition that you be torn up by the roots and burned?"


  TRUTH


  "Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king then? Jesus answered,

Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came

I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Everyone that is of

the truth heareth my voice.

  "Pilate saith unto Him, What is truth? And when he had said this he went

out, etc." (St. John xviii. 37.)

  It is a sad thing for the human race that Pilate went out without waiting for

the answer; we should know what truth is. Pilate had very little curiosity. The

accused led before him, says he is king, that he was to be king; and Pilatedoes not inquire how that can be. He is supreme judge in Cæsar's name, he

has power of life and death; his duty was to probe the sense of these words.

He ought to say-"Tell me what you understand by being king. How were you

born to be king and to bear witness to the truth? It is maintained that truth

reaches but with difficulty to the ear of kings. I am judge, I have always had

great  trouble  in  finding  it.  While  your  enemies  are  howling  against  you

without, give me some information on the point; you will be doing me the

greatest service that has ever been done a judge; and I much prefer to learn to

recognize truth, than to accede to the Jews' clamorous demand to have you

hanged."

  We shall not dare, to be sure, seek what the author of all truth would have

been able to reply to Pilate.

  Would  he  have  said:  "Truth  is  an  abstract  word  which  most  men  use

indifferently in their books and judgments, for error and falsehood?" This

definition  would  have  been  marvellously  appropriate  to  all  makers  of

systems. Similarly is the word "wisdom" taken often for folly, and "wit" for

nonsense.

  Humanly  speaking,  let  us  define  truth,  while  waiting  for  a  better

definition, as-"a statement of the facts as they are."

  I suppose that if one had given only six months to teaching Pilate the

truths of logic, he would assuredly have made this conclusive syllogism. One

must not take away the life of a man who has only preached good morality:

well, the man who has been impeached has, on the showing of his enemies

even, often preached excellent morality; therefore he should not be punished

with death.

  He might have drawn this further argument.

  My duty is to disperse the riotous assemblage of a seditious people who

demand a man's death, unreasonably and without legal form; well, that is the

position of the Jews in this instance; therefore I must drive them away and

break up their meeting.

  We suppose that Pilate knew arithmetic; hence we will not speak of those

forms of truth.

  As regards mathematical truths, I think it would have taken at least threeyears before he could have learned higher geometry. The truths of physics

combined  with  those  of  geometry  would  have  demanded  more  than  four

years. We spend six, ordinarily, in studying theology; I ask twelve for Pilate,

seeing that he was pagan, and that six years would not have been too much

for eradicating all his old errors, and six years more for making him fit to

receive a doctor's hood.

  If Pilate had had a well-balanced mind, I should have asked only two years

to  teach  him  metaphysical  truth;  and  as  metaphysical  truth  is  necessarily

allied to moral truth, I flatter myself that in less than nine years he would

have become a real scholar and a perfectly honest man.

  I should then have said to Pilate:-Historical truths are merely probabilities.

If you had fought at the battle of Philippi, that is for you a truth which you

know  by  intuition,  by  perception.  But  for  us  who  dwell  near  the  Syrian

desert, it is merely a very probable thing, which we know by hearsay. How

much hearsay is necessary to form a conviction equal to that of a man who,

having seen the thing, can flatter himself that he has a sort of certainty?

  He who has heard the thing told by twelve thousand eyewitnesses, has

only twelve thousand probabilities, equal to one strong probability, which is

not equal to certainty.

  If you have the thing from only one of these witnesses, you know nothing;

you  should  be  sceptical.  If  the  witness  is  dead,  you  should  be  still  more

sceptical, for you cannot enlighten yourself. If from several witnesses who

are dead, you are in the same plight. If from those to whom the witnesses

have spoken, your scepticism should increase still more.

  From  generation  to  generation  scepticism  increases,  and  probability

diminishes; and soon probability is reduced to zero.


  TYRANNY


  One gives the name of tyrant to the sovereign who knows no laws but

those of his caprice, who takes his subjects' property, and who afterwards

enrols them to go to take the property of his neighbours. There are none of

these tyrants in Europe.  One distinguishes between the tyranny of one man and that of many. The

tyranny of many would be that of a body which invaded the rights of other

bodies, and which exercised despotism in favour of the laws corrupted by it.

Nor are there any tyrants of this sort in Europe.

  Under which tyranny would you like to live? Under neither; but if I had to

choose, I should detest the tyranny of one man less than that of many. A

despot always has his good moments; an assembly of despots never. If a

tyrant  does  me  an  injustice,  I  can  disarm  him  through  his  mistress,  his

confessor or his page; but a company of grave tyrants is inaccessible to all

seductions. When it is not unjust, it is at the least hard, and never does it

bestow favours.

  If I have only one despot, I am quit of him by drawing myself up against a

wall when I see him pass, or by bowing low, or by striking the ground with

my  forehead,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  country;  but  if  there  is  a

company of a hundred despots, I am exposed to repeating this ceremony a

hundred times a day, which in the long run is very annoying if one's hocks

are not supple. If I have a farm in the neighbourhood of one of our lords, I am

crushed; if I plead against a relation of the relations of one of our lords, I am

ruined. What is to be done? I fear that in this world one is reduced to being

either hammer or anvil; lucky the man who escapes these alternatives!


  VIRTUE

  SECTION I


  It is said of Marcus Brutus that, before killing himself, he uttered these

words: "O virtue! I thought you were something; but you are only an empty

phantom!"

  You were right, Brutus, if you considered virtue as being head of a faction,

and  assassin  of  your  benefactor;  but  if  you  had  considered  virtue  as

consisting only of doing good to those dependent on you, you would not have

called it a phantom, and you would not have killed yourself in despair.

  I am very virtuous says this excrement of theology, for I have the four

cardinal virtues, and the three divine. An honest man asks him-"What is thecardinal  virtue?"  The  other  answers-"Strength,  prudence,  temperance  and

justice."

  THE HONEST MAN:

  If you are just, you have said everything; your strength, your prudence,

your temperance, are useful qualities. If you have them, so much the better

for you; but if you are just, so much the better for the others. But it is not

enough to be just, you must do good; that is what is really cardinal. And your

divine virtues, which are they?

  THE EXCREMENT:

  Faith, hope, charity.

  THE HONEST MAN:

  Is it a virtue to believe? either what you believe seems true to you, and in

this case there is no merit in believing; or it seems false to you, and then it is

impossible for you to believe.

  Hope cannot be a virtue any more than fear; one fears and one hopes,

according as one receives a promise or a threat. As for charity, is it not what

the  Greeks  and  the  Romans  understood  by  humanity,  love  of  one's

neighbour? this love is nothing if it be not active; doing good, therefore, is

the sole true virtue.

  THE EXCREMENT:

  One would be a fool! Really, I am to give myself a deal of torment in

order to serve mankind, and I shall get no return! all work deserves payment.

I do not mean to do the least honest action, unless I am certain of paradise.

  THE HONEST MAN:

  Ah, master! that is to say that, if you did not hope for paradise, and if you

did not fear hell, you would never do any good action. Believe me, master,

there are two things worthy of being loved for themselves, God and virtue.

  THE EXCREMENT:

  I see, sir, you are a disciple of Fénélon.

  THE HONEST MAN:

  Yes, master.  THE EXCREMENT:

  I shall denounce you to the judge of the ecclesiastical court at Meaux.

  THE HONEST MAN:

  Go along, denounce!


  SECTION II


  What is virtue? Beneficence towards the fellow-creature. Can I call virtue

things other than those which do me good? I am needy, you are generous. I

am  in  danger,  you  help  me.  I  am  deceived,  you  tell  me  the  truth.  I  am

neglected, you console me. I am ignorant, you teach me. Without difficulty I

shall  call  you  virtuous.  But  what  will  become  of  the  cardinal  and  divine

virtues? Some of them will remain in the schools.

  What does it matter to me that you are temperate? you observe a precept

of health; you will have better health, and I am happy to hear it. You have

faith and hope, and I am happy still; they will procure you eternal life. Your

divine virtues are celestial gifts; your cardinal virtues are excellent qualities

which serve to guide you: but they are not virtues as regards your fellow-

creature. The prudent man does good to himself, the virtuous man does good

to mankind. St. Paul was right to tell you that charity prevails over faith and

hope.

  But shall only those that are useful to one's fellow-creature be admitted as

virtues? How can I admit any others? We live in society; really, therefore, the

only things that are good for us are those that are good for society. A recluse

will be sober, pious; he will be clad in hair-cloth; he will be a saint: but I

shall not call him virtuous until he has done some act of virtue by which other

men have profited. So long as he is alone, he is doing neither good nor evil;

for us he is nothing. If St. Bruno brought peace to families, if he succoured

want, he was virtuous; if he fasted, prayed in solitude, he was a saint. Virtue

among  men  is  an  interchange  of  kindness;  he  who  has  no  part  in  this

interchange should not be counted. If this saint were in the world, he would

doubtless do good; but so long as he is not in the world, the world will be

right in refusing him the title of virtuous; he will be good for himself and notfor us.

  But, you say to me, if a recluse is a glutton, a drunkard, given to secret

debauches with himself, he is vicious; he is virtuous, therefore, if he has the

opposite  qualities.  That  is  what  I  cannot  agree:  he  is  a  very  disagreeable

fellow  if  he  has  the  faults  you  mention;  but  he  is  not  vicious,  wicked,

punishable as regards society to whom these infamies do no harm. It is to be

presumed that were he to return to society he would do harm there, that he

would  be  very  vicious;  and  it  is  even  more  probable  that  he  would  be  a

wicked man, than it is sure that the other temperate and chaste recluse would

be a virtuous man, for in society faults increase, and good qualities diminish.

  A much stronger objection is made; Nero, Pope Alexander VI., and other

monsters of this species, have bestowed kindnesses; I answer hardily that on

that day they were virtuous.

  A few theologians say that the divine emperor Antonine was not virtuous;

that he was a stubborn Stoic who, not content with commanding men, wished

further to be esteemed by them; that he attributed to himself the good he did

to the human race; that all his life he was just, laborious, beneficent through

vanity,  and  that  he  only  deceived  men  through  his  virtues.  "My  God!"  I

exclaim. "Give us often rogues like him!"


  WHY?


  Why does one hardly ever do the tenth part of the good one might do?

  Why in half Europe do girls pray to God in Latin, which they do not

understand?

  Why in antiquity was there never a theological quarrel, and why were no

people ever distinguished by the name of a sect? The Egyptians were not

called  Isiacs  or  Osiriacs;  the  peoples  of  Syria  did  not  have  the  name  of

Cybelians. The Cretans had a particular devotion to Jupiter, and were never

entitled Jupiterians. The ancient Latins were very attached to Saturn; there

was not a village in Latium called Saturnian: on the contrary, the disciples of

the God of truth taking their master's title, and calling themselves "anointed"

like Him, declared, as soon as they could, an eternal war on all the peopleswho  were  not  anointed,  and  made  war  among  themselves  for  fourteen

hundred years, taking the names of Arians, Manicheans, Donatists, Hussites,

Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists. And lastly, the Jansenists and the Molinists

have had no more poignant mortification than that of not having been able to

slaughter each other in pitched battle. Whence does this come?

  Why is the great number of hard-working, innocent men who till the land

every  day  of  the  year  that  you  may  eat  all  its  fruits,  scorned,  vilified,

oppressed, robbed; and why is it that the useless and often very wicked man

who lives only by their work, and who is rich only through their poverty, is

on the contrary respected, courted, considered?

  Why  is  it  that,  the  fruits  of  the  earth  being  so  necessary  for  the

conservation of men and animals, one yet sees so many years and so many

countries where there is entire lack of these fruits?

  Why is the half of Africa and America covered with poisons?

  Why is there no land where insects are not far in excess of men?

  Why does a little whitish, evil-smelling secretion form a being which has

hard bones, desires and thoughts? and why do these beings always persecute

each other?

  Why does so much evil exist, seeing that everything is formed by a God

whom all theists are agreed in naming "good?"

  Why, since we complain ceaselessly of our ills, do we spend all our time

in increasing them?

  Why, as we are so miserable, have we imagined that not to be is a great ill,

when it is clear that it was not an ill not to be before we were born?

  Why and how does one have dreams during sleep, if one has no soul; and

how is it that these dreams are always so incoherent, so extravagant, if one

has a soul?

  Why do the stars move from west to east rather than from east to west?

  Why do we exist? why is there anything?Voltaire's Romances Complete Work

 

  Voltaire

  Voltaire's Romances Complete Work

  Published in 1901


    COMPLETE IN ONE VOLUME.

  NEW YORK:PUBLISHED BY

  PETER ECKLER,35 FULTON STREET.


  I choose that a story should be founded on probability, and not always

resemble a dream. I desire to find nothing in it trivial or extravagant; and I

desire above all, that under the appearance of fable there may appear some

latent truth, obvious to the discerning eye, though it escape the observation of

the vulgar.

  Voltaire.


  TABLE

  PUBLISHER'S PREFACE

  THE WHITE BULL: A SATIRICAL ROMANCE.

  CHAPTER I.

  How the Princess Amasidia meets a bull.

  CHAPTER II.

  How the wise Mambres, formerly magician of Pharoah, knew again the

old woman, and was known

  by her.

  CHAPTER III.

  How the beautiful Amasidia had a secret conversation with a beautiful

serpent.  CHAPTER IV.

  How they wanted to sacrifice the bull and exorcise the Princess.

  CHAPTER V.

  How the wise Mambres conducted himself wisely.

  CHAPTER VI.

  How Mambres met three prophets, and gave them a good dinner.

  CHAPTER VII.

  How king Amasis wanted to give the White Bull to be devoured by the

fish of Jonah, and did not

  do it.

  CHAPTER VIII.

  How the serpent told stories to the Princess to comfort her.

  CHAPTER IX.

  How the serpent did not comfort the Princess.

  CHAPTER X.

  How they wanted to behead the Princess, and did not do it.

  CHAPTER XI.

  Apotheosis of the White Bull. Triumph of the wise Mambres. The seven

years proclaimed by Daniel are accomplished. Nebuchadnezzar resumes the

human  form,  marries  the  beautiful  Amasidia,  and  ascends  the  throne  of

Babylon.

  ZADIG; OR FATE.

    APPROBATION.

  EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO THE SULTANA SHERAA.

  I. THE BLIND OF ONE EYE.

  II. THE NOSE.

  III. THE DOG AND THE HORSE.

  IV. THE ENVIOUS MAN.  V. THE GENEROUS.

  VI. THE MINISTER.

  VII. THE DISPUTES AND THE AUDIENCES.

  VIII. JEALOUSY.

  IX. THE WOMAN BEATER.

  X. SLAVERY.

  XI. THE FUNERAL PILE.

  XII. THE SUPPER.

  XIII. THE RENDEZVOUS.

  XIV. THE ROBBER.

  XV. THE FISHERMAN.

  XVI. THE BASILISK.

  XVII. THE COMBATS.

  XVIII. THE HERMIT.

  XIX. THE ENIGMAS.

  THE SAGE AND THE ATHEIST.

  INTRODUCTION

  CHAPTER I.

  Adventures of Johnny, a young Englishman, written by Donna Las Nalgas

  CHAPTER II.

  Continuation of the adventures of John, the young Englishman; also those

of his worthy father,

  D.D., M.P., and F.R.S.

  CHAPTER III.

  Summary of the controversy of the "Buts," between Mr. Freind and Don

Inigo-y-Medroso, y-Comodios, y-Papalamiendos, Bachelor of Salamanca

  CHAPTER IV.  John returns to London and is led into bad company

  CHAPTER V.

  They want to get John married

  CHAPTER VI.

  A terrible adventure

  CHAPTER VII.

  What happened in America

  CHAPTER VIII.

  Dialogue between Freind and Birton

  on Atheism

  CHAPTER IX.

  On Atheism

  CHAPTER X.

  On Atheism

  CHAPTER XI.

  Return to England-John's marriage

  THE PRINCESS OF BABYLON.

  I. Royal contest for the hand of Formosanta

  II. The King of Babylon convenes his Council and consults the Oracle

  III. Royal festival given in honor of the kingly visitors. The bird converses

eloquently with Formosanta

  IV. The beautiful bird is killed by the King of Egypt. Formosanta begins a

journey. Aldea elopes with the King of Scythia

  V. Formosanta visits China and Scythia in search of Amazan

  VI. The Princess continues her journey

  VII. Amazan visits Albion

  VIII. Amazan leaves Albion to visit the land of Saturn  IX. Amazan visits Rome

  X. An unfortunate adventure in Gaul

  XI. Amazan and Formosanta become reconciled

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.

  I. National Poverty

  II. Disaster of the Man of Forty Crowns

  III. Conversation with a Geometrician

  IV. An adventure with a Carmelite

  V. Audience of the Comptroller General

  VI. The Man of Forty Crowns marries, becomes a father, and discants

upon the monks

  VII. On taxes paid to a foreign power

  VIII. On Proportions

  IX. A great quarrel

  X. A rascal repulsed

  XI. The good sense of Mr. Andrew

  XII. The good supper at Mr. Andrew's

  THE HURON; OR, PUPIL OF NATURE.

  I. The Huron arrives in France

  II. The Huron, called the Ingenu, acknowledged by his relatives

  III. The Huron converted

  IV. The Huron baptized

  V. The Huron in love

  VI. The Huron flies to his mistress, and becomes quite furious

  VII. The Huron repulses the English

  VIII. The Huron goes to Court. Sups upon the road with some Huguenots

  IX. The arrival of the Huron at Versailles. His reception at Court  X. The Huron is shut up in the Bastile with a Jansenist

  XI. How the Huron discloses his genius

  XII. The Huron's sentiments upon theatrical pieces

  XIII. The beautiful Miss St. Yves goes to Versailles

  XIV. Rapid progress of the Huron's intellect

  XV. The beautiful Miss St. Yves visits M. de St. Pouange

  XVI. Miss St. Yves consults a Jesuit

  XVII. The Jesuit triumphs

  XVIII. Miss St. Yves delivers her lover and a Jansenist

  XIX.  The  Huron,  the  beautiful  Miss  St.  Yves,  and  their  relatives,  are

convened

  XX. The death of the beautiful Miss St. Yves and its consequences

  MICROMEGAS.

  I. A voyage to the planet Saturn, by a native of Sirius

  II. The conversation between Micromegas and the inhabitant of Saturn

  III. The voyage of these inhabitants of other worlds

  IV. What befell them upon this our globe

  V. The travelers capture a vessel

  VI. What happened in their intercourse with men

  THE WORLD AS IT GOES

  THE BLACK AND THE WHITE

  MEMNON THE PHILOSOPHER

  ANDRÉ DES TOUCHES AT SIAM

  BABABEC

  THE STUDY OF NATURE.

  I. Introduction

  II. The study of Nature  III. Good advice

  IV. Dialogue upon the soul and other topics

  A CONVERSATION WITH A CHINESE

  PLATO'S DREAM

  PLEASURE IN HAVING NO PLEASURE

  AN ADVENTURE IN INDIA

  JEANNOT AND COLIN

  THE TRAVELS OF SCARMENTADO

  THE GOOD BRAMIN

  THE TWO COMFORTERS

  ANCIENT FAITH AND FABLE


  The white bull. A satyrical romance.

  "Daniel changed a monarch into this bull, and I have changed this bull into

a god!" 


  TAURUS.


  The object and significance of ancient Tauric and Phallic worship have

been clearly set forth by Dupuis, Payne Knight, and other learned authors,

and we have, even at the present day, a survival of the ancient faith, in the

Mayday festivals of India and Britain, which were originally instituted to

celebrate the entrance of the sun into the zodiacal sign Taurus, at the vernal

equinox, when the god Osiris was worshiped in Egypt under the form of a

bull called Apis.

  "The general devotion of the ancients to the worship of the BULL," says

the Rev. Mr. Maurice in his learned work on the Antiquities of India, "I have

had frequent occasion to remark, and more particularly in the Indian history,

by their devotion to it at that period 'when the Bull with his horns opened the

Vernal year.' I observed that all nations seem anciently to have vied with each

other in celebrating that blissful epoch; and that the moment the sun enteredthe sign Taurus, were displayed the signals of triumph and the incentives to

passion; that memorials of the universal festivity indulged at that season, are

to be found in the records and customs of people otherwise the most opposite

in manners and most remote in situation;... that the Apis, or Sacred Bull of

Egypt, was only the symbol of the sun in the vigor of vernal youth; and that

the Bull of Japan, breaking with his horn the mundane egg, was evidently

connected  with  the  same  bovine  species  of  superstition,  founded  on  the

mixture of astronomy and mythology."

  "In many of the most ancient temples or India," says Godfrey Higgins in

the  Anacalypsis,  "the  Bull,  as  an  object  of  adoration  makes  a  most

conspicuous figure. A gigantic image of one protrudes from the front of the

temple of the Great Creator, called in the language of the country, Jaggernaut,

in Orissa. This is the Bull of the Zodiac,-the emblem of the sun when the

equinox took place in the first degree of the sign of the Zodiac, Taurus. In

consequence of the precession of the equinoxes, the sun at the vernal equinox

left Taurus, and took place in Aries, which it has left also for a great number

of years, and it now takes place in Aquarius. Thus it keeps receding about

one degree in seventy-two years, and about a whole sign in 2,160 years. M.

Dupuis has demonstrated that the labors of Hercules are nothing but a history

of the passage of the sun through the signs of the zodiac; and that Hercules is

the sun in Aries or the Ram, Bacchus the sun in Taurus or the Bull. The

adoration of the Bull of the zodiac is to be met with everywhere throughout

the world, in the most opposite climes. The examples of it are innumerable

and incontrovertable; they admit of no dispute.

  "It appears from the book or history of the Exod, that it was on the leaving

of Egypt that Moses changed the object of adoration from Taurus to Aries. It

appears  that  the  change  took  place  on  the  mountain  of  Sin,  or  Nisi,  or

Bacchus, which was evidently its old name before Moses arrived there. The

Israelites were punished for adhering to the old worship, that of the Calf, in

opposition  to  the  paschal  Lamb,  which  Moses  had  substituted-'the  Lamb

which taketh away the sins of the world,'-in place of the Bull or Calf which

took away the sins of the world.

  "The planets were in later times all called by names appropriated to the

days of the week, which were dedicated by astrologers to the gods who were

typified by the Bull: Monday to the horned Isis; Tuesday to Mercury, thesame as Hermes and Osiris; Wednesday to Woden, Fo, Buddha, and Surya;

Thursday or Thor-day, or Tur, or Taurus, or Bull-day, to Jove or Jupiter, who,

as a Bull, stole Europa; Friday was dedicated to Venus, Ashteroth or beeve-

horned Astarte; Saturday to Saturn, identified by Mr. Faber with Moloch and

the Centaur Cronus or Taschter; Sunday to the Sun, everywhere typified by

Taurus. All these, I think, must have taken their names after the entrance of

the Sun into Taurus; and before this date all history and even mythology fails

us.

  "In ancient collections we often meet with a person in the prime of life

killing  a  young  bull.  He  is  generally  accompanied  with  a  number  of

astrological emblems. This Bull was the mediatorial Mithra, slain to make

atonement for, and to take away the sins of the world. This was the God Bull,

to whom the prayers were addressed which we find in Bryant and Faber, and

in which he is expressly called the Mediator. This is the Bull of Persia, which

Sir. William Jones and Mr. Faber identify with Buddha or Mahabad. The

sacrifice of the Bull, which taketh away the sins of the world, was succeeded

by  the  sacrifice  of  the  Agni  or  of  Fire,  by  our  Indians  in,  comparatively

speaking, modern times; it was closely connected with the two principles

spoken of above. While the sun was in Taurus, the Bull was slain as the

vicarious sacrifice; when it got into Aries, the Ram or Lamb was substituted.

  "M. Dupuis observes, that the lamb was a symbol or mark of initiation into

the Christian mysteries, a sort of proof of admission into the societies of the

initiated of the lamb, like the private sign of the free-masons. It follows, then,

that  the  mysteries  of  Christ  are  the  mysteries  of  the  Lamb,  and  that  the

mysteries  of  the  Lamb  are  mysteries  of  the  same  nature  as  those  of  the

Mithraitic Bull to which they succeeded by the effect of the precession of the

equinoxes, which substituted the slain lamb for the slain bull."-E.


  PUBLISHER'S PREFACE


  Voltaire  wrote  what  the  people  thought,  and  consequently  his  writings

were universally read. He wittily ridiculed established abuses, and keenly

satirized venerable absurdities. For this he was consigned to the Bastile, and

this distinction served to increase his popularity and extend his influence. Hewas thus enabled to cope successfully with the papal hierarchy, and laugh at

the  murmurs  of  the  Vatican.  The  struggle  commenced  in  his  youth,  and

continued till his death. It was a struggle of light against darkness-of freedom

against  tyranny;  and  it  ended  in  the  triumph  of  truth  over  error  and  of

toleration over bigotry.

  Educated  by  the  Jesuits,  he  early  learned  their  methods,  and  his  great

ability enabled him to circumvent their wiles. The ceremonious presentation

of his tragedy of Mahomet[1] to Pope Benedict XIV., is an example of his

daring  audacity;-his  success  with  the  "head  of  the  church"  shows  his

intellectual  superiority-whilst  the  gracious  reply  of  "his  Holiness"  fitly

illustrates the pontiff's vanity. From priest to bishop, from cardinal to pope,

all felt his intellectual power and all dreaded his merciless satire.

  Voltaire at seventy.

  He  was  famous  as  poet,  dramatist,  historian,  and  philosopher.  An

experienced  courtier  and  polished  writer,  he  gracefully  and  politely

conquered  his  clerical  opponents,  and  with  courteous  irony  overthrew  his

literary critics. From his demeanor you could not judge of his thoughts or

intentions, and while listening to his compliments, you instinctively dreaded

his sarcasms. But venture to approach this grand seigneur, this keen man of

the world, this intellectual giant, and plead in favor of human justice-appeal

to  his  magnanimity  and  love  of  toleration-and  you  then  had  no  cause  to

question his earnestness, no reason to doubt his sincerity. His blood boiled,

says  Macaulay,[2]  at  the  sight  of  cruelty  and  injustice,  and  in  an  age  of

religious persecution, judicial torture, and arbitrary imprisonment, he made

manful  war,  with  every  faculty  he  possessed,  on  what  he  considered  as

abuses; and on many signal occasions, placed himself gallantly between the

powerful  and  the  oppressed.  "When  an  innocent  man  was  broken  on  the

wheel  at  Toulouse,  when  a  youth,  guilty  only  of  an  indiscretion,  was

beheaded at Abbéville, when a brave officer, borne down by public injustice,

was dragged, with a gag in his mouth, to die on the Place de Grêve, a voice

instantly went forth from the banks of Lake Leman, which made itself heard

from  Moscow  to  Cadiz,  and  which  sentenced  the  unjust  judges  to  the

contempt and detestation of all Europe."

  "None can read these stories of the horrible religious bigotry of the day,"says  Alex.  A.  Knox,  in  The  Nineteenth  Century,[3]  "without  feeling  for

Voltaire reverence and respect."

  The  following  extract  from  the  above  named  Review  will  explain  the

religious cruelty to which Macaulay refers:

  "Jean Calas, a Protestant, kept a small shop in Toulouse. He had a scape-

grace of a son, Marc Antoine by name, who hanged himself in his father's

shop. The poor father and mother were up stairs at the time, at supper, in

company with the second son. The evidence was so clear that a coroner's jury

at a public-house would not have turned round upon it. The priests and the

priest party got hold of it, and turned it into a religious crime. The Protestant,

or  Huguenot  parents  were  charged  with  murdering  their  son  for  fear  he

should turn Catholic. The body was taken to the Hôtel de Ville, and then

escorted by priests to the cathedral. The religious orders-White Penitents and

others-held solemn ceremonies for the repose of Marc Antoine's soul. The

churches resounded with the exhortations of the priests, informing the people

what evidence was required to procure the condemnation of the Calas, and

directing  them  to  come  forward  as  witnesses.  Upon  such  assumptions  as

these horrible people could devise, the poor old man was stretched till his

limbs were torn out of the sockets. He was then submitted to the question

extraordinaire. This consisted in pouring water into his mouth from a horn till

his body was swollen to twice its size. The man had been drowned a hundred

times over, but he was still alive. He was then carried to the scaffold and his

limbs were broken with an iron bar, and he was left for two hours to die. He

did not then die, and so the executioner strangled him at last; but he died

without confessing his crime. The man was innocent; he had no confession to

make. The poor creature by his unutterable agony thus saved the lives of his

wife and family, all as innocent as himself. Two daughters were thrust into a

convent: a son shammed conversion to Catholicism and was released. The

servant escaped into a convent. The property of the family was confiscated.

The poor mother slipped away unseen. Finally, another son, who had been

apprenticed to a watchmaker of Nismes, escaped to Geneva. This is a picture

of France in the eighteenth century.

  "Voltaire  took  poor  young  Calas  into  his  family.  He  tried  at  once  to

interest  the  Cardinal  de  Bernis,  the  Duc  de  Choiseul,  and  others  in  this

horrible story. He found for the widow a comfortable retreat at Paris; heemployed  the  best  lawyers  he  could  find  to  give  practical  form  to  the

business; he sent the daughters to join the mother. He paid all the expenses

out of his own pocket. He reached the Chancellor; he made his appeal to

Europe.  He  employed  a  clever  young  advocate  M.  Elie  de  Beaumont,  to

conduct the cast. The Queen of England, Frederick the Great, Catharine of

Russia, were induced by Voltaire to help the Calas.

  "The case of the Sirvens was well-nigh as bad as that of the Calas. Sirven

lived with his wife and three daughters, all Protestants, near Toulouse. The

story is so illustrative of the France of the eighteenth century, and of what

Voltaire  was  about,  that  it  deserves  a  few  lines.  Sirven's  housekeeper,  a

Roman Catholic, with the assent of the Bishop of Castres, spirited away the

youngest daughter, and placed her in a convent of the Black Ladies with a

view to her conversion. She returned to her parents in a state of insanity, her

body  covered  with  the  marks  of  the  whip.  She  never  recovered  from  the

cruelties  she  had  endured  at  the  convent.  One  day,  when  her  father  was

absent on his professional duties, she threw herself into a well, at the bottom

of which she was found drowned. It was obvious to the authorities that the

parents had murdered their child because she wished to become a Roman

Catholic. They most wisely did not appear, and were sentenced to be hanged

when  they  could  be  caught.  In  their  flight  the  married  daughter  gave

premature  birth  to  a  child;  and  Madame  Sirven  died  in  despair.  It  took

Voltaire ten years to get this abominable sentence reversed, and to turn wrong

into right.

  "A  Protestant  gentleman,  M.  Espinasse,  had  been  condemned  to  the

galleys for life and his estate confiscated because he had given supper and

lodging to a Protestant clergyman. He served twenty-three years; but in 1763

Voltaire obtained his release, and ultimately obtained back for the family a

portion of their property.

  "The Chevalier de la Barre was another victim. Some person or persons

unknown had hacked with a knife a wooden crucifix which stood on a bridge

at  Abbéville  over  the  Somme.  The  same  night  a  crucifix  on  one  of  the

cemeteries was bespattered with mud. The bishop of the place set to work to

stir  up  excitement,  praying  for  punishment  'on  those  who  had  rendered

themselves worthy of the severest punishment known to the world's law.'

Young De la Barre was arrested. The evidence against him was that he, withcertain  companions,  had  been  known  to  pass  within  thirty  yards  of  a

procession bearing the Sacrament without taking off their hats. It was further

proved in evidence that he and his friends had sung certain objectionable

songs, and that not only some novels had been found in his rooms, but also

two small volumes of Voltaire's Dictionnaire Philosophique. On this evidence

he was sentenced to be subjected to the torture, ordinary and extraordinary; to

have his tongue torn out by the roots with pincers of iron, to have his right

hand cut off at the door of the principal church at Abbéville, to be drawn in a

cart to the market-place, and there to be burned to death by a slow fire. The

sentence was mitigated so far that he was allowed to be beheaded before he

was burned. This sentence was carried out on the 1st of July, 1766. These are

samples of what was occurring in France. Was there not enough to rouse

indignation to fever-heat?

  "When one reads such stories, even at this distance of time, he understands

the French Revolution and Voltaire."

  In all his writings Voltaire claimed to be religious, and was as ready to

oppose with his sarcasms the agnostic or atheist, as the catholic. In speaking

of  Tully  as  a  doubter,  he  makes  Pococurante  exclaim:  "I  once  had  some

liking  for  his  philosophical  works;  but  when  I  found  he  doubted  of

everything, I thought I knew as much as himself, and had no need of a guide

to learn ignorance."

  But while Voltaire was a Theist-as Lord Brougham says,[4] "without any

hesitation  or  any  intermission,  a  Theist"-and  was  a  firm  believer  in  the

existence  of  a  Creator  and  ruler  of  the  universe,-he  was  also  an  avowed

opponent of Catholicism; and when not engaged in the production of works

which have added dignity to the literature of France, his life was passed in

open warfare with the church of Rome. To this church he was as sincerely

opposed as Martin Luther, and although his methods of attack and opposition

differed entirely from that of the great German reformer, who shall say that

his efforts have not proved even more successful? Macaulay has shown[5]

that  no  Catholic  nation  has  become  Protestant  since  the  period  of  the

Reformation; while on the other hand, no nation once Protestant, has returned

to Catholicism. Each party has retained its own territory, and the only gain

has been in favor of religious freedom. The sincere and earnest appeals of

Luther, which convulsed Germany, produced but little or no effect on theversatile  mind  of  France.  But  the  brilliant  writings  of  Voltaire  were

welcomed by his countrymen, and have not been without their influence on

French civilization. And although France has not been claimed as a protestant

nation, yet freethinkers have there attained great power and influence, whilst

Germany,  once  the  stronghold  of  Protestantism,  is  now  the  chosen  and

hospitable home of freethought.

  Voltaire in his day was an acknowledged leader of public opinion. His

thoughts engrossed the attention of the world. "Whole nations," says Quinet,

[6] "emulously repeat every syllable that falls from his pen:" and the lapse of

time has but confirmed the verdict of his cotemporaries, that of all the great

reformers, his writings are the most useful to mankind.

  "If we judge of men by what they have done" says Lamartine,[7] "then

Voltaire is incontestably the greatest writer of modern Europe. No one has

caused,  through  the  powerful  influence  of  his  genius  alone,  and  the

perseverance of his will, so great a commotion in the minds of men; his pen

aroused  a  world,  and  has  shaken  a  far  mightier  empire  than  that  of

Charlemagne, the European empire of a theocracy. His genius was not force

but  light.  Heaven  had  destined  him  not  to  destroy  but  to  illuminate,  and

wherever he trod light followed him, for reason (which is light) had destined

him to be first her poet, then her apostle, and lastly her idol."

  At seventeen years of age Voltaire wrote Œdipus, at eighty-three he wrote

Irène. During the intervening years he enriched the world of thought with

seventy volumes of irresistible humor-of brilliant and caustic wit,-in truth, a

mine of literary gems undimmed with mediocrity's prosy dullness. In fact, it

was  this  quality  of  humor  and  mirth  that  made  Voltaire's  writings  so

distasteful to his opponents-so welcome to mankind. Other writers, who went

far beyond Voltaire, were not considered dangerous, because they were never

read. They were sincere and learned, but tedious and austere. Their disbelief

was condoned by its metaphysical obscurity-their skepticism was redeemed

by its unmitigated dullness. But with Voltaire the case was very different. His

writings were read and appreciated by old or young, grave or gay, sage or

sophist, prince or peasant. To answer him was impossible-to abuse him was

thought commendable.

  "Napoleon, during fifteen years," says Lamartine,[8] "paid writers whodegrade, vilify, and deny the genius of Voltaire; he hated his name as might

must ever hate intellect; and so long as men yet cherished the memory of

Voltaire-so long he felt his position was not secure." The church voluntarily

joined in this work of aspersion. To the priests it was no hardship,-it was a

welcome task-a labor of love. They hated the writings they could not answer-

the genius they could not destroy.

  "The  church,"  says  Macaulay,[9]  "made  no  defense,  except  by  acts  of

power. Censures were pronounced; books were seized; insults were offered to

the  remains  of  infidel  writers  but  no  Bossuet,  no  Pascal,  came  forth  to

encounter  Voltaire.  There  appeared  not  a  single  defense  of  the  catholic

doctrine  which  produced  any  considerable  effect,  or  which  is  even  now

remembered."

  "His element," says Schlosser,[10] "was the lighter kind of poetry, and his

fugitive verses, his sharp wit, his bold opinions, produced effects in his time,

like flashes of lightning, for they illuminated at the same time the night of

Jesuitical superstition, and struck and shivered to pieces the majestic towers

and gothic domes of the middle ages.

  "The so-called fugitive pieces alone, if he had written nothing else, would

have  been  sufficient  to  secure  Voltaire's  immortality;  for  in  these  he  is

altogether in his sphere; he has only to think of the people whom he calls

exclusively the world, and he can direct every spark of his genius to the

production  of  instantaneous  effect,  delight  his  reader  by  his  fancy,  and

surprise him by his wit.

  "The chief aim of each one of Voltaire's small novels is the overthrow and

refutation of some ruling opinion, and this object is admirably attained by the

story itself, and by weaving in sarcasms, because this rendered all reply and

refutation impossible. Seriousness could never have reached the readers of

these novels, or would immediately weary them; and every attempt to rival

Voltaire in a strain of pleasantry and satire, would have been a folly.

  "In Zadig he shows palpably and obviously how entirely devoid of reason

and  taste  the  usual  moral  and  edifying  considerations  upon  the  way  of

Providence, upon a God who thinks, counsels, acts, and conducts the affairs

of the world as a man, must appear to the bold scoffer. Voltaire, we would

say, confined and limited the doctrine of an immediate guidance of humanaffairs by the hand of Divine Providence, wholly to the church and to the

faith of the people; he roofed it out of higher life and out of science by means

of his dreadful ridicule. By his narratives he made that obvious, which indeed

is easily made palpable enough, because it is undeniable, that the theory of a

palpable  guidance  of  human  affairs  by  an  ever-manifesting  interposing

Providence,  may  be  just  as  easily  refuted  as  proved  by  history  and

experience. In Memnon is shown, in an admirable manner, how the multitude

are enamoured of their prudence, and laugh at nature and its feelings. In the

Ingenu, the witty man yields himself up wholly to his humor and to accident,

and brings forth a rich abundance of wit and flashes of genius with respect to

the most various subjects."

  "Voltaire had the genius of criticism," says Lamartine,[11] "that power of

raillery which withers all it overthrows. He had made human nature laugh at

itself, had felled it low in order to raise it, had laid bare before it all errors,

prejudices, iniquities, and crimes of ignorance; he had urged it to rebellion

against consecrated ideas, not by the ideal but by sheer contempt. Destiny

gave  him  eighty  years  of  existence,  that  he  might  slowly  decompose  the

decayed age; he had the time to combat against time, and when he fell he was

the conqueror.

  "Such were the elements of the revolution in religious matters. Voltaire

laid  hold  of  them,  at  the  precise  moment,  with  that  coup  d'œil  of  strong

instinct which sees clearer than genius itself. To an age young, fickle, and

unreflecting,  he  did  not  present  reason  under  the  form  of  an  austere

philosophy, but beneath the guise of a facile freedom of ideas, and a scoffing

irony. He would not have succeeded in making his age think, he did succeed

in making it smile. He never attacked it in front, nor with his face uncovered,

in order that he might not set the laws in array against him; and to avoid the

fate of Servetus, he, the modern Æsop, attacked under imaginary names the

tyranny which he wished, to destroy. He concealed his hate in history, the

drama, light poetry, romance, and even in jests. His genius was a perpetual

allusion, comprehending all his age, but impossible to be seized on by his

enemies. He struck, but his hand was concealed. Yet the struggle of a man

against  a  priesthood,  an  individual  against  an  institution,  a  life  against

eighteen centuries, was by no means destitute of courage.

  "There is an incalculable power of conviction and devotion of idea, in thedaring  of  one  against  all.  To  brave  at  once,  with  no  other  power  than

individual  reason,  with  no  other  support  than  conscience,  human

consideration, that cowardice of the mind, masked under respect for error; to

dare the hatred of earth and the anathema of heaven, is the heroism of the

writer. Voltaire was not a martyr in his body, but he consented to be one in

his name, and devoted it during his life and after his death. He condemned his

own ashes to be thrown to the winds, and not to have either an asylum or a

tomb.  He  resigned  himself  even  to  lengthened  exile  in  exchange  for  the

liberty of a free combat. He isolated himself voluntarily from men, in order

that their too close contact might not interfere with his thoughts.

  "At eighty years of age, feeble, and feeling his death nearly approaching,

he several times made his preparations hastily, in order to go and struggle

still, and die at a distance from the roof of his old age. The unwearied activity

of his mind was never checked for a moment. He carried his gaiety even to

genius, and under that pleasantry of his whole life we may perceive a grave

power of perseverance and conviction. Such was the character of this great

man.  The  enlightened  serenity  of  his  mind  concealed  the  depth  of  its

workings:  under  the  joke  and  laugh  his  constancy  of  purpose  was  hardly

sufficiently  recognized.  He  suffered  all  with  a  laugh,  and  was  willing  to

endure all, even in absence from his native land, in his lost friendships, in his

refused fame, in his blighted name, in his memory accursed. He took all-bore

all-for the sake of the triumph of the independence of human reason."

  The manners and customs of the eighteenth century differ widely from

those of the nineteenth. Certain words and phrases that were then in common

use are now wisely suppressed. Lecky says very truly,[12] that "a Roman of

the age of Pliny, an Englishman of the age of Henry VIII., and an Englishman

of our own day, would all agree in regarding humanity as a virtue, and its

opposite as a vice; but their judgments of the acts which are compatible with

a humane disposition would be widely different."

  The enemies of freethought have taken advantage of this fact-this change

in modes of expression-this refinement in literature-to defame the memory of

Voltaire. They denounce La Pucelle or The Maid of Orleans for language and

expressions, formerly popular in court circles and sanctioned by the nobility

and ladies of fashion, but which, happily, have now become obsolete. They

judge the license of the eighteenth century-the license and profligacy whichaccompany ecclesiasticism and monasticism-by nineteenth century standards.

If the same rule were applied to other writers, none would have cause to

complain. But, unfortunately, an exception has been unjustly made in favor

of the language employed by historians like Moses and Solomon, by poets

like  Shakspeare  and  Pope,  by  theologians  like  Rabelais  and  Swift,  by

novelists like Fielding and Smollett. In short, immodest language cannot be

redeemed by wit, by learning, or by pretended revelation, and should always

and invariably be suppressed; but writers should be judged by the manners

and  customs  of  their  age,  and  not  by  modern  standards.  There  are  many

passages in the old classic authors that were formerly considered in good

taste, which cannot now be commended. Still, the gold outweighs the dross,

and we should remember the laxity and licentiousness of the times in which

those books were written.

  The romances and tales in this publication have been selected for their

graceful  and  sprightly  wit,  as  well  as  genial  humor  and  keen  satire;  and

further, because they are free from even a suspicion of impropriety. They

each teach a lesson of wisdom and morality-they teach courage, fortitude and

resignation, and, what is perhaps of even greater importance, they also tend to

free the mind from the baneful errors of priestcraft and superstition.

  "The most interesting adventures are related to no sort of purpose," says

Voltaire in one of his essays, "if they do not convey, at the same time, a

description of manners. And even this is but a frivolous amusement, if that

description does not contribute to inspire us with sentiments of virtue. I dare

assert that, from the Henriade to Zara and down to the Chinese tragedy of

The Orphan of Tchao such was always the aim I proposed, and the principle

that conducted me. In the history of the age of Louis the fourteenth, I have

celebrated my king and country, without flattering either. In these endeavors

have  I  spent  above  forty  years.  But  here  is  the  advice  of  a  Chinese

philosopher,  whose  writings  are  translated  into  Spanish,  by  the  famous

Navarette:

  "'If you write a book, show it only to your friends. Dread the public and

your brother authors. They will embitter your expressions, misrepresent your

meaning, and impute to you, what you never thought of. Calumny, which has

an hundred mouths, will open them against you; and truth, which is silent,

will remain with you.'"  It has been said of Voltaire that he was "not only just, but generous in his

dealings with others. With open purse and open heart, helpful to all who

approached him. Collini, his secretary, said he was a miser only of his time,

which was always usefully employed. But we are also told that there was one

person to whom he could not even deny his time-it was Mademoiselle de

  Varicourt-Belle-et-Bonne-whom  he  had  adopted,  and  who  was  afterward

married to the Marquis de Villette. "She could never disturb him," says A.A.

Knox, "not even when he was giving the last touches to Irène. If he were in a

passion with anybody else, and she appeared in the room, he was at once

gentle and calm. There is something very affecting in the old man's love and

tenderness for this young girl."

  After  the  success  of  the  French  Revolution,  to  which  the  writings  of

Voltaire had so greatly contributed, when the National Assembly ordered the

removal  of  his  remains  to  the  Pantheon,  to  repose  between  the  ashes  of

Descartes and Mirabeau-when France honored herself in honoring the great

philosopher-it was Belle-et-Bonne-in the full splendor of her majestic beauty-

her heart overflowing with tenderness and gratitude-her eyes dimmed with

pathetic  tears-who  placed  with  loving  hands  on  the  bier  of  her  noble

benefactor the wreath of filial affection-the grandest tribute that humanity can

bestow.


  PETER ECKLER.

  New York, Jan. 28, 1885.


  FOOTNOTE:


  [1] This work, says Prof. F.C. Schlosser in his History of the Eighteenth

Century, (vol. ii, p. 122.) "was sent to the pope, and very favorably received

by him; although it could not possibly escape the notice of the pope, that the

piece  was  indebted  for  its  chief  effect  upon  the  public,  to  the  vehement

expressions against religious fanaticism which it contained. The pope felt

himself  flattered  by  the  transmission  of  the  Mahomet,  and  notified  his

approbation,  of  which  Voltaire  cunningly  enough  availed  himself,  for  the

advantage of his new principles."  [2] Critical and Historical Essays, page 553.

  [3] Vol. iv, No. 39.

  [4] Men of Letters of the time of George III.

  [5] Critical & Historical Essays, p. 553.

  [6] Lectures on the Romish Church.

  [7] History of the Girondists, vol. i, p. 152.

  [8] History of the Girondists, vol. i, p. 152.

  [9] Critical and Historical Essays, p. 553.

  [10] History of the Eighteenth Century, vol. i, pp. 263-269.

  [11] History of the Girondists, vol. i, pp. 15, 154, 155, 156.

  [12] History of European Morals, vol. i, page iii.


  THE WHITE BULL.

  Apis. [1]

  CHAPTER I.

  HOW THE PRINCESS AMASIDIA MEETS A BULL.


  The princess Amasidia, daughter of Amasis, King of Tanis in Egypt, took

a walk upon the highway of Peluaium with the ladies of her train. She was

sunk in deep melancholy. Tears gushed from her beautiful eyes. The cause of

her grief was known, as well as the fears she entertained lest that grief should

displease the king, her father. The old man, Mambres, ancient magician and

eunuch of the Pharoahs, was beside her, and seldom left her. He was present

at her birth. He had educated her, and taught her all that a fair princess was

allowed to know of the sciences of Egypt. The mind of Amasidia equaled her

beauty. Her sensibility and tenderness rivaled the charms of her person; and it

was this sensibility which cost her so many tears.

  The princess was twenty-four years old, the magician, Mambres, about

thirteen hundred. It was he, as every one knows, who had that famous dispute

with Moses, in which the victory was so long doubtful between these twoprofound  philosophers.  If  Mambres  yielded,  it  was  owing  to  the  visible

protection of the celestial powers, who favored his rival. It required gods to

overcome Mambres!

  Amasis  made  him  superintendent  of  his  daughter's  household,  and  he

acquitted himself in this office with his usual prudence. His compassion was

excited by the sighs of the beautiful Amasidia.

  "O, my lover!" said she to herself, "my young, my dear lover! O, greatest

of  conquerors,  most  accomplished,  most  beautiful  of  men!  Almost  seven

years hast thou disappeared from the world. What God hath snatched thee

from thy tender Amasidia? Thou art not dead. The wise Egyptian prophets

confess this. But thou art dead to me. I am alone in the world. To me it is a

desert. By what extraordinary prodigy hast thou abandoned thy throne and

thy mistress?-thy throne, which was the first in the world-however, that is a

matter of small consequence; but to abandon me, who adores thee! O, my

dear Ne-"

  She was going on.


  "Tremble  to  pronounce  that  fatal  name,"  said  Mambres,  the  ancient

eunuch and magician of the Pharoahs. "You would perhaps be discovered by

some of the ladies of your court. They are all very much devoted to you, and

all fair ladies certainly make it a merit to serve the noble passions of fair

princesses.  But  there  may  be  one  among  them  indiscreet,  and  even

treacherous. You know that your father, although he loves you, has sworn to

put you to death, should you pronounce the terrible name always ready to

escape  your  lips.  This  law  is  severe;  but  you  have  not  been  educated  in

Egyptian wisdom to be ignorant of the government of the tongue. Remember

that Hippocrates, one of our greatest gods, has always his finger upon his

mouth."

  The beautiful Amasidia wept, and was silent.

  As she pensively advanced toward the banks of the Nile she perceived at a

distance, under a thicket watered by the river, an old woman in a tattered gray

garment, seated on a hillock. This old woman had beside her a she-ass, a dog,

and a he-goat. Opposite to her was a serpent, which was not like the common

serpents; for its eyes were mild, its physiognomy noble and engaging, whileits  skin  shone  with  the  liveliest  and  brightest  colors.  A  huge  fish,  half

immersed in the river, was not the least astonishing figure in the group; and

on a neighboring tree were perched a raven and a pigeon. All these creatures

seemed to carry on a very animated conversation.

  Amasidia-"O,  my  lover!  my  young,  my  dear  lover!  O,  greatest  of

conquerors, most accomplished, most beautiful of men!"


  "Alas!" said the princess in a low tone, "these animals undoubtedly speak

of their loves, and it is not so much as allowed me to mention the name of

mine."

  The old woman held in her hand a slender steel chain a hundred fathoms

long, to which was fastened a bull who fed in the meadow. This bull was

white, perfectly well-made, plump, and at the same time agile, which is a

thing seldom to be found. He was indeed the most beautiful specimen that

was ever seen of his kind. Neither the bull of Pasiphæ, nor that in whose

shape Jupiter appeared when he carried off Europa, could be compared to this

noble animal. The charming young heifer into which Isis was changed, would

have scarce been worthy of his company.

  As soon as the bull saw the princess he ran toward her with the swiftness

of a young Arabian horse, who pricks up his ears and flies over the plains and

rivers of the ancient Saana to approach the lovely consort whose image reigns

in his heart. The old woman used her utmost efforts to restrain the bull. The

serpent wanted to terrify him by its hissing. The dog followed him and bit his

beautiful limbs. The she-ass crossed his way and kicked him to make him

return. The great fish remounted the Nile and, darting himself out of the

water,  threatened  to  devour  him.  The  he-goat  remained  immovable,

apparently struck with fear. The raven fluttered round his head as if it wanted

to tear out his eyes. The pigeon alone accompanied him from curiosity, and

applauded him by a sweet murmur.

  So extraordinary a sight threw Mambres into serious reflections. In the

meanwhile, the white bull, dragging after him his chain and the old woman,

had already reached the princess, who was struck with astonishment and fear.

He threw himself at her feet. He kissed them. He shed tears. He looked upon

her with eyes in which there was a strange mixture of grief and joy. He darednot to low, lest he should terrify the beautiful Amasidia. He could not speak.

A weak use of the voice, granted by Heaven to certain animals, was denied

him; but all his actions were eloquent. The princess was delighted by him.

She perceived that a trifling amusement could suspend for some moments

even the most poignant grief.

  "Here," said she, "is a most amiable animal. I could wish much to have

him in my stable."

  At these words he bull bent himself on his knees and kissed the ground.

  "He understands me," cried the princess. "He shows me that he wants to

be  mine.  Ah,  heavenly  magician!  ah,  divine  eunuch!  Give  me  this

consolation.  Purchase  this  beautiful  bovine.  Settle  the  price  with  the  old

woman, to whom he no doubt belongs. This animal must be mine. Do not

refuse me this innocent comfort."

  All  the  ladies  joined  their  requests  to  the  entreaties  of  the  princess.

Mambres yielded to them, and immediately went to speak to the old woman.

  [1] According to Eschenburg, Apis is the name of the ox in which Osiris

was supposed to reside, rather than a distinct deity. The ox thus honored was

known by certain marks; his body was all black, excepting a square spot of

white on his forehead, and a white crescent or sort of half-moon on his right

side; on his back was the figure of an eagle; under his tongue a sort of knot

resembling a beetle (cantharus), and two sorts of hair upon his tail. This ox

was permitted to live twenty-five years. His body was then embalmed, placed

in a chest, and buried with many solemnities. A season of mourning then

followed, until a new Apis, or ox properly marked, was discovered.-E.


  CHAPTER II.

  HOW  THE  WISE  MAMBRES,  FORMERLY  MAGICIAN  OF

PHAROAH, KNEW AGAIN THE OLD WOMAN, AND WAS KNOWN

BY HER.

  "Madam," said Mambres to her, "you know that ladies, and particularly

princesses, have need of amusement. The daughter of the king is distractedly

fond of your bull. I beg that you will sell him to us. You shall be paid in

ready money."  "Sir," answered the old woman, "this precious animal does not belong to

me. I am charged, together with all the beasts which you see, to keep him

with care, to watch all his motions, and to give an exact account of them. God

forbid that I should ever have any inclination to sell this invaluable animal."

  The remarkable witch of Endor.-"What, is it indeed you," cried Mambres,

"who are so famous upon the banks of your little Jordan, and the first person

in the world for raising apparitions?"


  Mambres, upon this discourse, began to have a confused remembrance of

something  which  he  could  not  yet  properly  distinguish.  He  eyed  the  old

woman in the gray cloak with greater attention.

  "Respectable lady," said he to her, "I either mistake, or I have seen you

formerly."

  "I make no mistake, sir," replied the old woman. "I have seen you seven

hundred years ago, in a journey which I made from Syria into Egypt some

months after the destruction of Troy, when Hiram the second reigned at Tyre,

and Nephel Keres in ancient Egypt."

  "Ah!  madam,"  cried  the  old  man,  "you  are  the  remarkable  witch  of

Endor."

  "And you, sir," said the sorceress, embracing him, "are the great Mambres

of Egypt."

  "O, unforeseen meeting! memorable day! eternal decrees!" said Mambres.

"It certainly is not without permission of the universal providence that we

meet again in this meadow upon the banks of the Nile near the noble city of

Tanis. What, is it indeed you," continued Mambres, "who are so famous upon

the banks of your little Jordan, and the first person in the world for raising

apparitions?"

  "What,  is  it  you,  sir,"  replied  Miss  Endor,  "who  are  so  famous  for

changing rods into serpents, the day into darkness, and rivers into blood?"

  "Yes, madam, but my great age has in part deprived me of my knowledge

and power. I am ignorant from whence you have this beautiful bull, and who

these animals are that, together with you, watch round him."  The old woman, recollecting herself, raised her eyes to heaven, and then

replied.

  "My dear Mambres. We are of the same profession, but it is expressly

forbidden me to tell you who this bull is. I can satisfy you with regard to the

other animals. You will easily know them by the marks which characterize

them. The serpent is that which persuaded Eve to eat an apple, and to make

her husband partake of it. The ass, that which spoke to your contemporary,

Balaam, in a remarkable discourse. The fish, which always carries its head

above water, is that which swallowed Jonah a few years ago. The dog is he

who followed Raphael and the young Tobit in their journey to Ragusa in

Media, in the time of the great Salamanzar. This goat is he who expiates all

the sins of your nation. The raven and the pigeon, those which were in the ark

of Noah. Great event! universal catastrophe! of which almost all the world is

still ignorant. You are now informed. But of the bull you can know nothing."

  Mambres, having listened with respect, said:

  "The  Eternal,  O  illustrious  witch!  reveals  and  conceals  what  he  thinks

proper.  All  these  animals  who,  together  with  you,  are  entrusted  with  the

custody of the white bull, are only known to your generous and agreeable

nation, which is itself unknown to almost all the world. The miracles which

you and yours, I and mine, have performed, shall one day be a great subject

of doubt and scandal to inquisitive philosophers. But happily these miracles

shall find belief with the devout sages, who shall prove submissive to the

enlightened in one corner of the world; and this is all that is necessary."

  As he spoke these words, the princess pulled him by the sleeve, and said to

him,-

  "Mambres, will you not buy my bull?"

  The magician, plunged into a deep reverie, made no reply, and Amasidia

poured forth her tears.

  She then addressed herself to the old woman.

  "My good woman," said she, "I conjure you, by all you hold most dear in

the world, by your father, by your mother, by your nurse, who are certainly

still alive, to sell me not only your bull, but likewise your pigeon, which

seems very much attached to him.  "As for the other animals, I do not want them; but I shall catch the vapors

if you do not sell me this charming bull, who will be all the happiness of my

life."

  The  old  woman  respectfully  kissed  the  fringe  of  her  gauze  robe,  and

replied,-

  "Princess,  my  bull  is  not  to  be  sold.  Your  illustrious  magician  is

acquainted with this. All that I can do for your service is, to permit him to

feed every day near your palace. You may caress him, give him biscuits, and

make him dance about at your pleasure; but he must always be under the eyes

of  all  these  animals  who  accompany  me,  and  who  are  charged  with  the

keeping of him. If he does not endeavor to escape from them, they will prove

peaceable; but if he attempt once more to break his chain, as he did upon

seeing you, woe be unto him. I would not then answer for his life. This large

fish, which you see, will certainly swallow him, and keep him longer than

three days in his belly; or this serpent, who appears to you so mild, will give

him a mortal sting."

  The white bull, who understood perfectly the old woman's conversation,

but was unable to speak, humbly accepted all the proposals. He laid himself

down at her feet; he lowed softly, and, looking tenderly at Amasidia, seemed

to say to her,

  "Come and see me sometimes upon the lawn."

  The serpent now took up the conversation:

  "Princess," said he, "I advise you to act implicitly, as mademoiselle of

Endor has told you."

  The  she-ass  likewise  put  in  her  word,  and  was  of  the  opinion  of  the

serpent.

  Amasidia was afflicted that this serpent and this ass should speak so well;

while a beautiful bull, who had such noble and tender sentiments, was unable

to express them.

  "Alas," said she, in a low voice, "nothing is more common at court. One

sees  there  every  day  fine  lords  who  cannot  converse,  and  contemptible

wretches who speak with assurance."  "This  serpent,"  said  Mambres,  "is  not  a  contemptible  wretch.  He  is

perhaps the personage of the greatest importance."

  The day now declined, and the princess was obliged to return home, after

having promised to come back next day at the same hour. Her ladies of the

palace were astonished, and understood nothing of what they had seen or

heard. Mambres made reflections. The princess recollecting that the serpent

called the old woman Miss, concluded at random that she was still unmarried,

and felt some affliction that such was also her own condition. Respectable

affliction! which she concealed, however, with as much care as the name of

her lover.


  CHAPTER III.

  HOW  THE  BEAUTIFUL  AMASIDIA  HAD  A  SECRET

CONVERSATION WITH A BEAUTIFUL SERPENT.

  The beautiful princess recommended secrecy to her ladies with regard to

what they had seen. They all promised it, and kept their promise for a whole

day.

  We  may  believe  that  Amasidia  slept  little  that  night.  An  inexplicable

charm continually recalled the idea of her beautiful bull. As soon, therefore,

as she was at freedom with her wise Mambres, she said to him:

  "O, sage! this animal turns my head."

  "He  employs  mine  very  much,"  said  Mambres.  "I  see  plainly  that  this

bovine is very much superior to those of his species. I see that there is a great

mystery, and I suspect a fatal event. Your father Amasis is suspicious and

violent; and this affair requires that you conduct yourself with the greatest

precaution."

  "Ah!" said the princess, "I have too much curiosity to be prudent. It is the

only sentiment which can unite in my heart with that which preys upon me on

account of the lover I have lost. Can I not know who this white bull is that

gives me such strange disquiet?"

  Mambres replied,-

  "I have already confessed to you, frankly, that my knowledge declines inproportion  as  my  age  advances;  but  I  mistake  much  if  the  serpent  is  not

informed of what you are so very desirous of knowing. He does not want

sense. He expresses himself with propriety. He has been long accustomed to

interfere in the affairs of the ladies."

  "Ah! undoubtedly," said Amasidia, "this is the beautiful serpent of Egypt,

who, by fixing his tail into his mouth, becomes the emblem of eternity; who

enlightens the world when he opens his eyes, and darkens it when he shuts

them?"

  "No, Miss."

  "It is then the serpent of Æsculapius?"

  "Still less."

  "It is perhaps Jupiter under the figure of a serpent?"

  "Not at all."

  "Ah, now I see, I see. It is the rod which you formerly changed into a

serpent?"

  "No, indeed, it is not; but all these serpents are of the same family. This

one has a very high character in his own country. He passes there for the

most  extraordinary  serpent  that  was  ever  seen.  Address  yourself  to  him.

However, I warn you it is a dangerous undertaking. Were I in your place, I

would hardly trouble myself either with the bull, the she-ass, the he-goat, the

serpent, the fish, the raven, or the pigeon. But passion hurries you on; and all

I can do is to pity you, and tremble."

  The princess conjured him to procure her a tête-à-tête with the serpent.

Mambres, who was obliging, consented, and making profound reflections, he

went and communicated to the witch in so insinuating a manner the whim of

the princess, that the old woman told him Amasidia might lay her commands

upon her; that the serpent was perfectly well bred, and so polite to the ladies,

that he wished for nothing more than to oblige them, and would not fail to

keep the princess's appointment.

  The ancient magician returned to inform the princess of this good news;

but he still dreaded some misfortune, and made reflections.

  "You  desire  to  speak  with  the  serpent,  mademoiselle.  This  you  mayaccomplish whenever your highness thinks proper. But remember you must

flatter him; for every animal has a great deal of self-love, and the serpent in

particular.  It  is  said  he  was  formerly  driven  out  of  heaven  for  excessive

pride."

  "I have never heard of it," replied the princess.

  "I believe it," said the old man.

  He then informed her of all the reports which had been spread about this

famous serpent.

  "But, my dear princess, whatever singular adventures may have happened

to him, you never can extort these secrets from him but by flattery. Having

formerly deceived women, it is equitable that a woman in her turn should

deceive him."

  "I will do my utmost," said the princess; and departed with her maids of

honor. The old woman was feeding the bull at a considerable distance.

  Mambres  left  Amasidia  to  herself,  and  went  and  discoursed  with  the

witch.  One  lady  of  honor  chatted  with  the  she-ass,  the  others  amused

themselves with the goat, the dog, the raven, and the pigeon. As for the large

fish that frightened every body, he plunged himself into the Nile by order of

the old woman.

  The serpent then attended the beautiful Amasidia into the grove, where

they had the following conversation.

  SERPENT.-You cannot imagine, mademoiselle, how much I am flattered

with the honor which your highness deigns to confer upon me.

    PRINCESS.-Your great reputation, sir, the beauty of your countenance,

and  the  brilliancy  of  your  eyes,  have  emboldened  me  to  seek  for  this

conversation.  I  know  by  public  report  (if  it  be  not  false)  that  you  were

formerly a very great lord in the empyrean heaven.

  SERPENT.-It is true, miss, I had there a very distinguished place. It is

pretended I am a disgraced favorite. This is a report which once went abroad

in India. The Brahmins were the first who gave a history of my adventures.

And I doubt not but one day or other the poets of the north will make them

the subject of an extravagant epic poem;[1] for in truth it is all that can bemade of them. Yet I am not so much fallen, but that I have left in this globe a

very  extensive  dominion.  I  might  venture  to  assert  that  the  whole  earth

belongs to me.

    PRINCESS.-I believe it; for they tell me that your powers of persuasion

are irresistible, and to please is to reign.

  SERPENT.-I feel, mademoiselle, while I behold and listen to you, that you

have over me the same power which you ascribe to me over so many others.

  PRINCESS.-You are, I believe, an amiable conqueror. It is said that your

conquests among the fair sex have been numerous, and that you began with

our common mother, whose name I have unfortunately forgotten.

  SERPENT.-They do me injustice. She honored me with her confidence,

and I gave her the best advice. I desired that she and her husband should eat

heartily of the fruit of the tree of knowledge. I imagined in doing this that I

should please the ruler of all things. It seemed to me that a tree so necessary

to the human race was not planted to be entirely useless. Would the supreme

being have wished to have been served by fools and idiots? Is not the mind

formed for the acquisition of knowledge and for improvement? Is not the

knowledge of good and evil necessary for doing the one and avoiding the

other? I certainly merited their thanks.

  PRINCESS.-Yet, they tell me that you have suffered for it. Probably it is

since this period that so many ministers have been punished for giving good

advice, and so many real philosophers and men of genius persecuted for their

writings that were useful to mankind.

  SERPENT.-It is my enemies who have told you these stories. They say

that I am out of favor at court. But a proof that my influence there has not

declined, is their own confession that I entered into the council when it was in

agitation to try the good man Job; and I was again called upon when the

resolution was taken to deceive a certain petty king called Ahab. I alone was

charged with this honorable commission.

    PRINCESS.-Ah, sir! I do not believe that you are formed to deceive. But

since you are always in the ministry, may I beg a favor of you? I hope so

amiable a lord will not deny me.

    SERPENT.-Mademoiselle, your requests are laws; name your commands.    PRINCESS.-I intreat that you will tell me who this white bull is, for whom

I feel such extraordinary sentiments, which both affect and alarm me. I am

told that you would deign to inform me.

    SERPENT.-Curiosity is necessary to human nature, and especially to your

amiable sex. Without it they would live in the most shameful ignorance. I

have always satisfied, as far as lay in my power, the curiosity of the ladies. I

am accused indeed of using this complaisance only to vex the ruler of the

world. I swear to you, that I could propose nothing more agreeable to myself

than  to  obey  you;  but  the  old  woman  must  have  informed  you  that  the

revealing of this secret will be attended with some danger to you.

    PRINCESS.-Ah! it is that which makes me still more curious.

  SERPENT.-In  this  I  discover  the  sex  to  whom  I  have  formerly  done

service.

    PRINCESS.-If you possess any feeling; if rational beings should mutually

assist each other; if you have compassion for an unfortunate creature, do not

refuse my request.

  SERPENT.-You affect me. I must satisfy you; but do not interrupt me.

    PRINCESS.-I promise you I will not.

    SERPENT.There was a young king, beautiful, charming, in love, beloved-

    PRINCESS.-A young king! beautiful, charming, in love, beloved! And by

whom? And who was this king? How old was he? What has become of him?

Where is his kingdom? What is his name?

  SERPENT.-See, I have scarce begun, and you have already interrupted

me. Take care. If you have not more command over yourself, you are undone.

    PRINCESS.-Ah, pardon me, sir. I will not repeat my indiscretion. Go on, I

beseech you.

    SERPENT.-This great king, the most valiant of men, victorious wherever

he carried his arms, often dreamed when asleep, and forgot his dreams when

awake. He wanted his magicians to remember and inform him what he had

dreamed, otherwise he declared he would hang them; for that nothing was

more equitable. It is now near seven years since he dreamed a fine dream,

which he entirely forgot when he awoke; and a young Jew, full of experience,having revealed it to him, this amiable king was immediately changed into an

ox for-

    PRINCESS.-Ah! it is my dear Neb

  She  could  not  finish,  she  fainted  away.  Mambres,  who  listened  at  a

distance, saw her fall, and believed her dead.

  [1] A prophetic reference by the serpent to Milton's Paradise Lost.-E.


      Nebuchadnezzar.-Nebuchadnezzar,  transformed  into  a  white  bull,  is

recognized by Amasidia.


  CHAPTER IV.

  HOW THEY WANTED TO SACRIFICE THE BULL, AND EXORCISE

THE PRINCESS.

  Mambres runs to her weeping. The serpent is affected. He, alas, cannot

weep; but he hisses in a mournful tone. He cries out, "She is dead." The ass

repeats, "She is dead." The raven tells it over again. All the other animals

appeared afflicted, except the fish of Jonah, which has always been merciless.

The lady of honor, the ladies of the court, arrive and tear their hair. The white

bull, who fed at a distance and heard their cries, ran to the grove dragging the

old woman after him, while his loud bellowings made the neighboring echoes

resound. To no purpose did the ladies pour upon the expiring Amasidia their

bottles of rose-water, of pink, of myrtle, of benzoin, of balm of Gilead, of

amomum, of gilly-flower, of nutmeg, of ambergris. She had not as yet given

the smallest signs of life. But as soon as she perceived that the beautiful white

bull was beside her, she came to herself, more blooming, more beautiful and

lively than ever. A thousand times did she kiss this charming animal, who

languishingly leaned his head on her snowy bosom. She called him, "My

master, my king, my dear, my life!" She throws her fair arms around his

neck, which was whiter than the snow. The light straw does not adhere more

closely to the amber, the vine to the elm, nor the ivy to the oak. The sweet

murmur of her sighs was heard. Her eyes were seen, now sparkling with a

tender flame, and now obscured by those precious tears which love makes us

shed.  We may easily judge into what astonishment the lady of honor and ladies

of her train were thrown. As soon as they entered the palace, they related to

their  lovers  this  extraordinary  adventure,  and  every  one  with  different

circumstances, which increased its singularity, and which always contributes

to the variety of all histories.

  No sooner was Amasis, king of Tanis, informed of these events, than his

royal  breast  was  inflamed  with  just  indignation.  Such  was  the  wrath  of

Minos, when he understood that his daughter Pasiphæ lavished her tender

favors upon the father of the Minotaur. Thus raged Juno, when she beheld

Jupiter  caressing  the  beautiful  cow  Io,  daughter  of  the  river  Inachus.

Following the dictates of passion, the stern Amasis imprisoned his unhappy

daughter, the beautiful Amasidia, in her chamber and placed over her a guard

of black eunuchs. He then assembled his privy council.

  The grand magician presided there, but had no longer the same influence

as formerly. All the ministers of state concluded that this white bull was a

sorcerer. It was quite the contrary. He was bewitched. But in delicate affairs

they are always mistaken at court.

  It was carried by a great majority that the princess should be exorcised,

and the old woman and the bull sacrificed.

  The wise Mambres contradicted not the opinion of the king and council.

The  right  of  exorcising  belonged  to  him.  He  could  delay  it  under  some

plausible pretence. The god Apis had lately died at Memphis. A god ox dies

just like another ox. And it was not allowed to exorcise any person in Egypt

until a new ox was found to replace the deceased.

  It was decreed in the council to wait until the nomination should be made

of a new god at Memphis.

  The good old man, Mambres, perceived to what danger his dear princess

was exposed. He knew who her lover was. The syllables NEBU, which had

escaped her, laid open the whole mystery to the eyes of this sage.

  The dynasty of Memphis belonged at that time to the Babylonians. They

preserved this remainder of the conquests they had gained under the greatest

king  of  the  world,  to  whom  Amasis  was  a  mortal  enemy.  Mambres  had

occasion for all his wisdom to conduct himself properly in the midst of somany  difficulties.  If  the  king  Amasis  should  discover  the  lover  of  his

daughter,  her  death  would  be  inevitable.  He  had  sworn  it.  The  great,  the

young, the beautiful king of whom she was enamored, had dethroned the king

her father, and Amasis had only recovered his kingdom about seven years.

From that time it was not known what had become of the adorable monarch-

the conqueror and idol of the nations-the tender and generous lover of the

charming Amasidia. Sacrificing the white bull would eventually occasion the

death of the beautiful princess.

  Lot and his wayward daughters leaving Sodom.-From a celebrated picture

in S. Marks, Florence, by Domenico Cresti, named il Passigiano.


  DESTRUCTION OF SODOM AND GOMORRAH.

  A STRANGE METAMORPHOSIS.

  In the preceding engraving the artist has pictured the "Cities of the Plain"

in flames, ignited by a shower of "fire and brimstone out of heaven." Warned

by  an  angel,  Lot  and  his  family  are  fleeing  from  the  conflagration.  The

madame has, however, unfortunately changed her mind, and is seen returning

toward the doomed locality. She dearly loves her home, and braves danger-

even death-in its protection. Her husband and her children heartlessly forsake

her. Lot does not look like the coward he is represented to have been, who

basely offered to surrender his daughters to the horrible abuse of a Sodomite

mob;  and  the  daughters-innocent  and  beautiful-seem  incapable  of  the

depravity with which they are charged in the nineteenth chapter of Genesis.

  The comical statement that Madame Lot was transformed into "a pillar of

salt" for merely looking back toward her old home in Sodom, rests on bible

authority, and is believed by all the world excepting intelligent clergymen,

scientists, philosophers and reasonable people.

  The  assertion  of  Mambres,  (page  15),  that  this  estimable  "pillar"  has

become "very sharp tasted," rests on the authority of certain eastern travelers

who claim to have examined and tasted the saline remains of this unfortunate

female.  But  as  this  last  claim  is  based  on  a  French  romance  and  not  on

Hebrew revelation, readers may be pardoned for receiving it with the greatest

caution.  Indeed,  all  that  is  absolutely  necessary  for  even  the  orthodox  to

believe  is  that,  "once  upon  a  time,"  a  Sodomite  matron  was  chemicallychanged into pure chloride of sodium, and not that said sodium still retains its

sharp and acrid flavor.-E.


  What could Mambres do in such critical circumstances? He went, after the

council had broken up, to find his dear foster daughter.

  "My dear child," he says, "I will serve you; but I repeat it, they will behead

you if ever you pronounce the name of your lover."

  "Ah! what signifies my neck," replied the beautiful Amasidia, "if I cannot

embrace that of Nebu-? My father is a cruel man. He not only refuses to give

me a charming prince whom I adore, but he declares war against him; and

after he was conquered by my lover, he has found the secret of changing him

into an ox. Did one ever see more frightful malice? If my father were not my

father, I do not know what I should do to him."

  "It was not your father who played him this cruel trick," said the wise

Mambres.  "It  was  a  native  of  Palestine,  one  of  our  ancient  enemies,  an

inhabitant of a little country comprehended in that crowd of kingdoms which

your lover subdued in order to polish and refine them.

  "Such metamorphoses must not surprise you. You know that formerly I

performed more extraordinary. Nothing was at that time more common than

those changes which at present astonish philosophers. True history, which we

have read together, informs us that Lycaon, king of Arcadia, was changed

into a wolf; the beautiful Calista, his daughter, into a bear; Io, the daughter of

Inachus, our venerable Isis, into a cow; Daphne into a laurel; Sirinx into a

flute; the fair Edith, wife of Lot-the best and most affectionate husband and

father ever known in the world-has she not become, in our neighborhood, a

pillar of salt, very sharp tasted, which has preserved both her likeness and

form, as the great men attest who have seen it? I was witness to this change in

my youth. I saw seven powerful cities in the most dry and parched situation

in the world, all at once transformed into a beautiful lake. In the early part of

my life, the whole world was full of metamorphoses.

  "In fine, madam, if examples can soothe your grief, remember that Venus

changed Cerastes into an ox."

  "I do not know," said the princess, "that examples comfort us. If my loverwere dead, could I comfort myself by the idea that all men die?"

  "Your pain may at least be alleviated," replied the sage; "and since your

lover has become an ox, it is possible from an ox he may become a man. As

for me, I should deserve to be changed into a tiger or a crocodile, if I did not

employ the little power I have in the service of a princess worthy of the

adoration of the world,-if I did not labor for the beautiful Amasidia, whom I

have nursed upon my knees, and whom fatal destiny exposes to such rude

trials."

  CHAPTER V.

  HOW THE WISE MAMBRES CONDUCTED HIMSELF WISELY.

  The  sage  Mambres  having  said  every  thing  he  could  to  comfort  the

princess, but without succeeding in so doing, ran to the old woman.

  "My companion," said he to her, "ours is a charming profession, but a very

dangerous  one.  You  run  the  risk  of  being  hanged,  and  your  ox  of  being

burned, drowned or devoured, I don't know what they will do with your other

animals; for, prophet as I am, I know very little; but do you carefully conceal

the serpent, and the fish. Let not the one show his head above water, nor the

other venture out of his hole. I will place the ox in one of my stables in the

country. You shall be there with him, since you say that you are not allowed

to abandon him. The good scape-goat may upon this occasion serve as an

expiation. We will send him into the desert loaded with the sins of all the rest.

He is accustomed to this ceremony, which does him no harm; and every one

knows that sin is expiated by means of a he-goat, who walks about for his

own amusement. I only beg of you to lend me immediately Tobit's dog, who

is a very swift greyhound; Balaam's ass, who runs better than a dromedary;

the raven and the pigeon of the ark, who fly with amazing swiftness. I want to

send them on an embassy to Memphis. It is an affair of great consequence."

  The old woman replied to the magician:

  "You may dispose as you please of Tobit's dog,[1] of Balaam's ass, of the

raven and the pigeon of the ark, and of the scape-goat; but my ox cannot

enter into a stable. It is said, Daniel, v:21,-That he must be always made fast

to an iron chain, be always wet with the dew of heaven, and eat the grass of

the field, and his portion be with the wild beasts.  "He is entrusted to me, and I must obey. What would Daniel, Ezekiel, and

Jeremiah, think of me, if I trusted my ox to any other than to myself? I see

you know the secret of this extraordinary animal, but I have not to reproach

myself with having revealed it to you. I am going to conduct him far from

this polluted land, toward the lake Sirbon, where he will be sheltered from the

cruelties of the king of Tanis. My fish and my serpent will defend me. I fear

nobody when I serve my master."

  "My good woman," answered the wise Mambres, "let the will of God be

done! Provided I can find your white bull again, the lake Sirbon, the lake

Maris, or the lake of Sodom, are to me perfectly indifferent. I want to do

nothing but good to him and to you. But why have you spoken to me of

Daniel, Ezekiel, and Jeremiah?"

  "Ah! sir," answered the old woman, "you know as well as I what concern

they have in this important affair. But I have no time to lose. I don't desire to

be hanged. I want not that my bull should be burned, drowned, or devoured. I

go to the lake Sirbon by Canopus, with my serpent and my fish. Adieu."

  The bull followed her pensively, after having testified his gratitude to the

beneficent Mambres.

  The wise Mambres was greatly troubled. He saw that Amasis, king of

Tanis, distracted by the strange passion of his daughter for this animal, and

believing her bewitched, would pursue everywhere the unfortunate bull, who

would infallibly be burned as a sorcerer in the public place of Tanis, or given

to the fish of Jonah, or be roasted and served up for food. Mambres wanted at

all events to save the princess from this cruel disaster.

  He wrote a letter in sacred characters, to his friend, the high priest of

Memphis, upon the paper of Egypt, which was not yet in use. Here are the

identical words of this letter:

  "Light  of  the  world,  lieutenant  of  Isis,  Osiris,  and  Horus,  chief  of  the

circumcised, you whose altar is justly raised above all thrones! I am informed

that your god, the ox Apis, is dead. I have one at your service. Come quickly

with your priests to acknowledge, to worship him, and to conduct him into

the stable of your temple. May Isis, Osiris, and Horus, keep you in their holy

and worthy protection, and likewise the priests of Memphis in their holy care.  Your affectionate friend,

  Mambres."


  He made four copies of this letter for fear of accidents, and enclosed them

in cases of the hardest ebony. Then calling to him his four couriers, whom he

had destined for this employment, (these were the ass, the dog, the raven, and

the pigeon,) he said to the ass:

  "I know with what fidelity you served Balaam my brother. Serve me as

faithfully. There is not an unicorn who equals you in swiftness. Go, my dear

friend, and deliver this letter to the person himself to whom it is directed, and

return."

  The ass answered:

  "Sir, as I served Balaam, I will serve you. I will go, and I will return."

  The sage put the box of ebony into her mouth, and she swiftly departed.

He then called Tobit's dog.

  "Faithful  dog,"  said  Mambres,  "more  speedy  in  thy  course  than  the

nimble-footed Achilles, I know what you performed for Tobit, son of Tobit,

when you and the angel Raphael accompanied him from Nineveh to Ragusa

in Medea, and from Ragusa to Nineveh, and that he brought back to his father

ten talents, which the slave Tobit, the father, had lent to the slave Gabellus;

for the slaves at that time were very rich. Carry this letter as it is directed. It is

much more valuable than ten talents of silver."

  The dog then replied:

  "Sir, if I formerly followed the messenger Raphael, I can with equal ease

execute your commission."

  Mambres put the letter into his mouth.

  He next spoke in the same manner to the pigeon, who replied.

  "Sir, if I brought back a bough into the ark, I will likewise bring you back

an answer."

  She took the letter in her bill, and the three messengers were out of sight in

a moment. Then Mambres addressed the raven,  "I know that you fed the great prophet Elijah, when he was concealed near

the torrent of Cherith, so much celebrated in the world. You brought him

every day good bread and fat pullets. I only ask of you to carry this letter to

Memphis."

  The raven answered in these words:

  "It is true, sir, that I carried every day a dinner to the great prophet Elijah

the Tishbite. I saw him mount in a chariot of fire drawn by fiery horses,

although this is not the usual method of traveling. But I always took care to

eat  half  the  dinner  myself.  I  am  very  well  pleased  to  carry  your  letter,

provided you make me certain of two good meals every day, and that I am

paid money in advance for my commission."

  Mambres, angry, replied:

  "Gluttonous and malicious creature, I am not astonished that Apollo has

made you black as a mole, after being white as a swan, as you was formerly

before  you  betrayed  in  the  plains  of  Thessaly  the  beautiful  Coronis,  the

unfortunate  mother  of  Æsculapius.  Tell  me,  did  you  eat  ribs  of  beef  and

pullets every day when you was ten whole months in the ark?"

  "Sir," said the raven, "we had there very good cheer. They served up roast

meat twice a day to all the fowls of my species who live upon nothing but

flesh,  such  as  the  vultures,  kites,  eagles,  buzzards,  sparrow-hawks,  owls,

tarsels, falcons, great owls, and an innumerable crowd of birds of prey. They

furnished, with the most plentiful profusion, the tables of the lions, leopards,

tigers,  panthers,  hyænas,  wolves,  bears,  foxes,  polecats,  and  all  sorts  of

carnivorous quadrupeds. There were in the ark eight persons of distinction,

(and the only ones who were then in the world,) continually employed in the

care of our table and our wardrobe; Noah and his wife, who were about six

hundred years old, their three sons and their three wives. It was charming to

see  with  what  care,  what  dexterity,  what  cleanliness,  our  eight  domestics

served  four  thousand  of  the  most  ravenous  guests,  without  reckoning  the

amazing trouble which about ten or twelve thousand other animals required,

from the elephant and the giraffe, to the silk-worm and fly. What astonishes

me is, that our purveyor Noah is unknown to all the nations of whom he is the

stem,  but  I  don't  much  mind  it.  I  had  already  been  present  at  a  similar

entertainment with Xesustres king of Thrace. Such things as these happenfrom time to time for the instruction of ravens. In a word, I want to have good

cheer, and to be paid in ready money."

  The wise Mambres took care not to give his letter to such a discontented

and babbling animal; and they separated very much dissatisfied with each

other.

  But it is necessary to know what became of the white bull, and not to lose

sight of the old woman and the serpent. Mambres ordered his intelligent and

faithful domestics to follow them; and as for himself, he advanced in a litter

by the side of the Nile, always making reflections.

  Daniel, Ezekiel, and Jeremiah.-"A boatman singing a jovial song, made

fast a small boat by the side of the river, and three grave personages, half

clothed in dirty, tattered garments, landed from it; but preserved, under the

garb  of  poverty  the  most  majestic  and  august  air.  These  strangers  were

Daniel, Ezekiel, and Jeremiah."


  "How is it possible," said he to himself, "that a serpent should be master of

almost all the world, as he boasts, and as so many learned men acknowledge,

and that he nevertheless obeys an old woman? How is it, that he is sometimes

called to the council of the Most High, while he creeps upon earth? In what

manner can he enter by his power alone into the bodies of men, and that so

many men pretend to dislodge him by means of words? In short, why does he

pass with a small neighboring people, for having ruined the human race? And

how is it that the human race are entirely ignorant of this? I am old, I have

studied  all  my  life,  but  I  see  a  crowd  of  inconsistencies  which  I  cannot

reconcile. I cannot account for what has happened to myself, neither for the

great things which I long ago performed, nor those of which I have been

witness. Every thing well considered, I begin to think that this world subsists

by contradictions, rerum concordia discors, as my master Zoroaster formerly

said."

  While  he  was  plunged  in  this  obscure  metaphysical  reasoning,-obscure

like all metaphysics,-a boatman singing a jovial song, made fast a small boat

by the side of the river, and three grave personages, half clothed in dirty

tattered garments, landed from it; but preserved, under the garb of poverty,

the most majestic and august air. These strangers were Daniel, Ezekiel, andJeremiah.

  [1] "Histories," says Pope, in his Poetical Works, vol. 4, p. 245, "are more

full of examples of the fidelity of dogs than of friends, but: I will only say for

the honor of dogs, that the two most ancient and estimable books, sacred and

profane, extant, viz. the Scripture and Homer, have shown a particular regard

to these animals. That of Tobit is the most remarkable, because there seemed

no manner of reason to take notice of the dog, besides the great humanity of

the author. ['And the dog went after them,' Tobit, xi: 4.] Homer's account of

Ulysses's dog, Argus, is the most pathetic imaginable, all the circumstances

considered, and an excellent proof of the old bard's good nature.... Plutarch,

relating how the Athenians were obliged to abandon Athens in the time of

Themistocles,  steps  back  again  out  of  the  way  of  his  history,  purely  to

describe the lamentable cries and howlings of the poor dogs they left behind.

He makes mention of one that followed his master across the sea to Salamis,

where he died, and was honored with a tomb by the Athenians, who gave the

name of the Dog's Grave to that part of the island where he was buried. This

respect to a dog, in the most polite people of the world, is very observable. A

modern instance of gratitude to a dog is, that the chief order of Denmark,

(now injuriously called the order of the elephant), was instituted in memory

of the fidelity of a dog, named Wildbrat, to one of their kings who had been

deserted by his subjects. He gave his order this motto, or to this effect, (which

still remains), 'Wildbrat was faithful.' Sir William Trumbull has told me a

story, which he heard from one that was present. King Charles I. being with

some of his Court, during his troubles, a discourse arose what sort of dogs

deserved pre-eminence, and it being on all hands agreed to belong either to

the  spaniel  or  greyhound,  the  King  gave  his  opinion  on  the  part  of  the

greyhound, because (said he) it has all the good-nature of the other without

the fawning."


  This satire upon fawning would no doubt have been as applicable to the

court of king Amasis as to that of Charles I., for fawning has ever been the

besetting sin of dogs and courtiers.


  It is indeed a grand testimonial to the value of the greyhound, that his

fleetness  and  fidelity  were  appreciated  by  Mambres,  the  great  Egyptianmagician, five thousand years before they were endorsed by the unfortunate

English king. Miss Endor, Homer, Ulysses, Mambres, Tobit, Plutarch, the

polite Athenians, Charles I., and Alexander Pope are certainly as respectable

a list of references as the most aristocratic greyhound could desire.-E.


  CHAPTER VI.

  HOW MAMBRES MET THREE PROPHETS, AND GAVE THEM A

GOOD DINNER.

  These three great men who had the prophetic light in their countenance,

knew the wise Mambres to be one of their brethren, by some marks of the

same light which he had still remaining, and prostrated themselves before his

litter. Mambres likewise knew them to be prophets, more by their uncouth

dress, than by those gleams of fire which proceeded from their august heads.

He  conjectured  that  they  came  to  learn  news  of  the  white  bull;  and

conducting himself with his usual propriety, he alighted from his carriage and

advanced a few steps toward them, with dignified politeness. He raised them

up, caused tents to be erected, and prepared a dinner, of which he rightly

judged that the prophets had very great need.

  He invited the old woman to it, who was only about five hundred paces

from them. She accepted the invitation, and arrived leading her white bull.

  Two soups were served up, one de Bisque, and the other a la Reine. The

first course consisted of a carp's tongue pie, livers of eel-pouts, and pikes;

fowls dressed with pistachios, pigeons with truffles and olives; two young

turkeys with gravy of cray fish, mushrooms, and morels; and a chipotata. The

second course was composed of pheasants, partridges, quails, and ortalons,

with four salads; the epergne was in the highest taste; nothing could be more

delicious than the side dishes, nothing more brilliant and more ingenious than

the dessert. But the wise Mambres took great care to have no boiled beef, nor

short  ribs,  nor  tongue,  nor  palate  of  an  ox,  nor  cows'  udder,  lest  the

unfortunate monarch near at hand should think that they insulted him.

  This great and unfortunate prince was feeding near the tent; and never did

he feel in a more cruel manner the fatal revolution which had deprived him of

his throne for seven long years.  "Alas!" said he, to himself, "this Daniel who has changed me into a bull,

and this sorceress my keeper, make the best cheer in the world; while I, the

sovereign of Asia, am reduced to the necessity of eating grass, and drinking

water."

  When they had drank heartily of the wine of Engaddi, of Tadmor, and of

Sebiras, the prophets and the witch conversed with more frankness than at the

first course.

  "I must acknowledge," said Daniel, "that I did not live so well in the lion's

den."

  "What, sir," said Mambres, "did they put you into a den of lions? How

came you not to be devoured?"

  "Sir," said Daniel, "you know very well that lions never eat prophets."

  "As  for  me,"  said  Jeremiah,  "I  have  passed  my  whole  life  starving  of

hunger. This is the only day I ever ate a good meal; and were I to spend my

life over again, and had it in my power to choose my condition, I must own I

would much rather be comptroller-general or bishop of Babylon, than prophet

at Jerusalem."

  Ezekiel cried, "I was once ordered to sleep three hundred and ninety days

upon my left side, and to eat all that time bread of wheat, and barley, and

beans, and lentiles, cooked in the strangest manner. Still I must own that the

cookery of Seigneur Mambres is much more delicate. However, the prophetic

trade has its advantages, and the proof is, that there are many who follow it."

  After they had spoken thus freely, Mambres entered upon business. He

asked the three pilgrims the reason of their journey into the dominions of the

king of Tanis. Daniel replied, "That the kingdom of Babylon had been all in a

flame since Nebuchadnezzar had disappeared: that according to the custom of

the court, they had persecuted all the prophets, who passed their lives in

sometimes seeing kings humbled at their feet, and sometimes receiving a

hundred lashes from them; that at length they had been obliged to take refuge

in Egypt for fear of being starved."

  Ezekiel and Jeremiah likewise spoke a long time in such fine terms, that it

was almost impossible to understand them. As for the witch, she had always a

strict eye over her charge. The fish of Jonah continued in the Nile, opposite tothe tent, and the serpent sported upon the grass. After drinking coffee, they

took a walk by the side of the Nile; and the white bull, perceiving the three

prophets, his enemies, bellowed most dreadfully, ran furiously at them, and

gored them with his horns. As prophets never have anything but skin upon

their bones, he would certainly have run them through; but the ruler of the

world,  who  sees  all  and  remedies  all,  changed  them  immediately  into

magpies; and they continued to chatter as before. The same thing happened

since to the Pierides;[1] so much has fable always imitated sacred history.

  This incident caused new reflections in the mind of Mambres.

  "Here,"  said  he,  "are  three  great  prophets  changed  into  magpies.  This

ought to teach us never to speak too much, and always to observe a suitable

discretion."

  He  concluded  that  wisdom  was  better  than  eloquence,  and  thought

profoundly as usual; when a great and terrible spectacle presented itself to his

eyes.

  [1] The nine daughters of Pierus, king of Emathia, were called Pierides.

They  entered  into  a  contest  with  the  Muses,  and  being  conquered  were

metamorphosed into birds.-E.


  CHAPTER VII.

  HOW KING AMASIS WANTED TO GIVE THE WHITE BULL TO BE

DEVOURED BY THE FISH OF JONAH, AND DID NOT DO IT.

  Clouds of dust floated from south to north. The noise of drums, fifes,

psalteries, harps, and sackbuts was heard. Several squadrons and battalions

advanced, and Amasis, king of Tanis, was at their head upon an Arabian

horse caparisoned with scarlet trappings embroidered with gold. The heralds

proclaimed that they should seize the white bull, bind him, and throw him

into the Nile, to be devoured by the fish of Jonah; "for the king our lord, who

is just, wants to revenge himself upon the white bull, who has bewitched his

daughter."

  The good old man Mambres made more reflections than ever. He saw very

plainly that the malicious raven had told all to the king, and that the princess

ran a great risk of being beheaded.  "My dear friend," said he to the serpent, "go quickly and comfort the fair

Amasidia, my foster daughter. Bid her fear nothing whatever may happen,

and tell her stories to alleviate her inquietude; for stories always amuse the

ladies, and it is only by interesting them that one can succeed in the world."

  Mambres next prostrated himself before Amasis, king of Tanis, and thus

addressed him:

  "O king, live for ever! The white bull should certainly be sacrificed, for

your majesty is always in the right, but the ruler of the world has said, this

bull must not be swallowed up by the fish of Jonah till Memphis shall have

found a god to supply the place of him who is dead. Then thou shalt be

revenged, and thy daughter exorcised, for she is possessed. Your piety is too

great not to obey the commands of the ruler of the universe."

  Amasis, king of Tanis, remained for some time silent and in deep thought.

  "The god Apis," said he, at length, "is dead! God rest his soul! When do

you think another ox will be found to reign over the fruitful Egypt?"

  "Sire," replied Mambres, "I ask but eight days."

  "I grant them to you," replied the king, who was very religious, "and I will

remain here the eight days. At the expiration of that time I will sacrifice the

enemy of my daughter."

  Amasis immediately ordered that his tents, cooks, and musicians should be

brought, and remained here eight days, as it is related in Manethon.

  The old woman was in despair that the bull she had in charge had but eight

days to live. She raised phantoms every night, in order to dissuade the king

from his cruel resolution; but Amasis forgot in the morning the phantoms he

had seen in the night; similar to Nebuchadnezzar, who had always forgotten

his dreams.


  CHAPTER VIII.

  HOW  THE  SERPENT  TOLD  STORIES  TO  THE  PRINCESS  TO

COMFORT HER.

  Meanwhile the serpent told stories to the fair Amasidia to soothe her. He

related to her how he had formerly cured a whole nation of the bite of certainlittle serpents, only by showing himself at the end of a staff. (Num. xx:9.) He

informed her of the conquests of a hero who made a charming contrast with

Amphion, architect of Thebes. Amphion assembled hewn stones by the sound

of his violin. To build a city he had only to play a rigadoon and a minuet; but

the  other  hero  destroyed  them  by  the  sound  of  rams'  horns.  He  executed

thirty-one powerful kings in a country of four leagues in length and four in

breadth. He made stones rain down from heaven upon a battalion of routed

Amorites; and having thus exterminated them, he stopped the sun and moon

at  noon-day  between  Gibeon  and  Ajalon,  in  the  road  to  Beth-horon,  to

exterminate them still more, after the example of Bacchus, who had stopped

the sun and the moon in his journey to the Indies.

  The prudence which every serpent ought to have, did not allow him to tell

the fair Amasidia of the powerful Jephthah, who made a vow and beheaded

his daughter, because he had gained a battle. This would have struck terror

into the mind of the fair princess. But he related to her the adventures of the

great Sampson, who killed a thousand Philistines with the jaw-bone of an ass,

who tied together three hundred foxes by the tail, and who fell into the snares

of  a  lady,  less  beautiful,  less  tender,  and  less  faithful  than  the  charming

Amasidia.

  He related to her the story of the unfortunate Sechem and Dinah, as well

as the more celebrated adventures of Ruth and Boaz; those of Judah and

Tamar; those even of Lot's two daughters; those of Abraham and Jacob's

servant maids; those of Reuben and Bilhah; those of David and Bath-sheba;

and  those  of  the  great  king  Solomon.  In  short,  every  thing  which  could

dissipate the grief of a fair princess.


  CHAPTER IX.

  HOW THE SERPENT DID NOT COMFORT THE PRINCESS.

  "All these stories tire me," said Amasidia, for she had understanding and

taste. "They are good for nothing but to be commented upon among the Irish

by that madman Abbadie, or among the Welsh by that prattler d'Houteville.

Stories which might have amused the great, great, great grandmother of my

grandmother,  appear  insipid  to  me  who  have  been  educated  by  the  wise

Mambres,  and  who  have  read  Human  Understanding  by  the  Egyptianphilosopher named Locke[1] and the Matron of Ephesus. I choose that a story

should be founded on probability, and not always resemble a dream. I desire

to find nothing in it trivial or extravagant; and I desire above all, that under

the appearance of fable there may appear some latent truth, obvious to the

discerning eye, though it escape the observation of the vulgar."

  "I am weary of a sun and of a moon which an old beldam disposes of at

her  pleasure,  of  mountains  which  dance,  of  rivers  which  return  to  their

sources, and of dead men who rise again; but I am above measure disgusted

when  such  insipid  stories  are  written  in  a  bombastic  and  unintelligible

manner. A lady who expects to see her lover swallowed up by a great fish,

and who is apprehensive of being beheaded by her own father, has need of

amusement; but suit amusement to my taste."

  "You impose a difficult task upon me," replied the serpent. "I could have

formerly made you pass a few hours agreeably enough, but for some time

past I have lost both my imagination and memory. Alas! what has become of

those faculties with which I formerly amused the ladies? Let me try, however,

if I can recollect one moral tale for your entertainment.

  "Five and twenty thousand years ago king Gnaof and queen Patra reigned

in Thebes with its hundred gates. King Gnaof was very handsome, and queen

Patra still more beautiful. But their home was unblest with children, and no

heirs were born to continue the royal race.

  "The members of the faculty of medicine and of the academy of surgery

wrote  excellent  treatises  upon  this  subject.  The  queen  was  sent  to  drink

mineral waters; she fasted and prayed; she made magnificent presents to the

temple of Jupiter Ammon, but all was to no purpose. At length a"

  "Mon Dieu!" said the princess, "but I see where this leads. This story is

too common, and I must likewise tell you that it offends my modesty. Relate

some very true and moral story, which I have never yet heard, to complete

the  improvement  of  my  understanding  and  my  heart,  as  the  Egyptian

professor Lenro says."

  "Here then, madam," said the beautiful serpent, "is one most incontestably

authentic.

  "There were three prophets all equally ambitious and discontented withtheir condition. They had in common the folly to wish to be kings: for there is

only one step from the rank of a prophet to that of a monarch, and man

always aspires to the highest step in the ladder of fortune. In other respects,

their inclinations and their pleasures were totally different. The first preached

admirably to his assembled brethren, who applauded him by clapping their

hands;  the  second  was  distractedly  fond  of  music;  and  the  third  was  a

passionate lover of the fair sex.

  "The angel Ithuriel presented himself one day to them when they were at

table discoursing on the sweets of royalty.

  "'The  ruler  of  the  world,'  said  the  angel  to  them,  'sends  me  to  you  to

reward your virtue. Not only shall you be kings, but you shall constantly

satisfy your ruling passions. Your first prophet, I make king of Egypt, and

you  shall  continually  preside  in  your  council,  who  shall  applaud  your

eloquence  and  your  wisdom;  and  you,  second  prophet,  I  make  king  over

Persia, and you shall continually hear most heavenly music; and you, third

prophet, I make king of India, and I give you a charming mistress who shall

never forsake you.'

  "He to whose lot Egypt fell, began his reign by assembling his council,

which was composed only of two hundred sages. He made them a long and

eloquent speech, which was very much applauded, and the monarch enjoyed

the pleasing satisfaction of intoxicating himself with praises uncorrupted by

flattery.

  "The council for foreign affairs succeeded to the privy council. This was

much more numerous; and a new speech received still greater encomiums.

And  it  was  the  same  in  the  other  councils.  There  was  not  a  moment  of

intermission in the pleasures and glory of the prophet king of Egypt. The

fame of his eloquence filled the world.

  "The prophet king of Persia began his reign by an Italian opera, whose

choruses were sung by fifteen hundred eunuchs. Their voices penetrated his

soul even to the very marrow of the bones, where it resides. To this opera

succeeded another, and to the second a third, without interruption.

  "The king of India shut himself up with his mistress, and enjoyed perfect

pleasure in her society. He considered the necessity of always flattering her

as the highest felicity, and pitied the wretched situation of his two brethren,of whom one was obliged always to convene his council, and the other to be

continually at an opera.

  "It happened at the end of a few days, that each of these kings became

disgusted with his occupation, and beheld from his window, certain wood-

cutters  who  came  from  an  ale-house,  and  who  were  going  to  work  in  a

neighboring forest. They walked arm in arm with their sweet-hearts, with

whom they were happy. The kings begged of the angel Ithuriel, that he would

intercede with the ruler of the world, and make them wood-cutters."

  "I do not know whether the ruler of the world granted their request or not,"

interrupted the tender Amasidia, "and I do not care much about it; but I know

very well that I should ask for nothing of any one, were I with my lover, with

my dear NEBUCHADNEZZAR!"

  The vaults of the palace resounded this mighty name. At first Amasidia

had only pronounced Ne-, afterwards Neb-, then Nebu. At length passion

hurried her on, and she pronounced entire the fatal name, notwithstanding the

oath she had sworn to the king, her father. All the ladies of the court repeated

Nebuchadnezzar, and the malicious raven did not fail to carry the tidings to

the king. The countenance of Amasis, king of Tanis, sunk, because his heart

was troubled. And thus it was that the serpent, the wisest and most subtle of

animals, always beguiled the women, thinking to do them service.

  Amasis, in a fury, sent twelve alguazils for his daughter. These men are

always ready to execute barbarous orders, because they are paid for it.

  [1] The doctrine of metempsychosis must be relied upon to explain this

seeming anachronism.-E.


  CHAPTER X.

  HOW THEY WANTED TO BEHEAD THE PRINCESS, AND DID NOT

DO IT.

  No sooner had the princess entered the camp of the king, than he said to

her: "My daughter, you know that all princesses who disobey their fathers are

put to death; without which it would be impossible that a kingdom could be

well  governed.  I  charged  you  never  to  mention  the  name  of  your  lover,

Nebuchadnezzar, my mortal enemy, who dethroned me about seven yearsago, and disappeared. In his place, you have chosen a white bull, and you

have cried Nebuchadnezzar. It is just that I behead you."

  The princess replied: "My father, thy will be done: but grant me some time

to bewail my sad fate."

  "That is reasonable," said King Amasis; "and it is a rule established among

the most judicious princes. I give you a whole day to bewail your destiny,

since  it  is  your  desire.  To-morrow,  which  is  the  eighth  day  of  my

encampment, I will cause the white bull to be swallowed up by the fish, and I

will behead you precisely at nine o'clock in the morning."

  The beautiful Amasidia then went forth in sorrow, to bewail her father's

cruelty, and wandered by the side of the Nile, accompanied with the ladies of

her train.

  The wise Mambres pondered beside her, and reckoned the hours and the

moments.

  "Well! my dear Mambres," said she to him, "you have changed the waters

of the Nile into blood, according to custom, and cannot you change the heart

of Amasis, king of Tanis, my father? Will you suffer him to behead me to-

morrow, at nine o'clock in the morning?"

  "That  depends,"  replied  the  reflecting  Mambres,  "upon  the  speed  and

diligence of my couriers."

  The next day, as soon as the shadows of the obelisks and pyramids marked

upon the ground the ninth hour of the day, the white bull was securely bound,

to be thrown to the fish of Jonah; and they brought to the king his large sabre.

  "Alas! alas!" said Nebuchadnezzar to himself, "I, a king, have been a bull

for near seven years; and scarcely have I found the mistress I had lost when I

am condemned to be devoured by a fish."

  Never had the wise Mambres made such profound reflections; and he was

quite absorbed in his melancholy thoughts when he saw at a distance all he

expected. An innumerable crowd drew nigh. Three figures of Isis, Osiris, and

Horus, joined together, advanced, drawn in a carriage of gold and precious

stones,  by  a  hundred  senators  of  Memphis,  preceded  by  a  hundred  girls,

playing  upon  the  sacred  sistrums.  Four  thousand  priests,  with  their  heads

shaved, were each mounted upon a hippopotamus.  At a great distance, appeared with the same pomp, the sheep of Thebes,

the dog of Babastes, the cat of Phoebe, the crocodile of Arsinoe, the goat of

Mendez, and all the inferior gods of Egypt, who came to pay homage to the

great ox, to the mighty Apis, as powerful as Isis, Osiris, and Horus, united

together.

  In the midst of the demi-gods, forty priests carried an enormous basket,

filled with sacred onions. These were, it is true, gods, but they resembled

onions very much.

  On both sides of this aisle of gods, followed by an innumerable crowd of

people,  marched  forty  thousand  warriors,  with  helmets  on  their  heads,

scimitars upon their left thighs, quivers at their shoulders, and bows in their

hands.

  All the priests sang in chorus, with a harmony which ravished the soul,

and which melted it.

  "Alas! alas! our ox is dead-

  We'll have a finer in its stead."


  And at every pause was heard the sound of the sistrums, of cymbals, of

tabors, of psalteries, of bagpipes, harps, and sackbuts.

  Amasis,  king  of  Tanis,  astonished  at  this  spectacle,  beheaded  not  his

daughter. He sheathed his scimitar.


  CHAPTER XI.

  APOTHEOSIS  OF  THE  WHITE  BULL.  TRIUMPH  OF  THE  WISE

MAMBRES.  THE  SEVEN  YEARS  PROCLAIMED  BY  DANIEL  ARE

ACCOMPLISHED.  NEBUCHADNEZZAR  RESUMES  THE  HUMAN

FORM, MARRIES THE BEAUTIFUL AMASIDIA, AND ASCENDS THE

THRONE OF BABYLON.

  "Great king," said Mambres to him, "the order of things is now changed.

Your majesty must set the example. O king! quickly unbind the white bull,

and be the first to adore him."

  Amasis obeyed, and prostrated himself with all his people. The high priestof  Memphis  presented  to  the  new  god  Apis  the  first  handful  of  hay;  the

Princess Amasidia tied to his beautiful horse festoons of roses, anemonies,

ranunculuses, tulips, pinks, and hyacinths. She took the liberty to kiss him,

but with a profound respect. The priests strewed palms and flowers on the

road  by  which  they  were  to  conduct  him  to  Memphis.  And  the  wise

Mambres, still making reflections, whispered to his friend, the serpent:

  "Daniel changed this monarch into a bull, and I have changed this bull into

a god!"

  They returned to Memphis in the same order, and the king of Tanis, in

some confusion, followed the band. Mambres, with a serene and diplomatic

air, walked by his side. The old woman came after, much amazed. She was

accompanied by the serpent, the dog, the she-ass, the raven, the pigeon, and

the  scape-goat.  The  great  fish  mounted  up  the  Nile.  Daniel,  Ezekiel,  and

Jeremiah, changed into magpies, brought up the rear.

  When they had reached the frontiers of the kingdom, which are not far

distant, King Amasis took leave of the bull Apis, and said to his daughter:

  "My daughter, let us return into my dominions, that I may behead you, as

it has been determined in my royal breast, because you have pronounced the

name of Nebuchadnezzar, my enemy, who dethroned me seven years ago.

When a father has sworn to behead his daughter, he must either fulfill his

oath, or sink into hell for ever; and I will not damn myself out of love for

you."

  The fair princess Amasidia replied to the King Amasis:

  "My dear father, whom it pleases you go and behead, but it shall not be

me. I am now in the territories of Isis, Osiris, Horus, and Apis. I will never

forsake my beautiful white bull, and I will continue to kiss him, till I have

seen his apotheosis in his stable in the holy city of Memphis. It is a weakness

pardonable in a young lady of high birth."

  Scarce had she spoken these words, when the ox Apis cried out:

  "My dear Amasidia, I will love you whilst I live!"

  This was the first time that the god Apis had been heard to speak during

the forty thousand years that he had been worshiped.  The serpent and the she-ass cried out, "the seven years are accomplished!"

And the three magpies repeated, "the seven years are accomplished!"

  All the priests of Egypt raised their hands to heaven.

  The god on a sudden was seen to lose his two hind legs, his two fore legs

were changed into two human legs; two white strong muscular arms grew

from his shoulders; his taurine visage was changed to the face of a charming

hero; and he once more became the most beautiful of mortals.

  "I choose," cried he, "rather to be the lover of the beautiful Amasidia than

a god. I am NEBUCHADNEZZAR, KING OF KINGS!"

  This metamorphosis astonished all the world, except the wise Mambres.

But what surprised nobody was, that Nebuchadnezzar immediately married

the fair Amasidia in presence of this assembly.

  He left his father-in-law in quiet possession of the kingdom of Tanis; and

made noble provision for the she-ass, the serpent, the dog, the pigeon, and

even for the raven, the three magpies, and the large fish; showing to all the

world that he knew how to forgive as well as to conquer.

  The old woman had a considerable pension placed at her disposal.

  The scape-goat was sent for a day into the wilderness, that all past sins

might  be  expiated;  and  had  afterwards  twelve  sprightly  goats  for  his

companions.

  The wise Mambres returned to his palace, and made reflections.

    Nebuchadnezzar,  after  having  embraced  the  magician,  his  benefactor,

governed  in  tranquillity  the  kingdoms  of  Memphis,  Babylon,  Damascus,

Balbec, Tyre, Syria, Asia Minor, Scythia, the countries of Thiras, Mosok,

Tubal, Madai, Gog, Magog, Javan, Sogdiana, Aroriana, the Indies, and the

Isles; and the people of this vast empire cried out aloud every morning at the

rising of the sun:

  "Long live great Nebuchadnezzar, king of kings, who is no longer an ox!"

  Since which time it has been a custom in Babylon, when the sovereign,

deceived  by  his  satraps,  his  magicians,  treasurers  or  wives,  at  length

acknowledges his errors, and amends his conduct, for all the people to cry out

at his gate:  Long live our great king, who is no longer an ox.

  The scape-goat 


  ZADIG; OR FATE.

  AN ORIENTAL HISTORY.

    APPROBATION.


  I, the underwritten, who have obtained the character of a learned, and even

of an ingenious man, have read this manuscript, which, in spite of myself, I

have found to be curious, entertaining, moral, philosophical, and capable of

affording pleasure even to those who hate romances. I have therefore decried

it; and have assured the cadi-lesquier that it is an abominable performance.


  EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO THE SULTANA SERAA.

  The 18th of the month Schewal, in the 837th year of the Hegira.

  Delight of the eyes, torment of the heart, and light of the mind, I kiss not

the  dust  of  thy  feet,  because  thou  never  walkest;  or  walkest  only  on  the

carpets of Iran, or in paths strewn with roses.

  I offer thee the translation of a book, written by an ancient sage, who,

having the happiness to have nothing to do, amused himself in composing the

History of Zadig; a work which performs more than it promises.

  I beseech thee to read and examine it; for, though thou art in the spring of

life, and every pleasure courts thee to its embrace; though thou art beautiful,

and  thy  beauty  be  embellished  by  thy  admirable  talents;  though  thou  art

praised from morning to evening, and, on all these accounts, hast a right to be

devoid of common sense, yet thou hast a sound judgment and a fine taste; and

I have heard thee reason with more accuracy than the old dervises, with their

long beards and pointed bonnets.

  Thou art discreet without being distrustful; gentle without weakness; and

beneficent with discernment. Thou lovest thy friends, and makest thyself no

enemies. Thy wit never borrows its charms from the shafts of detraction.

Thou neither sayest nor doest any ill, notwithstanding that both are so muchin thy power.

  In a word, thy soul hath always appeared to me to be as pure and unsullied

as thy beauty. Besides, thou hast some little knowledge in philosophy, which

makes me believe that thou wilt take more pleasure than others of thy sex in

perusing the work of this venerable sage.

  It was originally written in the ancient Chaldee, a language which neither

thou nor I understand. It was afterward translated into the Arabic, to amuse

the famous sultan Oulougbeg, much about the time that the Arabians and the

Persians began to write the Thousand and One Nights, the Thousand and One

Days, etc.

  Ouloug was fond of reading Zadig, but the sultanas were fonder of the

Thousand and One. "How can you prefer," said the wise Ouloug to them,

"those stories which have neither sense nor meaning?" "It is for that very

reason," replied the sultanas, "that we prefer them."

  I flatter myself that thou wilt not resemble these, thy predecessors; but that

thou wilt be a true Ouloug. I even hope, that when thou art tired with those

general conversations, which differ from the Thousand and One in nothing

but in being less agreeable, I shall have the honor to entertain thee for a

moment with a rational discourse.

  Hadst thou been Thalestris in the time of Scander, the son of Philip; hadst

thou been the Queen of Sheba in the time of Solomon; these are the very

kings that would have paid thee a visit.

  I pray the heavenly powers, that thy pleasures may be unmixed, thy beauty

never fading, and thy happiness without end.

  SADI.


  ZADIG: OR, FATE

  I.

  THE BLIND OF ONE EYE.

  There  lived  at  Babylon,  in  the  reign  of  King  Moabdar,  a  young  man,

named Zadig, of a good natural disposition, strengthened and improved by

education. Though rich and young, he had learned to moderate his passions.He  had  nothing  stiff  or  affected  in  his  behavior.  He  did  not  pretend  to

examine every action by the strict rules of reason, but was always ready to

make proper allowances for the weakness of mankind. It was a matter of

surprise,  that,  notwithstanding  his  sprightly  wit,  he  never  exposed  by  his

raillery those vague, incoherent, and noisy discourses; those rash censures,

ignorant decisions, coarse jests, and all that empty jingle of words which at

Babylon went by the name of conversation. He had learned, in the first book

of  Zoroaster,  that  self-love  is  a  foot-ball  swelled  with  wind,  from  which,

when pierced, the most terrible tempests issue forth. Above all, Zadig never

boasted  of  his  conquests  among  the  women,  nor  affected  to  entertain  a

contemptible opinion of the fair sex. He was generous, and was never afraid

of  obliging  the  ungrateful;  remembering  the  grand  precept  of  Zoroaster,

"When thou eatest, give to the dogs, should they even bite thee." He was as

wise as it is possible for man to be, for he sought to live with the wise.

Instructed  in  the  sciences  of  the  ancient  Chaldeans,  he  understood  the

principles of natural philosophy, such as they were then supposed to be; and

knew as much of metaphysics as hath ever been known in any age, that is,

little or nothing at all. He was firmly persuaded, notwithstanding the new

philosophy of the times, that the year consisted of three hundred and sixty-

five days and six hours, and that the sun was the centre of the solar system.

When the principal magi told him, with a haughty and contemptuous air, that

his sentiments were of a dangerous tendency, and that it was to be an enemy

to the state to believe that the sun revolved round its own axis, and that the

year  had  twelve  months,  he  held  his  tongue  with  great  modesty  and

meekness.

  Possessed as he was of great riches, and consequently of many friends,

blessed  with  a  good  constitution,  a  handsome  figure,  a  mind  just  and

moderate, and a heart noble and sincere, he fondly imagined that he might

easily be happy. He was going to be married to Semira, who, in point of

beauty, birth, and fortune, was the first match in Babylon. He had a real and

virtuous affection for this lady, and she loved him with the most passionate

fondness. The happy moment was almost arrived that was to unite them for

ever in the bands of wedlock, when happening to take a walk together toward

one of the gates of Babylon, under the palm-trees that adorn the banks of the

Euphrates, they saw some men approaching, armed with sabres and arrows.These were the attendants of young Orcan, the minister's nephew, whom his

uncle's creatures had flattered into an opinion that he might do everything

with impunity. He had none of the graces nor virtues of Zadig; but thinking

himself a much more accomplished man, he was enraged to find that the

other was preferred before him. This jealousy, which was merely the effect of

his vanity, made him imagine that he was desperately in love with Semira;

and accordingly he resolved to carry her off. The ravishers seized her; in the

violence of the outrage, they wounded her, and made the blood flow from a

person, the sight of which would have softened the tigers of mount Imaus.

She  pierced  the  heavens  with  her  complaints.  She  cried  out:  "My  dear

husband! they tear me from the man I adore!"

  Regardless of her own danger, she was only concerned for the fate of her

dear Zadig, who, in the meantime, defended himself with all the strength that

courage and love could inspire. Assisted only by two faithful slaves, he put

the cowardly ravishers to flight, and carried home Semira, insensible and

bloody as she was.

  "O Zadig," said she, on opening her eyes, and beholding her deliverer, "I

loved thee formerly as my intended husband, I now love thee as the preserver

of my honor and my life!"

  Never was heart more deeply affected than that of Semira. Never did a

more charming mouth express more moving sentiments, in those glowing

words inspired by a sense of the greatest of all favors, and by the most tender

transports of a lawful passion. Her wound was slight, and was soon cured.

Zadig was more dangerously wounded. An arrow had pierced him near his

eye, and penetrated to a considerable depth, Semira wearied heaven with her

prayers for the recovery of her lover. Her eyes were constantly bathed in

tears; she anxiously waited the happy moment when those of Zadig should be

able  to  meet  hers;  but  an  abscess  growing  on  the  wounded  eye,  gave

everything to fear. A messenger was immediately dispatched to Memphis, for

the great physician Hermes, who came with a numerous retinue. He visited

the patient, and declared that he would lose his eye. He even foretold the day

and hour when this fatal event would happen.

  "Had it been the right eye," said he, "I could easily have cured it; but the

wounds of the left eye are incurable."  All  Babylon  lamented  the  fate  of  Zadig,  and  admired  the  profound

knowledge of Hermes. In two days the abscess broke of its own accord, and

Zadig was perfectly cured. Hermes wrote a book, to prove that it ought not to

have been cured. Zadig did not read it: but, as soon as he was able to go

abroad, he went to pay a visit to her in whom all his hopes of happiness were

centered, and for whose sake alone he wished to have eyes. Semira had been

in the country for three days past. He learned on the road, that that fine lady,

having openly declared that she had an unconquerable aversion to one-eyed

men, had the night before given her hand to Orcan. At this news he fell

speechless to the ground. His sorrows brought him almost to the brink of the

grave.  He  was  long  indisposed;  but  reason  at  last  got  the  better  of  his

affliction; and the severity of his fate served even to console him.

  "Since," said he, "I have suffered so much from the cruel caprice of a

woman educated at court, I must now think of marrying the daughter of a

citizen."

  He pitched upon Azora, a lady of the greatest prudence, and of the best

family in town. He married her, and lived with her for three months in all the

delights  of  the  most  tender  union.  He  only  observed  that  she  had  a  little

levity;  and  was  too  apt  to  find  that  those  young  men  who  had  the  most

handsome persons were likewise possessed of the most wit and virtue.


  II.

  THE NOSE.

  One morning Azora returned from a walk in a terrible passion and uttering

the most violent exclamations.

  "What aileth thee," said he, "my dear spouse? What is it that can thus have

disturbed thee?"

  "Alas!" said she, "thou wouldst have been as much enraged as I am, hadst

thou seen what I have just beheld. I have been to comfort the young widow

Cosrou,  who,  within  these  two  days,  hath  raised  a  tomb  to  her  young

husband, near the rivulet that washes the skirts of this meadow. She vowed to

heaven, in the bitterness of her grief, to remain at this tomb whilst the water

of the rivulet should continue to run near it."  "Well," said Zadig, "she is an excellent woman, and loved her husband

with the most sincere affection."

  "Ah!" replied Azora, "didst thou but know in what she was employed

when I went to wait upon her!"

  "In what, pray tell me, beautiful Azora? Was she turning the course of the

rivulet?"

  Azora broke out into such long invectives, and loaded the young widow

with such bitter reproaches, that Zadig was far from being pleased with this

ostentation of virtue.

  Zadig had a friend named Cador; one of those young men in whom his

wife discovered more probity and merit than in others. He made him his

confidant, and secured his fidelity as much as possible by a considerable

present. Azora, having passed two days with a friend in the country, returned

home on the third. The servants told her, with tears in their eyes, that her

husband died suddenly the night before; that they were afraid to send her an

account of this mournful event; and that they had just been depositing his

corpse in the tomb of his ancestors, at the end of the garden. She wept, she

tore her hair, and swore she would follow him to the grave. In the evening,

Cador begged leave to wait upon her, and joined his tears with hers. Next day

they wept less, and dined together. Cador told her, that his friend had left him

the  greater  part  of  his  estate;  and  that  he  should  think  himself  extremely

happy in sharing his fortune with her. The lady wept, fell into a passion, and

at last became more mild and gentle. They sat longer at supper than at dinner.

They now talked with greater confidence. Azora praised the deceased; but

owned that he had many failings from which Cador was free.

  During supper, Cador complained of a violent pain in his side. The lady,

greatly concerned, and eager to serve him, caused all kinds of essences to be

brought,  with  which  she  anointed  him,  to  try  if  some  of  them  might  not

possibly ease him of his pain. She lamented that the great Hermes was not

still in Babylon. She even condescended to touch the side in which Cador felt

such exquisite pain.

  "Art  thou  subject  to  this  cruel  disorder?"  said  she  to  him,  with  a

compassionate air.  "It sometimes brings me," replied Cador, "to the brink of the grave; and

there is but one remedy that can give me relief-and that is, to apply to my side

the nose of a man who is lately dead."

  "A strange remedy, indeed!" said Azora.

  "Not more strange," replied he, "than the satchels of Arnou, against the

apoplexy."

  This reason, added to the great merit of the young man, at last determined

the lady.

  "After all," says she, "when my husband shall cross the bridge Tchinavar

in his journey to the other world, the angel Asrael will not refuse him a

passage because his nose is a little shorter in the second life than it was in the

first."

  She then took a razor, went to her husband's tomb, bedewed it with her

tears, and drew near to cut off the nose of Zadig, whom she found extended at

full length in the tomb. Zadig arose, holding his nose with one hand, and

putting back the razor with the other.

  "Madam," said he, "don't exclaim so violently against the widow Cosrou.

The project of cutting off my nose is equal to that of turning the course of a

rivulet."


  III.

  THE DOG AND THE HORSE.

  Zadig found by experience, that the first month of marriage, as it is written

in the book of Zend, is the moon of honey, and that the second is the moon of

wormwood. He was some time after obliged to repudiate Azora, who became

too difficult to be pleased; and he then sought for happiness in the study of

nature.

  "No man," said he, "can be happier than a philosopher, who reads in this

great book, which God hath placed before our eyes. The truths he discovers

are his own; he nourishes and exalts his soul; he lives in peace; he fears

nothing from men; and his tender spouse will not come to cut off his nose."

  Possessed of these ideas, he retired to a country house on the banks of theEuphrates. There he did not employ himself in calculating how many inches

of water flow in a second of time under the arches of a bridge, or whether

there fell a cube-line of rain in the month of the mouse more than in the

month  of  the  sheep.  He  never  dreamed  of  making  silk  of  cobwebs,  or

porcelain of broken bottles: but he chiefly studied the properties of plants and

animals; and soon acquired a sagacity that made him discover a thousand

differences where other men see nothing but uniformity.

  One day, as he was walking near a little wood, he saw one of the queen's

eunuchs running toward him, followed by several officers, who appeared to

be in great perplexity, and who ran to and fro like men distracted, eagerly

searching for something they had lost of great value.

  "Young man," said the first eunuch, "hast thou seen the queen's dog?"

  "It is a bitch," replied Zadig, with great modesty, "and not a dog."

  "Thou art in the right," returned the first eunuch.

  "It is a very small she-spaniel," added Zadig; "she has lately whelped; she

limps on the left fore-foot, and has very long ears."

  "Thou hast seen her," said the first eunuch, quite out of breath.

  "No," replied Zadig, "I have not seen her, nor did I so much as know that

the queen had a bitch."

  Exactly at the same time, by one of the common freaks of fortune, the

finest horse in the king's stable had escaped from the jockey in the plains of

Babylon. The principal huntsman, and all the other officers, ran after him

with as much eagerness and anxiety as the first eunuch had done after the

bitch. The principal huntsman addressed himself to Zadig, and asked him if

he had not seen the king's horse passing by.

  "He is the fleetest horse in the king's stable," replied Zadig, "he is five feet

high, with very small hoofs, and a tail three feet and an half in length; the

studs on his bit are gold, of twenty-three carats, and his shoes are silver of

eleven penny-weights."

  "What way did he take? where is he?" demanded the chief huntsman.

  "I have not seen him," replied Zadig, "and never heard talk of him before."

  The principal huntsman and the first eunuch never doubted but that Zadighad stolen the king's horse and the queen's bitch. They therefore had him

conducted before the assembly of the grand desterham, who condemned him

to the knout, and to spend the rest of his days in Siberia. Hardly was the

sentence passed, when the horse and the bitch were both found. The judges

were reduced to the disagreeable necessity of reversing their sentence; but

they condemned Zadig to pay four hundred ounces of gold for having said

that he had not seen what he had seen. This fine he was obliged to pay; after

which, he was permitted to plead his cause before the counsel of the grand

desterham, when he spoke to the following effect.

  "Ye  stars  of  justice,  abyss  of  sciences,  mirrors  of  truth,  who  have  the

weight of lead, the hardness of iron, the splendor of the diamond, and many

of the properties of gold; since I am permitted to speak before this august

assembly, I swear to you by Oromazes, that I have never seen the queen's

respectable bitch, nor the sacred horse of the king of kings. The truth of the

matter is as follows: I was walking toward the little wood, where I afterward

met the venerable eunuch, and the most illustrious chief huntsman. I observed

on the sand the traces of an animal, and could easily perceive them to be

those of a little dog. The light and long furrows impressed on little eminences

of sand between the marks of the paws, plainly discovered that it was a bitch,

whose dugs were hanging down, and that therefore she must have whelped a

few days before. Other traces of a different kind, that always appeared to

have gently brushed the surface of the sand near the marks of the fore-feet,

showed me that she had very long ears; and as I remarked that there was

always a slighter impression made on the sand by one foot than by the other

three, I found that the bitch of our august queen was a little lame, if I may be

allowed the expression. With regard to the horse of the king of kings, you

will be pleased to know, that walking in the lanes of this wood, I observed the

marks of a horse's shoes, all at equal distances. This must be a horse, said I to

myself, that gallops excellently. The dust on the trees in a narrow road that

was but seven feet wide, was a little brushed off, at the distance of three feet

and a half from the middle of the road. This horse, said I, has a tail three feet

and a half long, which, being whisked to the right and left, has swept away

the dust. I observed under the trees that formed an arbor five feet in height,

that the leaves of the branches were newly fallen, from whence I inferred that

the horse had touched them, and that he must therefore be five feet high. Asto his bit, it must be gold of twenty-three carats, for he had rubbed its bosses

against a stone which I knew to be a touchstone, and which I have tried. In a

word, from a mark made by his shoes on flints of another kind, I concluded

that he was shod with silver eleven deniers fine."

  All the judges admired Zadig for his acute and profound discernment. The

news of this speech was carried even to the king and queen. Nothing was

talked of but Zadig in the anti-chambers, the chambers, and the cabinet; and

though many of the magi were of opinion that he ought to be burnt as a

sorcerer, the king ordered his officers to restore him the four hundred ounces

of gold which he had been obliged to pay. The register, the attorneys, and

bailiffs, went to his house with great formality to carry him back his four

hundred ounces. They only retained three hundred and ninety-eight of them

to defray the expenses of justice; and then their servants demanded their fees.

  Zadig  saw  how  extremely  dangerous  it  sometimes  is  to  appear  too

knowing, and therefore resolved, that on the next occasion of the like nature

he would not tell what he had seen.

  Such an opportunity soon offered. A prisoner of state made his escape and

passed under the windows of Zadig's house. Zadig was examined and made

no answer. But it was proved that he had looked at the prisoner from this

window. For this crime he was condemned to pay five hundred ounces of

gold; and, according to the polite custom of Babylon, he thanked his judges

for their indulgence.

  "Great God!" said he to himself, "what a misfortune it is to walk in a wood

through  which  the  queen's  bitch  or  the  king's  horse  have  passed!  how

dangerous to look out at a window! and how difficult to be happy in this

life!"


  IV.

  THE ENVIOUS MAN.

  Zadig resolved to comfort himself by philosophy and friendship for the

evils he had suffered from fortune. He had in the suburbs of Babylon a house

elegantly furnished, in which he assembled all the arts and all the pleasures

worthy the pursuit of a gentleman. In the morning his library was open to thelearned. In the evening his table was surrounded by good company. But he

soon found what very dangerous guests these men of letters are. A warm

dispute arose on one of Zoroaster's laws, which forbids the eating of a griffin.

  "Why," said some of them, "prohibit the eating of a griffin, if there is no

such animal in nature?"

  "There  must  necessarily  be  such  an  animal,"  said  the  others,  "since

Zoroaster forbids us to eat it."

  Zadig would fain have reconciled them by saying:

  "If there are no griffins, we cannot possibly eat them; and thus either way

we shall obey Zoroaster."

  A learned man, who had composed thirteen volumes on the properties of

the griffin, and was besides the chief theurgite, hasted away to accuse Zadig

before one of the principal magi, named Yebor, the greatest blockhead, and

therefore the greatest fanatic among the Chaldeans. This man would have

empaled  Zadig  to  do  honor  to  the  sun,  and  would  then  have  recited  the

breviary of Zoroaster with greater satisfaction. The friend Cador (a friend is

better than a hundred priests) went to Yebor, and said to him:

  "Long live the sun and the griffins; beware of punishing Zadig; he is a

saint; he has griffins in his inner court, and does not eat them; and his accuser

is an heretic, who dares to maintain that rabbits have cloven feet, and are not

unclean."

  "Well," said Yebor, shaking his bald pate, "we must empale Zadig for

having thought contemptuously of griffins, and the other party for having

spoken disrespectfully of rabbits."

  Cador hushed up the affair by appealing to a person who had great interest

in the college of the magi. Nobody was empaled. This lenity occasioned a

great murmuring among some of the doctors, who from thence predicted the

fall of Babylon.

  "Upon what does happiness depend?" said Zadig; "I am persecuted by

everything in the world, even on account of beings that have no existence."

  He cursed those men of learning, and resolved for the future to live with

none but good company.  He assembled at his house the most worthy men, and the most beautiful

ladies  of  Babylon.  He  gave  them  delicious  suppers,  often  preceded  by

concerts of music, and always animated by polite conversation, from which

he knew how to banish that affectation of wit, which is the surest method of

preventing  it  entirely,  and  of  spoiling  the  pleasure  of  the  most  agreeable

society. Neither the choice of his friends, nor that of the dishes, was made by

vanity; for in everything he preferred the substance to the shadow; and by

these means he procured that real respect to which he did not aspire.

  Opposite  to  his  house  lived  one  Arimazes,  a  man  whose  deformed

countenance was but a faint picture of his still more deformed mind. His

heart was a mixture of malice, pride, and envy. Having never been able to

succeed in any of his undertakings, he revenged himself on all around him,

by loading them with the blackest calumnies. Rich as he was, he found it

difficult to procure a set of flatterers. The rattling of the chariots that entered

Zadig's court in the evening, filled him with uneasiness; the sound of his

praises enraged him still more. He sometimes went to Zadig's house, and sat

down at table without being desired; where he spoiled all the pleasure of the

company, as the harpies are said to infect the viands they touch.

  It happened that one day he took it in his head to give an entertainment to

a lady, who, instead of accepting it, went to sup with Zadig. At another time,

as he was talking with Zadig at court, a minister of state came up to them,

and invited Zadig to supper, without inviting Arimazes. The most implacable

hatred has seldom a more solid foundation. This man, who in Babylon was

called the envious, resolved to ruin Zadig, because he was called the happy.

"The opportunity of doing mischief occurs a hundred times in a day, and that

of doing good but once a year, as sayeth the wise Zoroaster."

  The envious man went to see Zadig, who was walking in his garden with

two friends and a lady, to whom he said many gallant things, without any

other intention than that of saying them. The conversation turned upon a war

which the king had just brought to a happy conclusion against the prince of

Hircania, his vassal. Zadig, who had signalized his courage in this short war,

bestowed great praises on the king, but greater still on the lady. He took out

his  pocket-book,  and  wrote  four  lines  extempore,  which  he  gave  to  this

amiable person to read. His friends begged they might see them; but modesty,

or  rather  a  well-regulated  self-love,  would  not  allow  him  to  grant  theirrequest. He knew that extemporary verses are never approved by any but by

the person in whose honor they are written. He therefore tore in two the leaf

on which he had written them, and threw both the pieces into a thicket of rose

bushes  where  the  rest  of  the  company  sought  for  them  in  vain.  A  slight

shower falling soon after, obliged them to return to the house.

  The envious man, who remained in the garden, continued to search, till at

last he found a piece of the leaf. It had been torn in such a manner, that each

half of a line formed a complete sense, and even a verse of a shorter measure;

but what was still more surprising, these short verses were found to contain

the most injurious reflections on the king. They ran thus:

  To flagrant crimes

  His crown he owes,

  To peaceful times

  The worst of foes.


  The envious man was now happy for the first time in his life. He had it in

his power to ruin a person of virtue and merit. Killed with this fiend-like joy,

he found means to convey to the king the satire written by the hand of Zadig,

who was immediately thrown into prison, together with the lady and Zadig's

two friends.

  His  trial  was  soon  finished  without  his  being  permitted  to  speak  for

himself. As he was going to receive his sentence, the envious man threw

himself in his way, and told him with a loud voice, that his verses were good

for nothing. Zadig did not value himself on being a good poet; but it filled

him  with  inexpressible  concern  to  find  that  he  was  condemned  for  high

treason; and that the fair lady and his two friends were confined in prison for

a crime of which they were not guilty. He was not allowed to speak, because

his writing spoke for him. Such was the law of Babylon. Accordingly he was

conducted to the place of execution through an immense crowd of spectators,

who  durst  not  venture  to  express  their  pity  for  him,  but  who  carefully

examined his countenance to see if he died with a good grace. His relations

alone  were  inconsolable;  for  they  could  not  succeed  to  his  estate.  Three-

fourths of his wealth were confiscated into the king's treasury, and the otherfourth was given to the envious man.

  Just as he was preparing for death, the king's parrot flew from its cage, and

alighted on a rose bush in Zadig's garden. A peach had been driven thither by

the wind from a neighboring tree, and had fallen on a piece of the written leaf

of the pocket-book to which it stuck. The bird carried off the peach and the

paper, and laid them on the king's knee. The king took up the paper with great

eagerness, and read the words, which formed no sense, and seemed to be the

endings of verses. He loved poetry; and there is always some mercy to be

expected from a prince of that disposition. The adventure of the parrot caused

him to reflect.

  The  queen,  who  remembered  what  had  been  written  on  the  piece  of

Zadig's pocket-book, ordered it to be brought. They compared the two pieces

together, and found them to tally exactly. They then read the verses as Zadig

had written them.

  Tyrants are prone to flagrant crimes;

  To clemency his crown he owes;

  To concord and to peaceful times

  Love only is the worst of foes.


  The king gave immediate orders that Zadig should be brought before him,

and  that  his  two  friends  and  the  lady  should  be  set  at  liberty.  Zadig  fell

prostrate  on  the  ground  before  the  king  and  queen,  humbly  begged  their

pardon for having made such bad verses, and spoke with so much propriety,

wit, and good sense, that their majesties desired they might see him again. He

did himself that honor, and insinuated himself still farther into their good

graces. They gave him all the wealth of the envious man; but Zadig restored

him  back  the  whole  of  it;  and  this  instance  of  generosity  gave  no  other

pleasure to the envious man than that of having preserved his estate. The

king's esteem for Zadig increased every day. He admitted him into all his

parties of pleasure, and consulted him in all affairs of state. From that time

the queen began to regard him with an eye of tenderness, that might one day

prove dangerous to herself, to the king her august consort, to Zadig, and to

the kingdom in general. Zadig now began to think that happiness was not sounattainable as he had formerly imagined.


  V.

  THE GENEROUS.

  The time had now arrived for celebrating a grand festival, which returned

every five years. It was a custom in Babylon solemnly to declare, at the end

of every five years, which of the citizens had performed the most generous

action. The grandees and the magi were the judges. The first satrap, who was

charged with the government of the city, published the most noble actions

that had passed under his administration. The competition was decided by

votes; and the king pronounced the sentence. People came to this solemnity

from the extremities of the earth. The conqueror received from the monarch's

hands a golden cup adorned with precious stones, his majesty at the same

time making him this compliment: "Receive this reward of thy generosity,

and may the gods grant me many subjects like to thee."

  This  memorable  day  having  come,  the  king  appeared  on  his  throne,

surrounded by the grandees, the magi, and the deputies of all the nations that

came  to  these  games,  where  glory  was  acquired  not  by  the  swiftness  of

horses, nor by strength of body, but by virtue. The first satrap recited, with an

audible  voice,  such  actions  as  might  entitle  the  authors  of  them  to  this

invaluable prize. He did not mention the greatness of soul with which Zadig

had restored the envious man his fortune, because it was not judged to be an

action worthy of disputing the prize.

  He first presented a judge, who having made a citizen lose a considerable

cause by a mistake, for which, after all, he was not accountable, had given

him the whole of his own estate, which was just equal to what the other had

lost.

  He next produced a young man, who being desperately in love with a lady

whom he was going to marry, had yielded her up to his friend, whose passion

for her had almost brought him to the brink of the grave, and at the same time

had given him the lady's fortune.

  He afterwards produced a soldier, who, in the wars of Hircania, had given

a still more noble instance of generosity. A party of the enemy having seizedhis mistress, he fought in her defence with great intrepidity. At that very

instant he was informed that another party, at the distance of a few paces,

were carrying off his mother; he therefore left his mistress with tears in his

eyes, and flew to the assistance of his mother. At last he returned to the dear

object of his love, and found her expiring. He was just going to plunge his

sword  in  his  own  bosom;  but  his  mother  remonstrating  against  such  a

desperate deed, and telling him that he was the only support of her life, he

had the courage to endure to live.

  The judges were inclined to give the prize to the soldier. But the king took

up the discourse, and said:

  "The action of the soldier, and those of the other two, are doubtless very

great, but they have nothing in them surprising. Yesterday, Zadig performed

an  action  that  filled  me  with  wonder.  I  had  a  few  days  before  disgraced

Coreb, my minister and favorite. I complained of him in the most violent and

bitter terms; all my courtiers assured me that I was too gentle, and seemed to

vie with each other in speaking ill of Coreb. I asked Zadig what he thought of

him, and he had the courage to commend him. I have read in our histories of

many people who have atoned for an error by the surrender of their fortune;

who have resigned a mistress; or preferred a mother to the object of their

affection, but never before did I hear of a courtier who spoke favorably of a

disgraced minister, that labored under the displeasure of his sovereign. I give

to  each  of  those  whose  generous  actions  have  been  now  recited,  twenty

thousand pieces of gold; but the cup I give to Zadig."

  "May it please your majesty," said Zadig, "thyself alone deservest the cup.

Thou  hast  performed  an  action  of  all  others  the  most  uncommon  and

meritorious, since, notwithstanding thy being a powerful king, thou wast not

offended at thy slave, when he presumed to oppose thy passion."

  The king and Zadig were equally the object of admiration. The judge who

had given his estate to his client; the lover who had resigned his mistress to

his friend, and the soldier, who had preferred the safety of his mother to that

of his mistress, received the king's presents, and saw their names enrolled in

the catalogue of generous men. Zadig had the cup, and the king acquired the

reputation  of  a  good  prince,  which  he  did  not  long  enjoy.  The  day  was

celebrated by feasts that lasted longer than the law enjoined; and the memoryof it is still preserved in Asia. Zadig said: "Now I am happy at last." But he

found himself fatally deceived.


  VI.

  THE MINISTER.

  The king had lost his first minister, and chose Zadig to supply his place.

All the ladies in Babylon applauded the choice; for, since the foundation of

the empire, there had never been such a young minister. But all the courtiers

were filled with jealousy and vexation. The envious man, in particular, was

troubled with a spitting of blood, and a prodigious inflammation in his nose.

Zadig, having thanked the king and queen for their goodness, went likewise

to thank the parrot.

  "Beautiful bird," said he, "tis thou that hast saved my life, and made me

first minister. The queen's bitch and the king's horse did me a great deal of

mischief; but thou hast done me much good. Upon such slender threads as

these do the fates of mortals hang! but," added he, "this happiness perhaps

will vanish very soon."

  The  cup.-"May  it  please  your  majesty,"  said  Zadig,  "thyself  alone

deservest the cup."


  "Soon," replied the parrot.

  Zadig was somewhat startled at this word. But as he was a good natural

philosopher, and did not believe parrots to be prophets, he quickly recovered

his spirits, and resolved to execute his duty to the best of his power.

  He made every one feel the sacred authority of the laws, but no one felt

the weight of his dignity. He never checked the deliberations of the divan;

and  every  vizier  might  give  his  opinion  without  fear  of  incurring  the

minister's displeasure. When he gave judgment, it was not he that gave it; it

was the law; the rigor of which, however, whenever it was too severe, he

always took care to soften; and when laws were wanting, the equity of his

decisions  was  such  as  might  easily  have  made  them  pass  for  those  of

Zoroaster.

  It is to him that the nations are indebted for this grand principle, to wit,that it is better to run the risk of sparing the guilty than to condemn the

innocent. He imagined that laws were made as well to secure the people from

the suffering of injuries as to restrain them from the commission of crimes.

His chief talent consisted in discovering the truth, which all men seek to

obscure. This great talent he put in practice from the very beginning of his

administration.

  A famous merchant of Babylon, who died in the Indies, divided his estate

equally  between  his  two  sons,  after  having  disposed  of  their  sister  in

marriage, and left a present of thirty thousand pieces of gold to that son who

should be found to have loved him best. The eldest raised a tomb to his

memory; the youngest increased his sister's portion, by giving her a part of

his inheritance. Every one said that the eldest son loved his father best, and

the youngest his sister; and that the thirty thousand pieces belonged to the

eldest.

  Zadig sent for both of them, the one after the other. To the eldest he said:

  "Thy father is not dead; but has survived his last illness, and is returning to

Babylon."

  "God  be  praised,"  replied  the  young  man;  "but  his  tomb  cost  me  a

considerable sum."

  Zadig afterwards repeated the same story to the youngest son.

  "God be praised," said he; "I will go and restore to my father all that I

have; but I could wish that he would leave my sister what I have given her."

  "Thou shalt restore nothing," replied Zadig, "and thou shalt have the thirty

thousand pieces, for thou art the son who loves his father best."

  A  widow,  having  a  young  son,  and  being  possessed  of  a  handsome

fortune,  had  given  a  promise  of  marriage  to  two  magi;  who  were  both

desirous of marrying her.

  "I will take for my husband," said she, "the man who can give the best

education to my beloved son."

  The two magi contended who should bring him up, and the cause was

carried before Zadig. Zadig summoned the two magi to attend him.

  "What will you teach your pupil?" said he to the first.  "I  will  teach  him,"  said  the  doctor,  "the  eight  parts  of  speech,  logic,

astrology, pneumatics, what is meant by substance and accident, abstract and

concrete, the doctrine of the monades, and the pre-established harmony."

  "For my part," said the second, "I will endeavor to give him a sense of

justice, and to make him worthy the friendship of good men."

  Zadig then cried:

  "Whether thou art the child's favorite or not, thou shalt have his mother."


  VII.

  THE DISPUTES AND THE AUDIENCES.

  In  this  manner  he  daily  discovered  the  subtlety  of  his  genius  and  the

goodness of his heart. The people at once admired and loved him. He passed

for the happiest man in the world. The whole empire resounded with his

name. All the ladies ogled him. All the men praised him for his justice. The

learned regarded him as an oracle; and even the priests confessed that he

knew  more  than  the  old  arch-magi  Yebor.  They  were  now  so  far  from

prosecuting him on account of the griffins, that they believed nothing but

what he thought credible.

  There had continued at Babylon, for the space of fifteen hundred years, a

violent contest that had divided the empire into two sects. The one pretended

that they ought to enter the temple of Mithra with the left foot foremost; the

other held this custom in detestation, and always entered with the right foot

first.  The  people  waited  with  great  impatience  for  the  day  on  which  the

solemn feast of the sacred fire was to be celebrated, to see which sect Zadig

would favor. All the world had their eyes fixed on his two feet, and the whole

city  was  in  the  utmost  suspense  and  perturbation.  Zadig  jumped  into  the

temple with his feet joined together; and afterward proved, in an eloquent

discourse,  that  the  Sovereign  of  heaven  and  earth,  who  accepteth  not  the

persons of men, maketh no distinction between the right and the left foot. The

envious  man  and  his  wife  alleged  that  his  discourse  was  not  figurative

enough,  and  that  he  did  not  make  the  rocks  and  mountains  dance  with

sufficient agility.

  "He is dry," said they, "and void of genius. He does not make the sea tofly, and stars to fall, nor the sun to melt like wax. He has not the true oriental

style."

  Zadig contented himself with having the style of reason. All the world

favored him, not because he was in the right road, or followed the dictates of

reason, or was a man of real merit, but because he was prime vizier.

  He terminated with the same happy address the grand dispute between the

black and the white magi. The former maintained that it was the height of

impiety to pray to God with the face turned toward the east in winter; the

latter asserted that God abhorred the prayers of those who turned toward the

west in summer. Zadig decreed that every man should be allowed to turn as

he pleased.

  Thus he found out the happy secret of finishing all affairs, whether of a

private or a public nature, in the morning. The rest of the day he employed in

superintending and promoting the embellishments of Babylon. He exhibited

tragedies that drew tears from the eyes of the spectators, and comedies that

shook their sides with laughter,-a custom which had long been disused, and

which his good taste now induced him to revive. He never affected to be

more knowing in the polite arts than the artists themselves. He encouraged

them by rewards and honors, and was never jealous of their talents. In the

evening the king was highly entertained with his conversation, and the queen

still more.

  "Great minister!" said the king.

  "Amiable minister!" said the queen; and both of them added, "It would

have been a great loss to the state had such a man been hanged."

  Meanwhile Zadig perceived that his thoughts were always distracted, as

well when he gave audience as when he sat in judgment. He did not know to

what to attribute this absence of mind, and that was his only sorrow.

  He had a dream, in which he imagined that he laid himself down upon a

heap of dry herbs, among which there were many prickly ones that gave him

great uneasiness, and that he afterward reposed himself on a soft bed of roses,

from which there sprung a serpent that wounded him to the heart with its

sharp venomed fangs. "Alas," said he, "I have long lain on these dry and

prickly herbs, I am now on the bed of roses; but what shall be the serpent?"  VIII.

  JEALOUSY.

  Zadig's calamities sprung even from his happiness, and especially from his

merit. He every day conversed with the king and his august consort. The

charms  of  Zadig's  conversation  were  greatly  heightened  by  that  desire  of

pleasing which is to the mind what dress is to beauty. His youth and graceful

appearance insensibly made an impression on Astarte, which she did not at

first perceive. Her passion grew and flourished in the bosom of innocence.

Without fear or scruple, she indulged the pleasing satisfaction of seeing and

hearing a man who was so dear to her husband, and to the empire in general.

She  was  continually  praising  him  to  the  king.  She  talked  of  him  to  her

women,  who  were  always  sure  to  improve  on  her  praises.  And  thus

everything contributed to pierce her heart with a dart, of which she did not

seem to be sensible. She made several presents to Zadig, which discovered a

greater spirit of gallantry than she imagined. She intended to speak to him

only  as  a  queen  satisfied  with  his  services;  and  her  expressions  were

sometimes those of a woman in love.

  Astarte was much more beautiful than that Semira who had such a strong

aversion to one-eyed men, or that other woman who had resolved to cut off

her  husband's  nose.  Her  unreserved  familiarity,  her  tender  expressions,  at

which she began to blush; and her eyes, which, though she endeavored to

divert them to other objects, were always fixed upon his, inspired Zadig with

a passion that filled him with astonishment. He struggled hard to get the

better of it. He called to his aid the precepts of philosophy, which had always

stood  him  in  stead;  but  from  thence,  though  he  could  derive  the  light  of

knowledge, he could procure no remedy to cure the disorders of his love-sick

heart.  Duty,  gratitude,  and  violated  majesty,  presented  themselves  to  his

mind,  as  so  many  avenging  gods.  He  struggled,  he  conquered.  But  this

victory, which he was obliged to purchase afresh every moment, cost him

many sighs and tears. He no longer dared to speak to the queen with that

sweet and charming familiarity which had been so agreeable to them both.

His countenance was covered with a cloud. His conversation was constrained

and incoherent. His eyes were fixed on the ground; and when, in spite of allhis  endeavors  to  the  contrary,  they  encountered  those  of  the  queen,  they

found them bathed in tears, and darting arrows of flame. They seemed to say,

We adore each other, and yet are afraid to love; we are consumed with a

passion which we both condemn.

  Zadig left the royal presence full of perplexity and despair, and having his

heart oppressed with a burden which he was no longer able to bear. In the

violence of his perturbation he involuntarily betrayed the secret to his friend

Cador,  in  the  same  manner  as  a  man,  who,  having  long  endured  a  cruel

disease, discovers his pain by a cry extorted from him by a more severe

attack, and by the cold sweat that covers his brow.

  "I  have  already  discovered,"  said  Cador,  "the  sentiments  which  thou

wouldst  fain  conceal  from  thyself.  The  symptoms  by  which  the  passions

show themselves are certain and infallible. Judge, my dear Zadig, since I

have read thy heart, whether the king will not discover something in it that

may  give  him  offence.  He  has  no  other  fault  but  that  of  being  the  most

jealous man in the world. Thou canst resist the violence of thy passion with

greater fortitude than the queen, because thou art a philosopher, and because

thou art Zadig. Astarte is a woman. She suffers her eyes to speak with so

much  the  more  imprudence,  as  she  does  not  as  yet  think  herself  guilty.

Conscious  of  her  own  innocence,  she  unhappily  neglects  those  external

appearances which are so necessary. I shall tremble for her so long as she has

nothing  wherewithal  to  reproach  herself.  A  growing  passion  which  we

endeavor to suppress, discovers itself in spite of all our efforts to the contrary.

  Meanwhile, the queen mentioned the name of Zadig so frequently, and

with such a blushing and downcast look. She was sometimes so lively, and

sometimes so perplexed, when she spoke to him in the king's presence, and

was seized with such a deep thoughtfulness at his going away, that the king

began to be troubled. He believed all that he saw, and imagined all that he did

not see. He particularly remarked, that his wife's shoes were blue, and that

Zadig's shoes were blue; that his wife's ribbons were yellow, and that Zadig's

bonnet was yellow, and these were terrible symptoms to a prince of so much

delicacy. In his jealous mind suspicion was turned into certainty.

  All the slaves of kings and queens are so many spies over their hearts.

They soon observed that Astarte was tender, and that Moabdar was jealous.The envious man persuaded his wife to send anonymously to the king her

garter, which resembled those of the queen; and to complete the misfortune,

this  garter  was  blue.  The  monarch  now  thought  of  nothing  but  in  what

manner he might best execute his vengeance. He one night resolved to poison

the queen, and in the morning to put Zadig to death by the bowstring. The

orders were given to a merciless eunuch, who commonly executed his acts of

vengeance.

  There happened at that time to be in the king's chamber a little dwarf, who,

though  dumb,  was  not  deaf.  He  was  allowed,  on  account  of  his

insignificance, to go wherever he pleased; and, as a domestic animal, was a

witness of what passed in the most profound secrecy.

  This little mute was strongly attached to the queen and Zadig. With equal

horror and surprise, he heard the cruel orders given; but how could he prevent

the fatal sentence that in a few hours was to be carried into execution? He

could not write, but he could paint; and excelled particularly in drawing a

striking resemblance. He employed a part of the night in sketching out with

his pencil what he meant to impart to the queen. The piece represented the

king in one corner, boiling with rage, and giving orders to the eunuch; a blue

bowstring, and a bowl on a table, with blue garters and yellow ribbons; the

queen in the middle of the picture, expiring in the arms of her woman, and

Zadig strangled at her feet. The horizon represented a rising sun, to express

that this shocking execution was to be performed in the morning. As soon as

he had finished the picture, he ran to one of Astarte's women, awoke her, and

made her understand that she must immediately carry it to the queen.

  At midnight a messenger knocks at Zadig's door, awakes him, and gives

him a note from the queen. He doubts whether it is not a dream; and opens

the letter with a trembling hand. But how great was his surprise, and who can

express the consternation and despair into which he was thrown upon reading

these words? "Fly, this instant, or thou art a dead man! Fly, Zadig, I conjure

thee by our mutual love and my yellow ribbons. I have not been guilty, but I

find that I must die like a criminal."

  Zadig was hardly able to speak. He sent for Cador, and, without uttering a

word, gave him the note. Cador forced him to obey, and forthwith to take the

road to Memphis.  "Shouldst thou dare," said he, "to go in search of the queen, thou wilt

hasten her death. Shouldst thou speak to the king, thou wilt infallibly ruin

her. I will take upon me the charge of her destiny; follow thy own. I will

spread a report that thou hast taken the road to India. I will soon follow thee,

and inform thee of all that shall have passed in Babylon."

  At  that  instant,  Cador  caused  two  of  the  swiftest  dromedaries  to  be

brought to a private gate of the palace. Upon one of these he mounted Zadig,

whom he was obliged to carry to the door, and who was ready to expire with

grief.  He  was  accompanied  by  a  single  domestic,  and  Cador,  plunged  in

sorrow and astonishment, soon lost sight of his friend.

  This illustrious fugitive arriving on the side of a hill, from whence he

could take a view of Babylon, turned his eyes toward the queen's palace, and

fainted away at the sight; nor did he recover his senses but to shed a torrent of

tears,  and  to  wish  for  death.  At  length,  after  his  thoughts  had  been  long

engrossed  in  lamenting  the  unhappy  fate  of  the  loveliest  woman  and  the

greatest queen in the world, he for a moment turned his views on himself, and

cried:

  "What  then  is  human  life?  O  virtue,  how  hast  thou  served  me?  Two

women have basely deceived me; and now a third, who is innocent, and more

beautiful than both the others, is going to be put to death! Whatever good I

have done hath been to me a continual source of calamity and affliction; and I

have only been raised to the height of grandeur, to be tumbled down the most

horrid precipice of misfortune."

  Filled with these gloomy reflections, his eyes overspread with the veil of

grief,  his  countenance  covered  with  the  paleness  of  death,  and  his  soul

plunged in an abyss of the blackest despair, he continued his journey toward

Egypt.


  IX.

  THE WOMAN BEATER.

  Zadig directed his course by the stars. The constellation of Orion, and the

splendid Dogstars, guided his steps toward the pole of Canopæa. He admired

those vast globes of light which appear to our eyes as so many little sparks,while the earth, which in reality is only an imperceptible point in nature,

appears to our fond imaginations as something so grand and noble. He then

represented to himself the human species, as it really is, as a parcel of insects

devouring one another on a little atom of clay. This true image seemed to

annihilate his misfortunes, by making him sensible of the nothingness of his

own  being,  and  that  of  Babylon.  His  soul  launched  out  into  infinity,  and

detached from the senses, contemplated the immutable order of the universe.

But when afterward, returning to himself, and entering into his own heart, he

considered that Astarte had perhaps died for him, the universe vanished from

his sight, and he beheld nothing in the whole compass of nature but Astarte

expiring, and Zadig unhappy.

  While  he  thus  alternately  gave  up  his  mind  to  this  flux  and  reflux  of

sublime philosophy and intolerable grief, he advanced toward the frontiers of

Egypt; and his faithful domestic was already in the first village, in search of a

lodging.

  Meanwhile,  as  Zadig  was  walking  toward  the  gardens  that  skirted  the

village, he saw, at a small distance from the highway, a woman bathed in

tears and calling heaven and earth to her assistance, and a man in a furious

passion pursuing her.

  This madman had already overtaken the woman, who embraced his knees,

notwithstanding  which  he  loaded  her  with  blows  and  reproaches.  Zadig

judged by the frantic behavior of the Egyptian, and by the repeated pardons

which the lady asked him, that the one was jealous, and the other unfaithful.

But when he surveyed the woman more narrowly, and found her to be a lady

of exquisite beauty, and even to have a strong resemblance to the unhappy

Astarte, he felt himself inspired with compassion for her, and horror toward

the Egyptian.

  "Assist me," cried she to Zadig, with the deepest sighs, "deliver me from

the hands of the most barbarous man in the world. Save my life."

  Moved by these pitiful cries, Zadig ran and threw himself between her and

the  barbarian.  As  he  had  some  knowledge  of  the  Egyptian  language,  he

addressed him in that tongue.

  "If," said he, "thou hast any humanity, I conjure thee to pay some regard to

her beauty and weakness. How canst thou behave in this outrageous mannerto one of the masterpieces of nature, who lies at thy feet, and hath no defence

but her tears?"

  "Ah, ah!" replied the madman, "thou art likewise in love with her. I must

be revenged on thee too."

  So  saying,  he  left  the  lady,  whom  he  had  hitherto  held  with  his  hand

twisted in her hair, and taking his lance attempted to stab the stranger. Zadig,

who was in cold blood, easily eluded the blow aimed by the frantic Egyptian.

He seized the lance near the iron with which it was armed. The Egyptian

strove  to  draw  it  back;  Zadig  to  wrest  it  from  the  Egyptian;  and  in  the

struggle it was broken in two. The Egyptian draws his sword; Zadig does the

same. They attack each other. The former gives a hundred blows at random;

the latter wards them off with great dexterity. The lady, seated on a turf, re-

adjusts her head-dress, and looks at the combatants. The Egyptian excelled in

strength:  Zadig  in  address.  The  one  fought  like  a  man  whose  arm  was

directed by his judgment; the other like a madman, whose blind rage made

him deal his blows at random. Zadig closes with him, and disarms him; and

while the Egyptian, now become more furious, endeavors to throw himself

upon him, he seizes him, presses him close, and throws him down; and then

holding his sword to his breast, offers him his life. The Egyptian, frantic with

rage,  draws  his  poniard,  and  wounds  Zadig  at  the  very  instant  that  the

conqueror was granting a pardon. Zadig, provoked at such brutal behavior,

plunged his sword in the bosom of the Egyptian, who giving a horrible shriek

and a violent struggle, instantly expired. Zadig then approached the lady, and

said to her with a gentle tone:

  "He hath forced me to kill him. I have avenged thy cause. Thou art now

delivered  from  the  most  violent  man  I  ever  saw.  What  further,  madam,

wouldest thou have me do for thee?

  "Die, villain," replied she, "thou hast killed my lover. O that I were able to

tear out thy heart!"

  "Why truly, madam," said Zadig, "thou hadst a strange kind of a man for a

lover; he beat thee with all his might, and would have killed thee, because

thou hadst entreated me to give thee assistance."

  "I  wish  he  were  beating  me  still,"  replied  the  lady  with  tears  and

lamentation. "I well deserved it; for I had given him cause to be jealous.Would to heaven that he was now beating me, and that thou wast in his

place."

  Zadig,  struck  with  surprise,  and  inflamed  with  a  higher  degree  of

resentment than he had ever felt before, said:

  "Beautiful as thou art, madam, thou deservest that I should beat thee in my

turn for thy perverse and impertinent behavior. But I shall not give myself the

trouble."

  So saying, he remounted his camel, and advanced toward the town. He

had proceeded but a few steps, when he turned back at the noise of four

Babylonian  couriers,  who  came  riding  at  full  gallop.  One  of  them,  upon

seeing the woman, cried:

  "It is the very same. She resembles the description that was given us."

  They gave themselves no concern about the dead Egyptian, but instantly

seized the lady. She called out to Zadig:

  "Help  me  once  more,  generous  stranger.  I  ask  pardon  for  having

complained of thy conduct. Deliver me again, and I will be thine for ever."

  Zadig was no longer in the humor of fighting for her.

  "Apply  to  another,"  said  he,  "thou  shalt  not  again  ensnare  me  in  thy

wiles."

  Besides, he was wounded; his blood was still flowing, and he himself had

need of assistance: and the sight of four Babylonians, probably sent by King

Moabdar, filled him with apprehension. He therefore hastened toward the

village, unable to comprehend why four Babylonian couriers should come

and  seize  this  Egyptian  woman,  but  still  more  astonished  at  the  lady's

behavior.


  X.

  SLAVERY.

  As he entered the Egyptian village, he saw himself surrounded by the

people. Every one said:

  "This is the man who carried off the beautiful Missouf, and assassinatedClitofis."

  "Gentleman," said he, "God preserve me from carrying off your beautiful

Missouf. She is too capricious for me. And with regard to Clitofis, I did not

assassinate him, I only fought with him in my own defence. He endeavored to

kill me, because I humbly interceded for the beautiful Missouf, whom he beat

most unmercifully. I am a stranger, come to seek refuge in Egypt; and it is

not  likely,  that  in  coming  to  implore  your  protection,  I  should  begin  by

carrying off a woman, and assassinating a man."

  The Egyptians were then just and humane. The people conducted Zadig to

the town-house. They first of all ordered his wound to be dressed, and then

examined  him  and  his  servant  apart,  in  order  to  discover  the  truth.  They

found that Zadig was not an assassin; but as he was guilty of having killed a

man, the law condemned him to be a slave. His two camels were sold for the

benefit of the town: all the gold he had brought with him was distributed

among the inhabitants; and his person, as well as that of the companion of his

journey, was exposed for sale in the market-place. An Arabian merchant,

named Setoc, made the purchase; but as the servant was fitter for labor than

the master, he was sold at a higher price. There was no comparison between

the two men. Thus Zadig became a slave subordinate to his own servant.

They  were  linked  together  by  a  chain  fastened  to  their  feet,  and  in  this

condition they followed the Arabian merchant to his house.

  By the way Zadig comforted his servant, and exhorted him to patience; but

he could not help making, according to his usual custom, some reflections on

human  life.  "I  see,"  said  he,  "that  the  unhappiness  of  my  fate  hath  an

influence  on  thine.  Hitherto  everything  has  turned  out  to  me  in  a  most

unaccountable manner. I have been condemned to pay a fine for having seen

the marks of a bitch's feet. I thought that I should once have been empaled

alive on account of a griffin. I have been sent to execution for having made

some verses in praise of the king. I have been on the point of being strangled,

because  the  queen  had  yellow  ribbons;  and  now  I  am  a  slave  with  thee,

because a brutal wretch beat his mistress. Come, let us keep a good heart; all

this will perhaps have an end. The Arabian merchants must necessarily have

slaves; and why not me as well as another, since, as well as another, I am a

man? This merchant will not be cruel. He must treat his slaves well if he

expects any advantage from them."  But while he spoke thus, his heart was entirely engrossed by the fate of the

queen of Babylon.

  Two days after, the merchant Setoc set out for Arabia Deserta, with his

slaves and his camels. His tribe dwelt near the desert of Oreb. The journey

was long and painful. Setoc set a much greater value on the servant than the

master, because the former was more expert in loading the camels, and all the

little marks of distinction were shown to him. A camel having died within

two days journey of Oreb, his burden was divided and laid on the backs of

the servants; and Zadig had his share among the rest. Setoc laughed to see all

his slaves walking with their bodies inclined. Zadig took the liberty to explain

to him the cause, and inform him of the laws of the balance. The merchant

was astonished, and began to regard him with other eyes. Zadig, finding he

had raised his curiosity, increased it still further by acquainting him with

many  things  that  related  to  commerce;  the  specific  gravity  of  metals  and

commodities under an equal bulk; the properties of several useful animals;

and the means of rendering those useful that are not naturally so.

  At last Setoc began to consider Zadig as a sage, and preferred him to his

companion, whom he had formerly so much esteemed. He treated him well,

and had no cause to repent of his kindness.

  As soon as Setoc arrived among his own tribe he demanded the payment

of five hundred ounces of silver, which he had lent to a Jew in presence of

two witnesses; but as the witnesses were dead, and the debt could not be

proved,  the  Hebrew  appropriated  the  merchant's  money  to  himself,  and

piously thanked God for putting it in his power to cheat an Arabian. Setoc

imparted this troublesome affair to Zadig, who had now become his counsel.

  "In what place," said Zadig, "didst thou lend the five hundred ounces to

this infidel?"

  "Upon a large stone," replied the merchant, "that lies near the mountain of

Oreb."

  "What is the character of thy debter?" said Zadig.

  "That of a knave," returned Setoc.

  "But  I  ask  thee,  whether  he  is  lively  or  phlegmatic;  cautious  or

imprudent?"  "He is, of all bad payers," said Setoc, "the most lively fellow I ever knew."

  "Well," resumed Zadig, "allow me to plead thy cause."

  In effect, Zadig having summoned the Jew to the tribunal, addressed the

judge in the following terms:

  "Pillow of the throne of equity, I come to demand of this man, in the name

of my master, five hundred ounces of silver, which he refuses to repay."

  "Hast thou any witnesses?" said the judge.

  "No, they are dead; but there remains a large stone upon which the money

was counted; and if it please thy grandeur to order the stone to be sought for,

I hope that it will bear witness. The Hebrew and I will tarry here till the stone

arrives. I will send for it at my master's expense."

  "With all my heart," replied the judge, and immediately applied himself to

the discussion of other affairs.

  When the court was going to break up, the judge said to Zadig:

  "Well, friend, hath not thy stone yet arrived?"

  The Hebrew replied with a smile:

  "Thy grandeur may stay here till to-morrow, and after all not see the stone.

It is more than six miles from hence and it would require fifteen men to move

it."

  "Well," cried Zadig, "did I not say that the stone would bear witness?

Since this man knows where it is, he thereby confesses that it was upon it that

the money was counted."

  The Hebrew was disconcerted, and was soon after obliged to confess the

truth. The judge ordered him to be fastened to the stone, without meat or

drink, till he should restore the five hundred ounces, which were soon after

paid.

  The slave Zadig and the stone were held in great repute in Arabia.


  XI.

  THE FUNERAL PILE.  Setoc, charmed with the happy issue of this affair, made his slave his

intimate friend. He had now conceived as great an esteem for him as ever the

king of Babylon had done; and Zadig was glad that Setoc had no wife. He

discovered in his master a good natural disposition, much probity of heart,

and a great share of good sense; but he was sorry to see that, according to the

ancient custom of Arabia, he adored the host of heaven; that is, the sun,

moon,  and  stars.  He  sometimes  spoke  to  him  on  this  subject  with  great

prudence and discretion. At last he told him that these bodies were like all

other bodies in the universe, and no more deserving of our homage than a tree

or a rock.

  "But," said Setoc, "they are eternal beings; and it is from them we derive

all we enjoy. They animate nature; they regulate the seasons; and, besides,

are  removed  at  such  an  immense  distance  from  us,  that  we  cannot  help

revering them."

  "Thou receivest more advantage," replied Zadig, "from the waters of the

Red Sea, which carry thy merchandize to the Indies. Why may not it be as

ancient as the stars? and if thou adorest what is placed at a distance from thee,

thou shouldest adore the land of the Gangarides, which lies at the extremity

of the earth."

  "No," said Setoc, "the brightness of the stars commands my adoration."

  At night Zadig lighted up a great number of candles in the tent where he

was to sup with Setoc; and the moment his patron appeared, he fell on his

knees before these lighted tapers, and said:

  "Eternal and shining luminaries! be ye always propitious to me."

  Having thus said, he sat down at the table, without taking the least notice

of Setoc.

  "What art thou doing?" said Setoc in amaze.

  "I act like thee," replied Zadig, "I adore these candles, and neglect their

master and mine."

  Setoc comprehended the profound sense of this apologue. The wisdom of

his  slave  sunk  deep  into  his  soul.  He  no  longer  offered  incense  to  the

creatures, but he adored the eternal Being who made them.  There  prevailed  at  that  time  in  Arabia  a  shocking  custom,  sprung

originally from Scythia, and which, being established in the Indies by the

credit of the Brahmins, threatened to over-run all the East. When a married

man died, and his beloved wife aspired to the character of a saint, she burned

herself publicly on the body of her husband. This was a solemn feast, and

was called the Funeral Pile of Widowhood; and that tribe in which most

women had been burned was the most respected. An Arabian of Setoc's tribe

being dead, his widow, whose name was Almona, and who was very devout,

published the day and hour when she intended to throw herself into the fire,

amidst the sound of drums and trumpets.

  Zadig remonstrated against this horrible custom. He showed Setoc how

inconsistent it was with the happiness of mankind to suffer young widows to

burn themselves-widows who were capable of giving children to the state, or

at least of educating those they already had; and he convinced him that it was

his duty to do all that lay in his power to abolish such a barbarous practice.

  "The women," said Setoc, "have possessed the right of burning themselves

for more than a thousand years; and who shall dare to abrogate a law which

time hath rendered sacred? Is there anything more respectable than ancient

abuses?"

  "Reason is more ancient," replied Zadig: "meanwhile, speak thou to the

chiefs of the tribes, and I will go to wait on the young widow."

  Accordingly, he was introduced to her, and after having insinuated himself

into her good graces by some compliments on her beauty, and told her what a

pity it was to commit so many charms to the flames, he at last praised her for

her constancy and courage.

  "Thou must surely have loved thy husband," said he to her, "with the most

passionate fondness."

  "Who,  I?"  replied  the  lady,  "I  loved  him  not  at  all.  He  was  a  brutal,

jealous, and insupportable wretch; but I am firmly resolved to throw myself

on his funeral pile."

  The funeral pyre.-"The women," said Setoc, "have possessed the right of

burning themselves for more than a thousand years; and who shall dare to

abrogate  a  law  which  time  hath  rendered  sacred?  Is  there  anything  morerespectable than ancient abuses?"


  "It would appear then," said Zadig, "that there must be a very delicious

pleasure in being burnt alive."

  "Oh! it makes me shudder," replied the lady, "but that must be overlooked.

I am a devotee; I should lose my reputation; and all the world would despise

me, if I did not burn myself."

  Zadig having made her acknowledge that she burned herself to gain the

good opinion of others, and to gratify her own vanity, entertained her with a

long discourse calculated to make her a little in love with life, and even went

so far as to inspire her with some degree of good will for the person who

spoke to her.

  "And what wilt thou do at last," said he, "if the vanity of burning thyself

should not continue?"

  "Alas!" said the lady, "I believe I should desire thee to marry me."

  Zadig's mind was too much engrossed with the idea of Astarte not to elude

this declaration; but he instantly went to the chiefs of the tribes, told them

what had passed, and advised them to make a law by which a widow should

not be permitted to burn herself, till she had conversed privately with a young

man for the space of an hour. Since that time not a single widow hath burned

herself in Arabia. They were indebted to Zadig alone for destroying in one

day a cruel custom that had lasted for so many ages; and thus he became the

benefactor of Arabia.


  XII.

  THE SUPPER.

  Setoc,  who  could  not  separate  himself  from  this  man  in  whom  dwelt

wisdom,  carried  Zadig  to  the  great  fair  of  Balzora,  whither  the  richest

merchants of the earth resorted. Zadig was highly pleased to see so many

men of different countries united in the same place. He considered the whole

universe as one large family assembled at Balzora. The second day he sat at

table with an Egyptian, an Indian, an inhabitant of Cathay, a Greek, a Celtic,

and several other strangers, who, in their frequent voyages to the ArabianGulf, had learned enough of the Arabic to make themselves understood.

  The Egyptian seemed to be in a violent passion. "What an abominable

country," said he, "is Balzora! They refuse me a thousand ounces of gold on

the best security in the world."

  "How!" said Setoc. "On what security have they refused thee this sum?"

  "On  the  body  of  my  aunt,"  replied  the  Egyptian.  "She  was  the  most

notable woman in Egypt; she always accompanied me in my journeys; she

died on the road. I have converted her into one of the nest mummies in the

world; and in my own country I could obtain any amount by giving her as a

pledge. It is very strange that they will not here lend me a thousand ounces of

gold on such a solid security."

  Angry as he was, he was going to help himself to a bit of excellent boiled

fowl, when the Indian, taking him by the hand, cried out in a sorrowful tone,

"Ah! what art thou going to do?"

  "To eat a bit of this fowl," replied the man who owned the mummy.

  "Take care that thou dost not," replied the Indian. "It is possible that the

soul of the deceased may have passed into this fowl; and thou wouldst not,

surely, expose thyself to the danger of eating thy aunt? To boil fowls is a

manifest outrage on nature."

  "What dost thou mean by thy nature and thy fowls?" replied the choleric

Egyptian. "We adore a bull, and yet we eat heartily of beef."

  "You adore a bull! is it possible?" said the Indian.

  "Nothing is more possible," returned the other; "we have done so for these

hundred  and  thirty-five  thousand  years;  and  nobody  amongst  us  has  ever

found fault with it."

  "A hundred and thirty-five thousand years!" said the Indian. "This account

is a little exaggerated. It is but eighty thousand years since India was first

peopled, and we are surely more ancient than you are. Brahma prohibited our

eating of ox-flesh before you thought of putting it on your spits or altars."

  Oannes-the Fish God.-"Thou art mistaken," said a Chaldean. "It is to the

fish Oannes that we owe these great advantages; and it is just that we should

render homage to none but him. All the world will tell thee, that he is a divinebeing, with a golden tail, and a beautiful human head; and that for three hours

every day he left the water to preach on dry land."


    OANNES-THE FISH AVATAR.


  "The  accompanying  engraving  of  the  fish-god  is  from  a  drawing  by

Gentil, given in Calmet's Dictionary. The god was worshiped under the name

of  Dagon  by  the  Syrians,  and  Oannes  by  the  Chaldeans.  The  image

represented the body of a fish with the head and arms of a man; and while all

figures of the god are not exactly alike, they all combine a human form with

that of a fish.

  "Owing to the precession of the equinoxes," says the Rev. Mr. Maurice in

the Antiquities of India, "after the rate of seventy-two years to a degree, a

total alteration has taken place through all the signs of the ecliptic, insomuch

that those stars which formerly were in Aries have now got into Taurus, and

those of Taurus into Gemini. Now the vernal equinox, after the rate of that

precession, could not have coincided with the first of May less than 4000

years before Christ."

  An Avatar in the form of the celestial Taurus (♉) then occurred, and

Osiris was worshiped in the form of a bull, by credulous believers. Next in

the course of revolving years, we have the celestial Aries, (♈) and the god

then became incarnate in the form of a lamb, and in that form received the

adoration of devout multitudes. Later still the Zodiacal sign had progressed to

Pisces, (♓) and mankind were then called upon to worship the astrological

emblem of the amphibious being called Oannes-the sacred god of the land

and  the  sea-whose  representative  on  earth  still  claims  to  be  the  Great

Fisherman,  and  who  has  entangled  in  the  meshes  of  his  net  of  faith  the

intellects and consciences of innumerable devotees.

  "In Berosus and other authors," says Godfrey Higgins in the Anacalypsis,

"the being half man, half fish, called Oannes, is said to have come out of the

Erythræan  Sea,  and  to  have  taught  the  Babylonians  all  kinds  of  useful

knowledge. This is clearly the fish Avatar of India; whether or not it be the I-

oannes of Jonas I leave to the reader. I apprehend it is the same as the Dagon

of Pegu and the fish sign of the Zodiac. Very little is known about it, but itexactly answers the description of an Avatar.

  "The apostles of Jesus, I believe, were most of them fishermen. There are

many stories of miraculous draughts of fish, and other matters connected with

fishes, in the Gospel histories; and Peter, the son of John, I-oannes or Oannes,

the great fisherman, inherited the power of ruling the church from the Lamb

of God. The fisherman succeeded to the shepherd. The Pope calls himself the

great fisherman, and boasts of the contents of his Poitrine.

  "In the Pentateuch, which is the sacred book of the Israelites, we meet

with no Dagon, Fish or God. But we do meet with it in the book of Judges. I

believe this Dagon to be the fish Avatar of India-the Dagon of Syrian in

Pegu; in fact the emblem of the entrance of the sun into Pisces.

  "In  the  earliest  time,  perhaps,  of  which  we  have  any  history,  God  the

creator was adored under the form or emblem of a Bull. After that, we read of

him under the form of a calf or two calves, afterward in the form of the Ram

and the Lamb, and the devotees were called lambs: then came the fish or two

fishes. It is a fact, not a theory, that he was called a fish, and that the devotees

were called Pisciculi or little fishes. I suppose few persons will attribute these

appearances of system to accident. As we have lambs and little fishes in the

followers  of  the  Ram,  Aries,  and  the  constellation  Pisces,  it  is  only  in

character to have the followers of the Bull called calves, and I am by no

means certain that we have not them in the Cyclops.

  "At first, no doubt, my reader will be very much surprised at the idea of

the devotees having converted Jesus into the fish Avatar: but why was he

called the lamb? And why were his followers called his flock, and his sheep,

and his lambs? Not many circumstances are more striking than that of Jesus

Christ being originally worshiped under the form of a Lamb-the actual lamb

of God which taketh away the sins of the world. It does not appear to me to

be  more  extraordinary  that  his  followers,  as  it  is  admitted  that  they  did,

should call him a fish and the believers in him pisciculi, than that they should

call him a lamb, and his followers lambs. He was originally represented as a

lamb until one of the popes changed his effigy to that of a man on a cross.

Applying the astronomical emblem of Pisces (♓) to Jesus, does not s seem

more absurd than applying the astronomical symbol of the Lamb (♈). They

applied  to  him  the  monogram  of  Bacchus,  ΙΗΣ;  the  astrological  andalchymical mark or sign of Aries, or the Ram (♈) and, in short, what was

there  that  was  Heathenish  that  they  have  not  applied  to  him?  They  have

actually  loaded  his  simple  and  sublime  religion  with  every  absurdity  of

Gentilism. I know not one absurdity that can be excepted."

  In one of the windows of the Magnificent Cathedral of the Incarnation,

erected by Mrs. A.T. Stewart, at Garden City, N.Y., is a painting representing

the Sea of Tiberias. The "risen Lord," clothed in rich robes of green, scarlet,

and gold, is standing on the seashore, with four of the apostles. Prominent

among them is the great fisherman St. Peter, who is grasping the end of a

seine. In the background is seen the mast and rigging of a fishing boat. At the

feet of Christ a fire is burning, and on the coals are two fishes, like the two

fishes in the Zodiacal sign Pisces (♓). The artist has thus reproduced the

ancient myth, regardless of its astrological origin, and the mythical fishes of

the zodiac, with other ancient Pagan emblems, now symbolize Christian faith

in the so-called Cathedral of the Incarnation.-E.


  "This  Brahma  of  yours,"  said  the  Egyptian,  "is  a  pleasant  sort  of  an

animal, truly, to compare with our Apis. What great things hath your Brahma

done?"

  "It was he," replied the Brahmin, "that taught mankind to read and write,

and to whom the world is indebted for the game of chess."

  "Thou art mistaken," said a Chaldean who sat near him. "It is to the fish

Oannes that we owe these great advantages; and it is just that we should

render homage to none but him. All the world will tell thee, that he is a divine

being, with a golden tail, and a beautiful human head; and that for three hours

every day he left the water to preach on dry land. He had several children,

who were kings, as every one knows. I have a picture of him at home, which

I worship with becoming reverence. We may eat as much beef as we please;

but it is surely a great sin to dress fish for the table. Besides, you are both of

an origin too recent and ignoble to dispute with me. The Egyptians reckon

only a hundred and thirty-five thousand years, and the Indians but eighty

thousand,  while  we  have  almanacs  of  four  thousand  ages.  Believe  me;

renounce your follies; and I will give to each of you a beautiful picture of

Oannes."  The man of Cathay took up the discourse, and said:

  "I have a great respect for the Egyptians, the Chaldeans, the Greeks, the

Celtics, Brahma, the bull Apis, and the beautiful fish Oannes; but I could

think that Li, or Tien, as he is commonly called, is superior to all the bulls on

the earth, or all the fish in the sea. I shall say nothing of my native country; it

is as large as Egypt, Chaldea, and the Indies put together. Neither shall I

dispute about the antiquity of our nation; because it is of little consequence

whether we are ancient or not; it is enough if we are happy. But were it

necessary to speak of almanacs, I could say that all Asia takes ours, and that

we had very good ones before arithmetic was known in Chaldea."

  "Ignorant men, as ye all are," said the Greek; "do you not know that Chaos

is the father of all; and that form and matter have put the world into its

present condition?"

  The Greek spoke for a long time, but was at last interrupted by the Celtic,

who, having drank pretty deeply while the rest were disputing, imagined he

was now more knowing than all the others, and said, with an oath, that there

were none but Teutat and the mistletoe of the oak that were worth the trouble

of a dispute; that, for his own part, he had always some mistletoe in his

pocket, and that the Scythians, his ancestors, were the only men of merit that

had ever appeared in the world; that it was true they had sometimes eaten

human flesh, but that, notwithstanding this circumstance, his nation deserved

to be held in great esteem; and that, in fine, if any one spoke ill of Teutat, he

would teach him better manners.

  The quarrel had now become warm, and Setoc feared the table would be

stained with blood.

  Zadig, who had been silent during the whole dispute, arose at last. He first

addressed himself to the Celtic, as the most furious of the disputants. He told

him that he had reason on his side, and begged a few mistletoes. He then

praised the Greek for his eloquence, and softened all their exasperated spirits.

He  said  but  little  to  the  man  of  Cathay,  because  he  had  been  the  most

reasonable of them all. At last he said:

  "You were going, my friends, to quarrel about nothing; for you are all of

one mind."  At this assertion they all cried out in dissent.

  "Is it not true," said he to the Celtic, "that you adore not this mistletoe, but

him that made both the mistletoe and the oak?"

  "Most undoubtedly," replied the Celtic.

  "And thou, Mr. Egyptian, dost not thou revere, in a certain bull, him who

created the bulls?"

  "Yes," said the Egyptian.

  "The fish Oannes," continued he, "must yield to him who made the sea

and the fishes. The Indian and the Cathaian," added he, "acknowledge a first

principle. I did not fully comprehend the admirable things that were said by

the Greek; but I am sure he will admit a superior being on whom form and

matter depend."

  The Greek, whom they all admired, said that Zadig had exactly taken his

meaning.

  "You are all then," replied Zadig, "of one opinion and have no cause to

quarrel."

  All the company embraced him.

  Setoc, after having sold his commodities at a very high price, returned to

his own tribe with his friend Zadig; who learned, upon his arrival, that he had

been tried in his absence and was now going to be burned by a slow fire.


  XIII.

  THE RENDEZVOUS.

  During  his  journey  to  Balzora  the  priests  of  the  stars  had  resolved  to

punish  Zadig.  The  precious  stones  and  ornaments  of  the  young  widows

whom they sent to the funeral pile belonged to them of right; and the least

they could now do was to burn Zadig for the ill office he had done them.

Accordingly they accused him of entertaining erroneous sentiments of the

heavenly host. They deposed against him, and swore that they had heard him

say that the stars did not set in the sea. This horrid blasphemy made the

judges tremble; they were ready to tear their garments upon hearing these

impious  words;  and  they  would  certainly  have  torn  them  had  Zadig  hadwherewithal to pay them for new ones. But, in the excess of their zeal and

indignation, they contented themselves with condemning him to be burnt by a

slow fire. Setoc, filled with despair at this unhappy event, employed all his

interest to save his friend, but in vain. He was soon obliged to hold his peace.

The young widow, Almona, who had now conceived a great fondness for life,

for which she was obliged to Zadig, resolved to deliver him from the funeral

pile, of the abuse of which he had fully convinced her. She resolved the

scheme in her own mind, without imparting it to any person whatever. Zadig

was to be executed the next day. If she could save him at all, she must do it

that very night; and the method taken by this charitable and prudent lady was

as follows:

  She perfumed herself, she heightened her beauty by the richest and gayest

apparel, and went to demand an audience of the chief priest of the stars. As

soon as she was introduced to the venerable old man, she addressed him in

these terms:

  "Eldest son of the great bear, brother of the bull, and cousin of the great

dog, (such were the titles of this pontiff,) I come to acquaint thee with my

scruples. I am much afraid that I have committed a heinous crime in not

burning myself on the funeral pile of my dear husband; for, indeed, what had

I  worth  preserving?  Perishable  flesh,  thou  seest,  that  is  already  entirely

withered." So saying, she drew up her long sleeves of silk, and showed her

naked arms, which were of an elegant shape and a dazzling whiteness. "Thou

seest," said she, that these are little worth. The priest found in his heart that

they were worth a great deal. He swore that he had never in his life seen such

beautiful arms. "Alas!" said the widow, "my arms, perhaps, are not so bad as

the rest; but thou wilt confess that my neck is not worthy of the least regard."

She then discovered the most charming neck that nature had ever formed.

Compared to it a rose-bud on an apple of ivory would have appeared like

madder on the box-tree, and the whiteness of new-washed lambs would have

seemed of a dusky yellow. Her large black eyes, languishing with the gentle

lustre of a tender fire; her cheeks animated with the finest pink, mixed with

the whiteness of milk; her nose, which had no resemblance to the tower of

Mount Lebanon; her lips, like two borders of coral, inclosing the nest pearls

in the Arabian Sea; all conspired to make the old man fancy and believe that

he was young again. Almona, seeing his admiration, now entreated him topardon Zadig. "Alas!" said he, "my charming lady, should I grant thee his

pardon, it would be of no service, as it must necessarily be signed by three

others, my brethren." "Sign it, however," said Almona. "With all my heart,"

said the priest. "Be pleased to visit me," said Almona, "when the bright star

of Sheat shall appear in the horizon."

  Almona then went to the second pontiff. He assured her that the sun, the

moon,  and  all  the  luminaries  of  heaven,  were  but  glimmering  meteors  in

comparison to her charms. She asked the same favor of him, and he also

granted it readily. She then appointed the second pontiff to meet her at the

rising of the star Algenib. From thence she went to the third and fourth priest,

always taking their signatures, and making an appointment from star to star.

She then sent a message to the judges, entreating them to come to her house

on an affair of great importance. They obeyed her summons. She showed

them the four names, and told them that the priests had granted the pardon of

Zadig. Each of the pontiffs arrived at the hour appointed. Each was surprised

at finding his brethren there, but still more at seeing the judges also present.

Zadig was saved; and Setoc was so charmed with the skill and address of

Almona that he at once made her his wife.

    Almona.-Almona,  seeing  his  admiration,  now  entreated  him  to  pardon

Zadig. "Alas!" said he, "my charming lady, should I grant thee his pardon, it

would be of no service, as it must necessarily be signed by three others, my

brethren. Sign it, however," said Almona.


  Business affairs now required Setoc's presence in the island of Serendib;

but  during  the  first  month  of  his  marriage-the  month  which  is  called  the

honeymoon-he could not permit himself to leave Almona, nor even to think

he could ever leave her, and he requested Zadig to make the journey in his

place. "Alas!" said Zadig, "must I put a still greater distance between the

beautiful Astarte and myself? But it would be ungrateful not to serve my

friend, and I will endeavor to do my duty."

  Setoc and Zadig now took leave of each other with tears in their eyes, both

swearing an eternal friendship, and promising to always share their fortunes

with each other. Zadig then, after having thrown himself at the feet of his fair

deliverer, set out on his journey to Serendib, still musing on the unhappyAstarte,  and  meditating  on  the  severity  of  fortune,  which  seemed  to

persistently  make  him  the  sport  of  her  cruelty  and  the  object  of  her

persecution.

  "What!" said he to himself, "fined four hundred ounces of gold for having

observed a bitch! condemned to lose my head for four bad verses in praise of

the king! sentenced to be strangled because the queen had shoes the color of

my turban! reduced to slavery for having succored a woman who was beaten!

and on the point of being burned for having saved the lives of all the young

widows of Arabia!"

  XIII.(1)

  THE DANCE.

  Arriving in due time at the island of Serendib, Zadig's merits were at once

recognized,  and  he  was  popularly  regarded  as  an  extraordinary  man.  He

became the friend of the wise and learned, the arbitrator of disputes, and the

advisor of the small number of those who were willing to take advice. He was

duly presented to the king, who was pleased with his affability, and soon

chose him for his friend. But this royal favor caused Zadig to tremble; for he

well remembered the misfortunes which the kindness of king Moabdar had

formerly brought upon him. "I please the king," said he; "shall I not therefore

be  lost?"  Still  he  could  not  refuse  the  king's  friendship,  for  it  must  be

confessed  that  Nabussan,  king  of  Serendib,  son  of  Nassanab,  son  of

Nabassun, son of Sanbusna, was one of the most amiable princes in Asia.

  But this good prince was always flattered, deceived, and robbed. It was a

contest who should most pillage the royal treasury. The example set by the

receiver-general of Serendib was universally followed by the inferior officers.

  This the king knew. He had often changed his treasurers, but had never

been able to change the established custom of dividing the revenues into two

unequal parts, of which the smaller came to his majesty, and the larger to his

officers.

  This  custom  Nabussan  explained  to  Zadig.  "You,  whose  knowledge

embraces so many subjects," said he, "can you not tell me how to select a

treasurer who will not rob me?" "Assuredly," said Zadig; "I know a sure

method for finding you a man who will keep his hands clean."  The king was charmed, and asked, while he embraced him, how this was

to be done.

  "You have only," said Zadig, "to cause all those who apply for the office

of treasurer to dance. He who dances the lightest will surely prove to be the

most honest man."

  "You jest," said the king. "A strange way, certainly, of choosing a receiver

of my revenues. What! do you pretend that he who cuts the neatest caper will

be the most just and skillful financier?"

  "I will not answer," returned Zadig, "for his being the most skillful, but I

assure you he will be the most honest."

  Zadig spoke with so much confidence that the king imagined he had some

supernatural test for selecting honest financiers.

  "I do not like the supernatural," said Zadig: "people and books dealing in

prodigies have always displeased me. If your majesty will permit me to make

the test, you will be convinced it is the easiest and simplest thing possible."

  Nabussan consented, and was more astonished to hear that the test was

simple, than if it had been claimed as a miracle.

  "Leave all the details to me," said Zadig: "You will gain more by this trial

than you imagine."

  The same day he made proclamation in the king's name, that all candidates

for the office of receiver-in-chief of the revenues of his gracious majesty

Nabussan, son of Nussanab, must present themselves in dresses of light silk,

on the first day of the month of the crocodile, in the king's anti-chamber. The

candidates came, accordingly, to the number of sixty-four. Musicians were

placed in an adjoining room, and all was prepared for the dance. As the door

of the saloon was closed, it was necessary, in order to enter it, to pass through

a  small  gallery  which  was  slightly  darkened.  An  usher  directed  each

candidate in succession through this obscure passage, in which he was left

alone for some moments. The king, being aware of the plan, had temptingly

spread  out  in  this  gallery  many  of  his  choicest  treasures.  When  all  the

candidates were assembled in the saloon, the king ordered the band to play

and the dance to begin. Never had dancers performed more unwillingly or

with less grace. Their heads were down, their backs bent, their hands pressedto their sides.

  "What rascals!" murmured Zadig.

  One alone danced with grace and agility,-his head up, his look assured, his

body erect, his arms free, his motions natural.

  "Ah, the honest man, the excellent man!" cried Zadig.

  The  king  embraced  this  upright  dancer,  appointed  him  treasurer,  and

punished  all  the  others  with  the  utmost  justice,  for  each  one  had,  while

passing through the gallery, filled his pockets till he could hardly walk. His

majesty was distressed at this exhibition of dishonesty, and regretted that

among these sixty-four dancers there should be sixty-three thieves. This dark

gallery was then named the Corridor of Temptation.

  In  Persia  these  sixty-three  lords  would  have  been  impaled;  in  other

countries a chamber of justice would have consumed in costs three times the

money stolen, replacing nothing in the king's coffers; in yet another kingdom

they would have been honorably acquitted, and the light dancer disgraced; in

Serendib they were only sentenced to add to the public treasure, for Nabussan

was very indulgent.

  He was also very grateful, and willingly gave Zadig a larger sum than any

treasurer had ever stolen from the revenue. This wealth Zadig used to send a

courier to Babylon to learn the fate of queen Astarte. His voice trembled

when directing the courier. His blood seemed to stagnate in his veins. His

heart almost ceased to beat. His eyes were suffused with tears.


  XIII.(2)

  BLUE EYES.

  After the courier had gone, Zadig returned to the palace; and forgetting

that  he  was  not  in  his  own  room,  almost  unconsciously  uttered  the  word

LOVE.

  "Ah!  love,"  exclaimed  the  king,  "that  is  indeed  the  cause  of  my

unhappiness. You have divined what it is that causes me pain. You are indeed

a great man. I hope you will assist me in my search for a woman, perfect in

all respects, and of whose affection I may feel assured. You have proved yourability for this service by selecting for me an honest financier, and I have

entire confidence in your success."

  Zadig, having recovered his composure, promised to serve the king in love

as he had in finance, although the task seemed to him far more difficult.

  "The body and the heart," said the king.

  At  these  words  Zadig  could  not  refrain  from  interrupting  his  majesty:

"You show good taste," said he, "by not saying the mind and the heart; for we

hear nothing but these words in the talk of Babylon. We see nothing but

books which treat of the heart and mind, written by people who have neither

the one nor the other: but pardon me, sire, and deign to continue."

  "I have in my palace," said the king, "one hundred women who are all

called charming, graceful, beautiful, affectionate even, or pretending to be so

when in my company; but I have too often realized that it is to the king of

Serendib they pay court, and that they care very little for Nabussan. This

pretended affection does not satisfy my desires. I would find a consort that

loves me for myself, and who would willingly be all my own. For such a

treasure I would joyfully barter the hundred beauties whose forced smiles

afford me no delight. Let us see if out of these hundred queens you can select

one true woman to bless me with her love."

  Zadig replied to him as he had previously done in regard to the finances:

"Sire, allow me to make the attempt, and permit me to again use the treasure

formerly displayed in the Corridor of Temptation. I will render you a faithful

account."

  The king willingly acceded to this request, and permitted Zadig to do as he

desired. He first chose thirty-three of the ugliest little hunchbacks that could

be  procured  in  Serendib,  then  thirty-three  of  the  handsomest  pages  to  be

found, and, lastly, thirty-three bonzes, (priests), the most eloquent and robust

he could select. He gave them all liberty to enter the king's private apartments

in the palace, and secure a partner if they so desired. Each little hunchback

had four thousand gold pieces given to him: and on the first day each had

secured a companion. The pages, who had nothing to give but themselves,

did not succeed in many cases until the end of two or three days. The priests

had still more trouble in obtaining partners, but, finally, thirty-three devotees

joined their fortunes with these pious suitors. The king, through the blindswhich opened into his apartments, saw all these trials, and was astounded. Of

these  hundred  women,  ninety-nine  discarded  his  protection.  There  still

remained one, however, still quite young, with whom his majesty had never

conversed.  They  sent  to  her  one,  two,  three  hunchbacks,  who  displayed

before her twenty thousand pieces of gold. She still remained firm, and could

not  refrain  from  laughing  at  the  idea  of  these  cripples,  that  wealth  could

change  their  appearance.  They  then  presented  before  her  the  two  most

beautiful pages. She said she thought the king was still more beautiful. They

attacked her with the most eloquent of the priests, and afterward with the

most audacious. She found the first a prattler, and could not perceive any

merit in the second.

  "The heart," said she, "is everything. I will never yield to the hunchbacks'

gold, the pages' vanity, or the pompous prattle of the priests. I love only

Nabussan, son of Nussanab, and I will wait until he condescends to love me

in return."

  The king was transported with joy, astonishment, and love. He took back

all the money that had brought success to the hunchbacks, and made a present

of it the beautiful Falide, which was the name of this charming lady. He gave

her his heart, which she amply deserved, for never were glances from female

eyes more brilliant than her own, nor the charms of youthful beauty more

enchanting.  Envy,  it  is  true,  asserted  that  she  courtesied  awkwardly;  but

candor compels the admission that she danced like the fairies, acted like the

graces, sang like the sirens, and that she was in truth the very embodiment of

intelligence and virtue. Nabussan loved and adored her; but, alas! she had

BLUE EYES, and this apparently trivial fact was the cause of the gravest

misfortunes.

  There was an old law in Serendib forbidding the kings to marry those to

whom the Greeks applied the word Βοῶπις. [1] A high-priest had established

this law thousands of years ago. He had anathematized blue eyes in order that

he might secure for himself the hand of the king's favorite. The various orders

of the empire now remonstrated with Nabussan for disregarding this organic

law and loving the beautiful Falide. They publicly asserted that the last days

of  the  kingdom  had  arrived-that  this  act  of  royal  love  was  the  height  of

sacrilege-that all nature was threatened with a sinister ending-and all because

Nabussan, son of Nussanab, loved two magnificent blue eyes. The cripples,the capitalists, the bonzes and the brunettes filled the kingdom with their

complaints.

  The  barbarians  of  the  northern  provinces  profited  by  the  general

discontent. They invaded the territory of the good Nabussan and demanded a

tribute from his subjects. The priests, who possessed half the revenues of the

state, contented themselves with raising their hands to heaven, and refused to

put them in their coffers to aid the king. They chanted beautiful prayers, and

left the state a prey to the invaders.

  "Oh! my dear Zadig," sadly cried Nabussan, "can you not rescue me from

this impending danger?"

  "Very willingly," replied Zadig: "you shall have for your defence as much

money from the priests as you may desire. Leave, I pray you, without guard

the property of the bonzes, and defend only your own possessions."

  Nabussan wisely followed this advice. The priests became alarmed, threw

themselves at his feet and implored his protection. The king replied with

agreeable music, and chanted forth prayers and invocations to heaven with

much sweetness and melody; finally, the priests reluctantly contributed the

money, and the king brought the war to a happy termination.

  Thus  Zadig  by  his  sensible  advice  and  judicious  services  drew  upon

himself the enmity of the most powerful parties in the state. The bonzes and

the brunettes swore to destroy him; the capitalists and the cripples did not

spare  him.  They  caused  the  good  Nabussan  to  suspect  him.  "Services

rendered  often  remain  in  the  anti-chamber,  and  distrust  enters  into  the

cabinet." So said Zoroaster. Every day there were fresh accusations: the first

is repelled; the second is lightly thought of; the third wounds; the fourth kills.

  Zadig  was  dismayed,  and  having  now  satisfactorily  arranged  Setoc's

affairs, he only thought of leaving the island in safety.

  "But where shall I go?" said he. "If I remain in Serendib the priests will

doubtless have me impaled; in Egypt I would probably be enslaved, burnt,

according to all appearances, in Arabia; strangled in Babylon. However, I

must learn what has become of Queen Astarte, and will go on and see what

sad fate destiny has still in store for me."

  [1] Having large, full, finely rounded eyes. In Homer, always applied tofemales,  and  most  frequently  to  the  goddess  Juno,  as  a  point  of  majestic

beauty.-E.


  XIV.

  THE ROBBER.

  Arriving  on  the  frontiers  which  divide  Arabia  Petræa  from  Syria,  he

passed by a very strong castle from which a party of armed Arabians sallied

forth. They instantly surrounded him and cried:

  "All thou hast belongs to us, and thy person is the property of our master."

  Zadig  replied  by  drawing  his  sword;  his  servant,  who  was  a  man  of

courage, did the same. They killed the first Arabians that presumed to lay

hands  on  them;  and  though  the  number  was  redoubled,  they  were  not

dismayed,  but  resolved  to  perish  in  the  conflict.  Two  men  defended

themselves  against  a  multitude;  but  such  combat  could  not  last  long,  the

master  of  the  castle,  whose  name  was  Arbogad,  having  observed  from  a

window the prodigies of valor performed by Zadig, conceived a high esteem

for this heroic stranger. He descended in haste, and went in person to call off

his men and deliver the two travelers.

  "All that passes over my lands," said he, "belongs to me, as well as what I

find upon the lands of others; but thou seemest to be a man of such undaunted

courage, that I will exempt thee from the common law."

  He then conducted him to his castle, ordering his men to treat him well;

and in the evening Arbogad supped with Zadig. The lord of the castle was

one of those Arabians who are commonly called robbers; but he now and

then performed some good actions amidst a multitude of bad ones. He robbed

with a furious rapacity, and granted favors with great generosity. He was

intrepid in action; affable in company; a debauchee at table, but gay in his

debauchery; and particularly remarkable for his frank and open behavior. He

was  highly  pleased  with  Zadig,  whose  lively  conversation  lengthened  the

repast. At last Arbogad said to him:

  "I  advise  thee  to  enroll  thy  name  in  my  catalogue.  Thou  canst  not  do

better. This is not a bad trade, and thou mayest one day become what I am at

present."  "May I take the liberty of asking thee," said Zadig, "how long thou hast

followed this noble profession?"

  "From my most tender youth," replied the lord, "I was servant to a petty,

good-natured Arabian, but could not endure the hardships of my situation. I

was vexed to find that fate had given me no share of the earth which equally

belongs to all men. I imparted the cause of my uneasiness to an old Arabian,

who said to me:

  "'My son, do not despair; there was once a grain of sand that lamented that

it was no more than a neglected atom in the deserts; at the end of a few years

it became a diamond, and it is now the brightest ornament in the crown of the

king of the Indies.'

  Zadig and the brigand.-"I advise thee to enroll thy name in my catalogue.

Thou canst not do better," said the robber, "This is not a bad trade, and thou

mayest one day become what I am at present."


  "This discourse made a deep impression on my mind. I was the grain of

sand, and I resolved to become the diamond. I began by stealing two horses. I

soon got a party of companions. I put myself in a condition to rob small

caravans; and thus, by degrees, I destroyed the difference which had formerly

subsisted between me and other men. I had my share of the good things of

this world; and was even recompensed with usury for the hardships I had

suffered.  I  was  greatly  respected,  and  became  the  captain  of  a  band  of

robbers.  I  seized  this  castle  by  force.  The  satrap  of  Syria  had  a  mind  to

dispossess me of it; but I was too rich to have any thing to fear. I gave the

satrap  a  handsome  present,  by  which  means  I  preserved  my  castle,  and

increased my possessions. He even appointed me treasurer of the tributes

which  Arabia  Petræa  pays  to  the  king  of  kings.  I  perform  my  office  of

receiver with great punctuality; but take the freedom to dispense with that of

paymaster.

  "The grand Desterham of Babylon sent hither a petty satrap in the name of

king Moabdar, to have me strangled. This man arrived with his orders. I was

apprised of all. I caused to be strangled in his presence the four persons he

had brought with him to draw the noose; after which I asked him how much

his commission of strangling me might be worth. He replied, that his feeswould amount to above three hundred pieces of gold. I then convinced him

that he might gain more by staying with me. I made him an inferior robber;

and he is now one of my best and richest officers. If thou wilt take my advice,

thy success may be equal to his. Never was there a better season for plunder,

since king Moabdar is killed, and all Babylon thrown into confusion."

  "Moabdar killed!" said Zadig, "and what has become of queen Astarte?"

  "I  know  not,"  replied  Arbogad.  "All  I  know  is,  that  Moabdar  lost  his

senses and was killed; that Babylon is a scene of disorder and bloodshed; that

all the empire is desolated; that there are some fine strokes to be made yet;

and that, for my own part, I have struck some that are admirable."

  "But the queen," said Zadig; "for heaven's sake, knowest thou nothing of

the queen's fate?"

  "Yes," replied he, "I have heard something of a prince of Plircania. If she

was not killed in the tumult, she is probably one of his concubines. But I am

much  fonder  of  booty  than  news.  I  have  taken  several  women  in  my

excursions, but I keep none of them. I sell them at a high price when they are

beautiful, without enquiring who they are. In commodities of this kind rank

makes no difference, and a queen that is ugly will never find a merchant.

Perhaps I may have sold queen Astarte; perhaps she is dead; but, be it as it

will, it is of little consequence to me, and I should imagine of as little to

thee."

  So saying, he drank a large draught, which threw all his ideas into such

confusion that Zadig could obtain no farther information.

  Zadig remained for some time without speech, sense, or motion. Arbogad

continued drinking, constantly repeated that he was the happiest man in the

world; and exhorted Zadig to put himself in the same condition. At last the

soporiferous fume of the wine lulled him into a gentle repose. Zadig passed

the night in the most violent perturbation.

  "What," said he, "did the king lose his senses? and is he killed? I cannot

help lamenting his fate. The empire is rent in pieces: and this robber is happy.

O fortune! O destiny! A robber is happy, and the most beautiful of nature's

works hath perhaps perished in a barbarous manner, or lives in a state worse

than death. O Astarte! what has become of thee?"  At day break, he questioned all those he met in the castle; but they were all

busy  and  he  received  no  answer.  During  the  night  they  had  made  a  new

capture, and they were now employed in dividing the spoil. All he could

obtain in this hurry and confusion was an opportunity of departing, which he

immediately embraced, plunged deeper than ever in the most gloomy and

mournful reflections.

  Zadig  proceeded  on  his  journey  with  a  mind  full  of  disquiet  and

perplexity,  and  wholly  employed  on  the  unhappy  Astarte  on  the  king  of

Babylon, on his faithful friend Cador, on the happy robber Arbogad, on that

capricious  woman  whom  the  Babylonians  had  seized  on  the  frontiers  of

Egypt. In a word, on all the misfortunes and disappointments he had hitherto

suffered.


  XV.

  THE FISHERMAN.

  At few leagues distance from Arbogad's castle he came to the banks of a

small  river,  still  deploring  his  fate,  and  considering  himself  as  the  most

wretched of mankind. He saw a fisherman lying on the bank of the river,

scarcely holding in his weak and feeble hand a net which he seemed ready to

drop, and lifting up his eyes to heaven.

  "I am certainly," said the fisherman, "the most unhappy man in the world.

I was universally allowed to be the most famous dealer in cream-cheese in

Babylon, and yet I am ruined. I had the most handsome wife that any man in

my situation could have; and by her I have been betrayed. I had still left a

paltry  house,  and  that  I  have  seen  pillaged  and  destroyed.  At  last  I  took

refuge in this cottage, where I have no other resource than fishing, and yet I

cannot catch a single fish. Oh, my net! no more will I throw thee into the

water; I will throw myself in thy place."

  So saying, he arose and advanced forward, in the attitude of a man ready

to throw himself into the river, and thus to finish his life.

  "What," said Zadig, "are there men as wretched as I?"

  His eagerness to save the fisherman's life was as sudden as this reflection.

He  runs  to  him,  stops  him,  and  speaks  to  him  with  a  tender  andcompassionate air. It is commonly supposed that we are less miserable when

we have companions in our misery. This, according to Zoroaster, does not

proceed from malice, but necessity. We feel ourselves insensibly drawn to an

unhappy person as to one like ourselves. The joy of the happy would be an

insult; but two men in distress are like two slender trees, which, mutually

supporting each other, fortify themselves against the tempest.

  "Why,"  said  Zadig  to  the  fisherman,  "dost  thou  sink  under  thy

misfortunes?"

  "Because,"  replied  he,  "I  see  no  means  of  relief.  I  was  the  most

considerable  man  in  the  village  of  Derlback,  near  Babylon,  and  with  the

assistance of my wife I made the best cream-cheese in the empire. Queen

Astarte, and the famous minister, Zadig, were extremely fond of them. I had

sent them six hundred cheeses, and one day went to the city to receive my

money; but, on my arrival at Babylon, was informed that the queen and Zadig

had disappeared. I ran to the house of Lord Zadig, whom I had never seen;

and  found  there  the  inferior  officers  of  the  grand  Desterham,  who  being

furnished  with  a  royal  license,  were  plundering  it  with  great  loyalty  and

order. From thence I flew to the queen's kitchen, some of the lords of which

told me that the queen was dead; some said she was in prison; and others

pretended that she had made her escape; but they all agreed in assuring me

that I would not be paid for my cheese. I went with my wife to the house of

Lord Orcan, who was one of my customers, and begged his protection in my

present distress. He granted it to my wife, but refused it to me. She was

whiter than the cream-cheeses that began my misfortune, and the lustre of the

Tyrian purple was not more bright than the carnation which animated this

whiteness. For this reason Orcan detained her, and drove me from his house.

In my despair I wrote a letter to my dear wife. She said to the bearer, 'Ha, ha!

I know the writer of this a little. I have heard his name mentioned. They say

he I makes excellent cream-cheeses. Desire him to send me some and he shall

be paid.'

  "In my distress I resolved to apply to justice. I had still six ounces of gold

remaining. I was obliged to give two to the lawyer whom I consulted, two to

the procurator who undertook my cause, and two to the secretary of the first

judge. When all this was done, my business was not begun; and I had already

expended more money than my cheese and my wife were worth. I returned tomy own village, with an intention to sell my house, in order to enable me to

recover my wife.

  "My house was well worth sixty ounces of gold; but as my neighbors saw

that I was poor and obliged to sell it, the first to whom I applied offered me

thirty ounces, the second twenty, and the third ten. Bad as these offers were, I

was so blind that I was going to strike a bargain, when a prince of Hircania

came to Babylon, and ravaged all in his way. My house was first sacked and

then burned.

  "Having thus lost my money, my wife, and my house, I retired into this

country, where thou now seest me. I have endeavored to gain a subsistence

by fishing; but the fish make a mock of thee as well as the men. I catch none;

I die with hunger; and had it not been for thee, august comforter, I should

have perished in the river."

  The  fisherman  was  not  allowed  to  give  this  long  account  without

interruption; at every moment, Zadig, moved and transported, said:

  "What! knowest thou nothing of the queen's fate?"

  "No my lord," replied the fisherman; "but I know that neither the queen

nor Zadig have paid me for my cream-cheeses; that I have lost my wife, and

am now reduced to despair."

  "I flatter myself," said Zadig, "that thou wilt not lose all thy money. I have

heard of this Zadig; he is an honest man; and if he return to Babylon, as he

expects, he will give thee more than he owes thee. But with regard to thy

wife, who is not so honest, I advise thee not to seek to recover her. Believe

me, go to Babylon; I shall be there before thee, because I am on horseback,

and thou art on foot. Apply to the illustrious Cador. Tell him thou hast met

his friend. Wait for me at his house. Go, perhaps thou wilt not always be

unhappy.

  "O powerful Oromazes!" continued he, "thou employest me to comfort

this man. Whom wilt thou employ to give me consolation?"

  So saying, he gave the fisherman half the money he had brought from

Arabia. The fisherman, struck with surprise and ravished with joy, kissed the

feet of the friend of Cador, and said:

  "Thou art surely an angel sent from heaven to save me!" Meanwhile Zadigcontinued to make fresh inquiries and to shed tears. "What! my lord," cried

the fisherman, "and art thou then so unhappy, thou who bestowest favors?"

  "A hundred times more unhappy than thee," replied Zadig.

  "But how is it possible," said the good man, "that the giver can be more

wretched than the receiver?"

  "Because," replied Zadig, "thy greatest misery arose from poverty, and

mine is seated in the heart."

  "Did Orcan take thy wife from thee?" said the fisherman.

  This  word  recalled  to  Zadig's  mind  the  whole  of  his  adventures.  He

repeated the catalogue of his misfortunes, beginning with the queen's bitch

and ending with his arrival at the castle of the robber Arbogad.

  "Ah!" said he to the fisherman, "Orcan deserves to be punished: but it is

commonly such men as those that are the favorites of fortune. However, go

thou to the house of Lord Cador, and there await my arrival."

  They  then  parted:  the  fisherman  walked,  thanking  heaven  for  the

happiness of his condition; and Zadig rode, accusing fortune for the hardness

of his lot.


  XVI.

  THE BASILISK.

  Arriving in a beautiful meadow, he there saw several women, who were

searching  for  something  with  great  application.  He  took  the  liberty  to

approach one of them, and to ask if he might have the honor to assist them in

their search.

  "Take care that thou dost not," replied the Syrian. "What we are searching

for can be touched only by women."

  "Strange," said Zadig. "May I presume to ask thee what it is that women

only are permitted to touch?"

  "It is a basilisk," said she.

  "A  basilisk,  madam!  and  for  what  purpose,  pray,  dost  thou  seek  for  a

basilisk?"  "It is for our lord and master, Ogul, whose castle thou seest on the bank of

that river, at the end of that meadow. We are his most humble slaves. The

lord Ogul is sick. His physician hath ordered him to eat a basilisk, stewed in

rose-water; and as it is a very rare animal, and can only be taken by women,

the lord Ogul hath promised to choose for his well-beloved wife the woman

that shall bring him a basilisk. Let me go on in my search; for thou seest what

I shall lose if I am forestalled by my companions."

  The basilisk.

  THE BASILISK, OR COCKATRICE.


  The Basilisk, called "Cockatrice" in "holy writ," was first described by

certain  ancient  historians  of  unquestioned  imaginative  ability,  but  of  very

doubtful veracity; and they have also enriched the popular mythology with

minute descriptions of the Phoenix, the Griffin, the Centaur, the Chimera, the

Unicorn, and many other fanciful and mythical creations.

  The  learned  and  pious  naturalist,  Charles  Owen,  D.D.,  of  London,

England,  (from  whose  celebrated  Essay  Towards  a  Natural  History  of

Serpents, published in 1742, the preceding engraving has been copied), tells

us that "the Basilisk is a serpent of the Draconick line-the property of Africa;

that in shape it resembles a cock, the tail excepted; that the Egyptians say it

springs from the egg of the bird Ibis, and others, from eggs of a cock; that it

is gross in body, of fiery eyes and sharp head, on which it wears a crest like a

cock's comb; that it has the honor to be styled Regulus by the Latins-the little

king of serpents; that it is terrible to them, and its voice puts them to flight,

that, as tradition adds, its eyes and breath are killing; that dreadful things are

attributed to it by the poets; and that, according to Pliny, the venom of the

Basilisk is said to be so exalted, that if it bites a staff 'twill kill the person that

makes  use  of  it;  but  this,"  continues  the  reverend  doctor  of  divinity,  "is

tradition without a voucher."

  The "inspired" prophet Isaiah, whose writings are venerated by both Jews

and Christians, and whose prophetic utterances have so long been discussed

with more zeal than discretion by the sectarians, tells us, (Isaiah xiv. 29), that

"Out of the serpent's root shall come forth a Cockatrice, and his fruit shall be

a fiery, flying serpent." This somewhat incoherent prediction has never beensatisfactorily  explained  by  the  learned  commentators  who  are  specially

educated in our colleges for solving theological enigmas, and who have failed

to  show,  to  the  confusion  of  scientists  and  the  admiration  of  a  believing

world, how a Cockatrice may emerge from a "serpent's root," and why a

Cockatrice's "fiery and flying fruit" should have formed a theme for prophetic

inspiration.-E.

  Zadig discovers Queen Astarte."In her hand she held a small rod with

which she was tracing characters on the fine sand that lay between the turf

and the brook."


  Zadig left her and the other Assyrians to search for their basilisk, and

continued his journey through the meadow; when coming to the brink of a

small rivulet, he found a lady lying on the grass, and who was not searching

for any thing. Her person seemed majestic; but her face was covered with a

veil. She was inclined toward the rivulet, and profound sighs proceeded from

her bosom. In her hand she held a small rod with which she was tracing

characters on the fine sand that lay between the turf and the brook.

  Zadig had the curiosity to examine what this woman was writing. He drew

near. He saw the letter Z, then an A; he was astonished: then appeared a D; he

started. But never was surprise equal to his, when he saw the two last letters

of his name. He stood for some time immovable. At last breaking silence

with a faltering voice:

  "Oh!  generous  lady!"  pardon  a  stranger,  an  unfortunate  man,  for

presuming to ask thee by what surprising adventure I here find the name of

Zadig traced out by thy divine hand?'

  At this voice and these words, the lady lifted up the veil with a trembling

hand, looked at Zadig, sent forth a cry of tenderness, surprise, and joy, and

sinking  under  the  various  emotions  which  at  once  assaulted  her  soul  fell

speechless into his arms. It was Astarte herself; it was the queen of Babylon;

it was she whom Zadig adored, and whom he had reproached himself for

adoring; it was she whose misfortunes he had so deeply lamented, and for

whose  fate  he  had  been  so  anxiously  concerned.  He  was  for  a  moment

deprived of the use of his senses, when he had fixed his eyes on those of

Astarte, which now began to open again with a languor mixed with confusionand tenderness:

  "O ye immortal powers!" cried he, "who preside over the fates of weak

mortals; do ye indeed restore Astarte to me? At what a time, in what a place,

and in what a condition do I again behold her?"

  He fell on his knees before Astarte, and laid his face in the dust at her feet.

The queen of Babylon raised him up, and made him sit by her side on the

brink of the rivulet. She frequently wiped her eyes, from which the tears

continued to flow afresh. She twenty times resumed her discourse, which her

sighs  as  often  interrupted.  She  asked  by  what  strange  accident  they  were

brought together, and suddenly prevented his answer by other questions. She

waived the account of her own misfortunes, and desired to be informed of

those of Zadig. At last, both of them having a little composed the tumult of

their souls, Zadig acquainted her in a few words by what adventure he was

brought into that meadow.

  "But, O unhappy and respectable queen! by what means do I find thee in

this lonely place, clothed in the habit of a slave, and accompanied by other

female  slaves,  who  are  searching  for  a  basilisk,  which,  by  order  of  the

physician, is to be stewed in rose-water?"

  "While they are searching for their basilisk," said the fair Astarte, "I will

inform  thee  of  all  I  have  suffered,  for  which  heaven  has  sufficiently

recompensed me, by restoring thee to my sight. Thou knowest that the king,

my husband, was vexed to see thee, the most amiable of mankind; and that

for this reason he one night resolved to strangle thee and poison me. Thou

knowest how heaven permitted my little mute to inform me of the orders of

his sublime majesty. Hardly had the faithful Cador obliged thee to depart, in

obedience  to  my  command,  when  he  ventured  to  enter  my  apartment  at

midnight by a secret passage. He carried me off, and conducted me to the

temple of Oromazes, where the magi, his brother, shut me up in that huge

statue, whose base reaches to the foundation of the temple, and whose top

rises to the summit of the dome. I was there buried in a manner; but was

served by the magi, and supplied with all the necessaries of life. At break of

day his majesty's apothecary entered my chamber with a potion composed of

a  mixture  of  henbane,  opium,  hemlock,  black  hellebore,  and  aconite;  and

another officer went to thine with a bowstring of blue silk. Neither of us wereto be found. Cador, the better to deceive the king, pretended to come and

accuse us both. He said that thou hadst taken the road to the Indies, and I that

to  Memphis;  on  which  the  king's  guards  were  immediately  dispatched  in

pursuit of us both.

  Cador concealing Astarte in the temple of Oromazes.

  "The couriers who pursured me did not know me. I had hardly ever shown

my face to any but thee, and to thee only in the presence and by the order of

my husband. They conducted themselves in the pursuit by the description that

had been given of my person. On the frontiers of Egypt they met with a

woman  of  the  same  stature  with  me,  and  possessed  perhaps  of  greater

charms. She was weeping and wandering. They made no doubt but that this

woman was the queen of Babylon, and accordingly brought her to Moabdar.

Their mistake at first threw the king into a violent passion; but having viewed

this woman more attentively, he found her extremely handsome, and was

comforted.  She  was  called  Missouf.  I  have  since  been  informed  that  this

name in the Egyptian language signifies the capricious fair one. She was so in

reality; but she had as much cunning as caprice. She pleased Moabdar, and

gained such an ascendency over him as to make him choose her for his wife.

Her character then began to appear in its true colors. She gave herself up,

without scruple, to all the freaks of a wanton imagination. She would have

obliged the chief of the magi, who was old and gouty, to dance before her;

and on his refusal, she persecuted him with the most unrelenting cruelty. She

ordered her master of the horse to make her a pie of sweetmeats. In vain did

he represent that he was not a pastry-cook. He was obliged to make it, and

lost his place because it was baked a little too hard. The post of master of the

horse  she  gave  to  her  dwarf,  and  that  of  Chancellor  to  her  page.  In  this

manner did she govern Babylon. Every body regretted the loss of me. The

king, who till the moment of his resolving to poison me and strangle thee had

been a tolerably good kind of man, seemed now to have drowned all his

virtues in his immoderate fondness for this capricious fair one. He came to

the temple on the great day of the feast held in honor of the sacred fire. I saw

him implore the gods in behalf of Missouf, at the feet of the statue in which I

was inclosed. I raised my voice; I cried out:

  "'The gods reject the prayers of a king who is now become a tyrant, and

who  attempted  to  murder  a  reasonable  wife,  in  order  to  marry  a  womanremarkable for nothing but her folly and extravagance.'

  "At  these  words  Moabdar  was  confounded  and  his  head  became

disordered.  The  oracle  I  had  pronounced,  and  the  tyranny  of  Missouf,

conspired  to  deprive  him  of  his  judgment,  and  in  a  few  days  his  reason

entirely forsook him.

  "His madness, which seemed to be the judgment of heaven, was the signal

for a revolt. The people rose, and ran to arms; and Babylon, which had been

so long immersed in idleness and effeminacy, became the theatre of a bloody

civil war. I was taken from the heart of my statue and placed at the head of a

party. Cador flew to Memphis to bring thee back to Babylon. The prince of

Hircania, informed of these fatal events, returned with his army and made a

third party in Chaldea. He attacked the king, who fled before him with his

capricious Egyptian. Moabdar died pierced with wounds. Missouf fell into

the hands of the conqueror. I myself had the misfortune to be taken by a party

of Hircanians, who conducted me to their prince's tent, at the very moment

that Missouf was brought before him. Thou wilt doubtless be pleased to hear

that the prince thought me more beautiful than the Egyptian; but thou wilt be

sorry to be informed that he designed me for his seraglio. He told me, with a

blunt and resolute air, that as soon as he had finished a military expedition,

which he was just going to undertake, he would come to me. Judge how great

must have been my grief. My ties with Moabdar were already dissolved; I

might have been the wife of Zadig; and I was fallen into the hands of a

barbarian. I answered him with all the pride which my high rank and noble

sentiment could inspire. I had always heard it affirmed that heaven stamped

on persons of my condition a mark of grandeur, which, with a single word or

glance, could reduce to the lowliness of the most profound respect those rash

and forward persons who presume to deviate from the rules of politeness. I

spoke  like  a  queen,  but  was  treated  like  a  maid-servant.  The  Hircanian,

without  even  deigning  to  speak  to  me,  told  his  black  eunuch  that  I  was

impertinent, but that he thought me handsome. He ordered him to take care of

me and to put me under the regimen of favorites, that, so my complexion

being improved, I might be the more worthy of his favors when he should be

at leisure to honor me with them. I told him, that, rather than submit to his

desires, I would put an end to my life. He replied with a smile, that women,

he believed, were not so blood-thirsty, and that he was accustomed to suchviolent expressions; and then left me with the air of a man who had just put

another parrot into his aviary. What a state for the first queen in the universe,

and, what is more, for a heart devoted to Zadig!"

  At these words Zadig threw himself at her feet, and bathed them with his

tears. Astarte raised him with great tenderness, and thus continued her story:

  "I now saw myself in the power of a barbarian, and rival to the foolish

woman with whom I was conned. She gave me an account of her adventures

in Egypt. From the description she gave of your person, from the time, from

the  dromedary  on  which  you  were  mounted,  and  from  every  other

circumstance, I inferred that Zadig was the man who had fought for her. I

doubted not but that you were at Memphis, and therefore resolved to repair

thither. 'Beautiful Missouf,' said I, 'thou art more handsome than I, and will

please the prince of Hircania much better. Assist me in contriving the means

of my escape. Thou wilt then reign alone. Thou wilt at once make me happy

and rid thyself of a rival.'

  "Missouf  concerted  with  me  the  means  of  my  flight;  and  I  departed

secretly  with  a  female  slave.  As  I  approached  the  frontiers  of  Arabia,  a

famous robber, named Arbogad, seized me and sold me to some merchants

who brought me to this castle where ford Ogul resides. He bought me without

knowing who I was. He is a voluptuary, ambitious of nothing but good living,

and thinks that God sent him into the world for no other purpose than to sit at

table. He is so extremely corpulent, that he is always in danger of suffocation.

His  physician,  who  has  but  little  credit  with  him  when  he  has  a  good

digestion, governs him with a despotic sway when he has eaten too much. He

has persuaded him that a basilisk stewed in rose-water will effect a complete

cure. The ford Ogul hath promised his hand to the female slave that brings

him a basilisk. Thou seest that I leave them to vie with each other in meriting

this honor; and never was I less desirous of finding the basilisk than since

heaven hath restored thee to my sight."

  This account was succeeded by a long conversation between Astarte and

Zadig, consisting of every thing that their long suppressed sentiments, their

great sufferings, and their mutual love, could inspire into hearts the most

noble and tender, and the genii who preside over love carried their words to

the sphere of Venus.  The women returned to Ogul without having found the basilisk. Zadig was

introduced to this mighty lord, and spoke to him in the following terms:

  "May immortal health descend from heaven to bless all thy days! I am a

physician. At the first report of thy indisposition I flew to thy castle, and have

now brought thee a basilisk stewed in rose-water. Not that I pretend to marry

thee. All I ask is the liberty of a Babylonian slave, who hath been in thy

possession for a few days; and, if I should not be so happy as to cure thee,

magnificent Lord Ogul, I consent to remain a slave in her place."

  The  proposal  was  accepted.  Astarte  set  out  for  Babylon  with  Zadig's

servant, promising, immediately upon her arrival, to send a courier to inform

him of all that had happened. Their parting was as tender as their meeting.

The moment of meeting, and that of parting are the two greatest epochs of

life as sayeth the great book of Zend. Zadig loved the queen with as much

ardor as he professed; and the queen loved Zadig more than she thought

proper to acknowledge.

  Meanwhile Zadig spoke thus to Ogul:

  "My lord, my basilisk is not to be eaten; all its virtues must enter through

thy pores. I have inclosed it in a little ball, blown up and covered with a fine

skin. Thou must strike this ball with all thy might, and I must strike it back

for a considerable time; and by observing this regimen for a few days, thou

wilt see the effects of my art."

  The first day Ogul was out of breath, and thought he should have died

with fatigue. The second, he was less fatigued, and slept better. In eight days

he recovered all the strength, all the health, all the agility and cheerfulness of

his most agreeable years.

  "Thou hast played at ball, and hast been temperate," said Zadig. "Know

that  there  is  no  such  thing  in  nature  as  a  basilisk;  that  temperance  and

exercise  are  the  two  great  preservatives  of  health;  and  that  the  art  of

reconciling  intemperance  and  health  is  as  chimerical  as  the  philosopher's

stone, judicial astrology, or the theology of the magi."

  Ogul's first physician observing how dangerous this man might prove to

the medical art, formed a design, in conjunction with the apothecary, to send

Zadig to search for a basilisk in the other world. Thus, after having sufferedsuch a long train of calamities on account of his good actions, he was now

upon the point of losing his life for curing a gluttonous lord. He was invited

to an excellent dinner, and was to have been poisoned in the second course;

but, during the first, he happily received a courier from the fair Astarte.

  "When one is beloved by a beautiful woman," says the great Zoroaster,

"he hath always the good fortune to extricate himself out of every kind of

difficulty and danger."


  XVII.

  THE COMBATS.

  The queen was received at Babylon with all those transports of joy which

are ever felt on the return of a beautiful princess who hath been involved in

calamities. Babylon was now in greater tranquillity. The prince of Hircania

had been killed in battle. The victorious Babylonians declared that the queen

should marry the man whom they should choose for their sovereign. They

were  resolved  that  the  first  place  in  the  world,  that  of  being  husband  to

Astarte and king of Babylon, should not depend on cabals and intrigues. They

swore to acknowledge for king the man who, upon trial, should be found to

be possessed of the greatest valor and the greatest wisdom. Accordingly, at

the distance of a few leagues from the city, a spacious place was marked out

for  the  list,  surrounded  with  magnificent  amphitheatres.  Thither  the

combatants were to repair in complete armor. Each of them had a separate

apartment behind the amphitheatres, where they were neither to be seen nor

known by any one. Each was to encounter four knights; and those that were

so happy as to conquer four, were then to engage with one another: so that he

who remained the last master of the field, would be proclaimed conqueror at

the games. Four days after he was to return to the same place, and to explain

the enigmas proposed by the magi. If he did not explain the enigmas, he was

not king; and the running at the lances was to begin afresh, till a man should

be found who was conqueror in both these combats; for they were absolutely

determined to have a king possessed of the greatest wisdom and the most

invincible courage. The queen was all the while to be strictly guarded. She

was only allowed to be present at the games, and even there she was to be

covered with a veil; but was not allowed to speak to any of the competitors,that so they might neither receive favor, nor suffer injustice.

  These particulars Astarte communicated to her lover, hoping that, in order

to  obtain  her,  he  would  show  himself  possessed  of  greater  courage  and

wisdom than any other person.

  Zadig set out on his journey, beseeching Venus to fortify his courage and

enlighten his understanding. He arrived on the banks of the Euphrates on the

eve of this great day. He caused his device to be inscribed among those of the

combatants, concealing his face and his name, as the law ordained; and then

went to repose himself in the apartment that fell to him by lot. His friend,

Cador, who after the fruitless search he had made for him in Egypt, had now

returned to Babylon, sent to his tent a complete suit of armor, which was a

present from the queen; as also from himself, one of the finest horses in

Persia. Zadig presently perceived that these presents were sent by Astarte;

and from thence his courage derived fresh strength, and his love the most

animating hopes.

  Next  day,  the  queen  being  seated  under  a  canopy  of  jewels,  and  the

amphitheatres filled with all the gentlemen and ladies of rank in Babylon, the

combatants appeared in the circus. Each of them came and laid his device at

the feet of the grand magi. They drew their devices by lot; and that of Zadig

was the last. The first who advanced was a certain lord, named Itobad, very

rich  and  very  vain,  but  possessed  of  little  courage,  of  less  address,  and

scarcely of any judgment at all. His servants had persuaded him that such a

man as he ought to be king. He had said in reply, "Such a man as I ought to

reign;" and thus they had armed him cap-a-pie. He wore an armor of gold

enameled with green, a plume of green feathers, and a lance adorned with

green  ribbons.  It  was  instantly  perceived  by  the  manner  in  which  Itobad

managed his horse, that it was not for such a man as him that heaven reserved

the sceptre of Babylon. The first knight that ran against him threw him out of

his saddle: the second laid him flat on his horse's buttocks, with his legs in

the air, and his arms extended. Itobad recovered himself, but with so bad a

grace, that the whole amphitheatre burst out a laughing. The third knight

disdained to make use of his lance; but, making a pass at him, took him by

the right leg, and wheeling him half round, laid him prostrate on the sand.

The squires of the games ran to him laughing, and replaced him in his saddle.

The fourth combatant took him by the left leg, and tumbled him down on theother side. He was conducted back with scornful shouts to his tent, where,

according to the law, he was to pass the night; and as he limped along with

great difficulty, he said: "What an adventure for such a man as I!"

  The combats.

  The other knights acquitted themselves with greater ability and success.

Some of them conquered two combatants; a few of them vanquished three;

but none but prince of Otamus conquered four. At last Zadig fought in his

turn. He successively threw four knights off their saddles with all the grace

imaginable. It then remained to be seen who should be conqueror, of Otamus

or Zadig. The arms of the first were gold and blue, with a plume of the same

color; those of the last were white. The wishes of all the spectators were

divided between the knight in blue and the knight in white. The queen, whose

heart was in a violent palpitation, offered prayers to heaven for the success of

the white color.

  The two champions made their passes and vaults with so much agility,

they mutually gave and received such dexterous blows with their lances, and

sat so firmly in their saddles, that every body but the queen wished there

might be two kings in Babylon. At length, their horses being tired and their

lances broken, Zadig had recourse to this stratagem: He passed behind the

blue prince; springs upon the buttocks of his horse; seizes him by the middle;

throws him on the earth; places himself in the saddle, and wheels around

Otamus as he lay extended on the ground. All the amphitheatre cried out,

"Victory to the white knight!" Otamus rises in a violent passion, and draws

his sword; Zadig leaps from his horse with his sabre in his hand. Both of

them are now on the ground, engaged in a new combat, where strength and

agility  triumph  by  turns.  The  plumes  of  their  helmets,  the  studs  of  their

bracelets, and the rings of their armor are driven to a great distance by the

violence of a thousand furious blows. They strike with the point and the edge;

to the right, to the left; on the head, on the breast; they retreat; they advance;

they  measure  swords;  they  close;  they  seize  each  other;  they  bend  like

serpents; they attack like lions; and the fire every moment flashes from their

blows. At last Zadig, having recovered his spirits, stops; makes a feint; leaps

upon Otamus; throws him on the ground and disarms him; and Otamus cries

out:  "It is thou alone, O white knight, that oughtest to reign over Babylon!"

  The queen was now at the height of her joy. The knight in blue armor, and

the knight in white, were conducted each to his own apartment, as well as all

the others, according to the intention of the law. Mutes came to wait upon

them, and to serve them at table. It may be easily supposed that the queen's

little mute waited upon Zadig. They were then left to themselves to enjoy the

sweets of repose till next morning, at which time the conqueror was to bring

his device to the grand magi, to compare it with that which he had left, and

make himself known.

  Zadig, though deeply in love, was so much fatigued that he could not help

sleeping. Itobad, who lay near him, never closed his eyes. He arose in the

night, entered his apartment, took the white arms and the device of Zadig,

and put his green armor in their place. At break of day, he went boldly to the

grand magi, to declare that so great a man as he was conqueror. This was

little expected; however, he was proclaimed while Zadig was still asleep.

Astarte,  surprised  and  filled  with  despair,  returned  to  Babylon.  The

amphitheatre was almost empty when Zadig awoke; he sought for his arms

but could find none but the green armor. With this he was obliged to cover

himself, having nothing else near him. Astonished and enraged, he put it on

in a furious passion and advanced in this equipage.

  The people that still remained in the amphitheatre and the circus received

him with hoofs and hisses. They surrounded him, and insulted him to his

face. Never did man suffer such cruel mortifications. He lost his patience;

with his sabre he dispersed such of the populace as dared to affront him; but

he knew not what course to take. He could not see the queen; he could not

claim the white armor she had sent him without exposing her; and thus, while

she was plunged in grief, he was filled with fury and distraction. He walked

on the banks of the Euphrates, fully persuaded that his star had destined him

to inevitable misery; and revolving in his mind all his misfortunes, from the

adventure of the woman who hated one-eyed men, to that of his armor:

  "This," said he, "is the consequence of my having slept too long. Had I

slept less, I should now have been king of Babylon, and in possession of

Astarte. Knowledge, virtue, and courage, have hitherto served only to make

me miserable."  He  then  let  fall  some  secret  murmurings  against  providence,  and  was

tempted to believe that the world was governed by a cruel destiny, which

oppressed the good, and prospered knights in green armor.


  XVIII.

  THE HERMIT.

  One of Zadig's greatest mortifications was his being obliged to wear that

green  armor  which  had  exposed  him  to  such  contumelious  treatment.  A

merchant happening to pass by, he sold it to him for a trifle, and bought a

gown and a long bonnet. In this garb he proceeded along the banks of the

Euphrates, filled with despair, and secretly accusing providence, which thus

continued to persecute him with unremitting severity.

  While he was thus sauntering along, he met a hermit whose white and

venerable beard hung down to his girdle. He held a book in his hand, which

he  read  with  great  attention.  Zadig  stopped,  and  made  him  a  profound

obeisance.  The  hermit  returned  the  compliment  with  such  a  noble  and

engaging air, that Zadig had the curiosity to enter into conversation with him.

He asked him what book it was that he had been reading.

  "It is the book of destinies," said the hermit. "Wouldst thou choose to look

into it?"

  He put the book into the hands of Zadig, who, thoroughly versed as he was

in several languages, could not decipher a single character of it. This only

redoubled his curiosity.

  "Thou seemest," said the good father, "to be in great distress."

  "Alas!" replied Zadig, "I have but too much reason."

  "If  thou  wilt  permit  me  to  accompany  thee,"  resumed  the  old  man,

"perhaps I may be of some service to thee. I have often poured the balm of

consolation into the bleeding heart of the unhappy."

  Zadig felt himself inspired with respect for the dignity, the beard, and the

book of the hermit. He found, in the course of the conversation, that he was

possessed of superior degrees of knowledge. The hermit talked of fate, of

justice, of morals, of the chief good, of human weakness, and of virtue andvice,  with  such  a  spirited  and  moving  eloquence,  that  Zadig  felt  himself

drawn toward him by an irresistible charm. He earnestly entreated the favor

of his company till their return to Babylon.

  "I  ask  the  same  favor  of  thee,"  said  the  old  man.  "Swear  to  me  by

Oromazes that, whatever I do, thou wilt not leave me for some days."

  Zadig swore, and they set out together. In the evening the two travelers

arrived at a superb castle. The hermit entreated a hospitable reception for

himself and the young man who accompanied him. The porter, whom one

might  have  mistaken  for  a  great  lord,  introduced  them  with  a  kind  of

disdainful civility. He presented them to a principal domestic, who showed

them his master's magnificent apartments. They were admitted to the lower

end of the table, without being honored with the least mark of regard by the

lord  of  the  castle;  but  they  were  served,  like  the  rest,  with  delicacy  and

profusion.  They  were  then  presented,  in  a  golden  basin  adorned  with

emeralds  and  rubies,  with  water  to  wash  their  hands.  At  last  they  were

conducted to bed in a beautiful apartment; and in the morning a domestic

brought each of them a piece of gold, after which they took their leave and

departed.

  "The master of the house," said Zadig, as they were proceeding on the

journey, "appears to be a generous man, though somewhat too proud. He

nobly performs the duties of hospitality."

  At that instant he observed that a kind of large pocket, which the hermit

had, was filled and distended; and upon looking more narrowly, he found that

it contained the golden basin adorned with precious stones, which the hermit

had stolen. He durst not then take any notice of it; but he was filled with a

strange surprise.

  About noon the hermit came to the door of a paltry house, inhabited by a

rich miser, and begged the favor of an hospitable reception for a few hours.

An old servant, in a tattered garb, received them with a blunt and rude air,

and led them into the stable, where he gave them some rotten olives, sour

wine, and mouldy bread. The hermit ate and drank with as much seeming

satisfaction as he had done the evening before, and then addressing himself to

the old servant who watched them both to prevent them stealing anything,

and had rudely pressed them to depart, he gave him the two pieces of gold hehad received in the morning, and thanked him for his great civility.

  "Pray," added he, "allow me to speak to thy master."

  The servant, filled with astonishment, introduced the two travelers.

  "Magnificent lord!" said the hermit, "I cannot but return thee my most

humble thanks for the noble manner in which thou hast entertained us. Be

pleased to accept of this golden basin as a small mark of my gratitude."

  The miser started, and was ready to fall backwards; but the hermit, without

giving  him  time  to  recover  from  his  surprise,  instantly  departed  with  his

young fellow traveler.

  "Father," said Zadig, "what is the meaning of all this? Thou seemest to me

to be entirely different from other men. Thou stealest a golden basin adorned

with precious stones, from a lord who received thee magnificently, and givest

it to a miser who treats thee with indignity."

  "Son," replied the old man, "this magnificent lord, who receives strangers

only from vanity and ostentation, will hereby be rendered more wise; and the

miser will learn to practice the duties of hospitality. Be surprised at nothing,

but follow me."

  Zadig knew not as yet whether he was in company with the most foolish

or  the  most  prudent  of  mankind'  but  the  hermit  spoke  with  such  an

ascendency  that  Zadig,  who  was  moreover  bound  by  his  oath,  could  not

refuse to follow him.

  In  the  evening  they  arrived  at  a  house  built  with  equal  elegance  and

simplicity, where nothing savored either of prodigality or avarice. The master

of it was a philosopher who had retired from the world, and who cultivated in

peace the study of virtue and wisdom, without any of that rigid and morose

severity so commonly found in men of his character. He had chosen to build

this fine house in which he received strangers with a generosity free from

ostentation. He went himself to meet the two travelers, whom he led into a

commodious apartment, and desired them to repose themselves. Soon after he

came and invited them to a decent and well ordered repast, during which he

spoke with great judgment of the last revolutions in Babylon. He seemed to

be strongly attached to the queen, and wished that Zadig had appeared in the

lists to contend for the crown.  "But the people," added he, "do not deserve to have such a king as Zadig."

  Zadig blushed and felt his griefs redoubled. They agreed, in the course of

the  conversation,  that  the  things  of  this  world  did  not  always  answer  the

wishes of the wise. The hermit maintained that the ways of providence were

inscrutable; and that men were in the wrong to judge of a whole, of which

they understood but the smallest part. They talked of the passions.

  "Ah," said Zadig, "how fatal are their effects!"

  "They are the winds," replied the hermit, "that swell the sails of the ship; it

is true, they sometimes sink her, but without them she could not sail at all.

The bile makes us sick and choleric but without the bile we could not live.

Everything in this world is dangerous, and yet everything in it is necessary."

  The conversation turned on pleasure; and the hermit proved that it was a

present bestowed by the deity.

  "For," said he, "man cannot either give himself sensations or ideas: he

receives all; and pain and pleasure proceed from a foreign cause as well as his

being."

  Zadig was surprised to see a man who had been guilty of such extravagant

actions, capable of reasoning with so much judgment and propriety. At last,

after a conversation equally entertaining and instructive, the host led back his

two guests to their apartment, blessing heaven for having sent him two men

possessed of so much wisdom and virtue. He offered them money with such

an easy and noble air that it could not possibly give any offence. The hermit

refused it, and said that he must now take his leave of him, as he proposed to

set out for Babylon in the morning before it was light. Their parting was

tender. Zadig especially felt himself filled with esteem and affection for a

man of such an amiable character.

  When he and the hermit were alone in their apartment they spent a long

time  in  praising  their  host.  At  break  of  day  the  old  man  awakened  his

companion.

  "We must now depart," said he; "but while all the family are still asleep, I

will leave this man a mark of my esteem and affection."

  So saying he took a candle and set fire to the house. Zadig, struck with

horror, cried aloud, and endeavored to hinder him from committing such abarbarous action; but the hermit drew him away by a superior force, and the

house was soon in flames. The hermit, who, with his companion, was already

at  a  considerable  distance,  looked  back  to  the  conflagration  with  great

tranquillity.

  "Thanks  be  to  God,"  said  he,  "the  house  of  my  dear  host  is  entirely

destroyed! Happy man!"

  At these words Zadig was at once tempted to burst out in laughing, to

reproach the reverend father, to beat him, and to run away. But he did none of

all  these;  for  still  subdued  by  the  powerful  ascendancy  of  the  hermit,  he

followed him, in spite of himself, to the next stage.

  This was at the house of a charitable and virtuous widow, who had a

nephew fourteen years of age, a handsome and promising youth, and her only

hope. She performed the honors of the house as well us she could. Next day,

she ordered her nephew to accompany the strangers to a bridge, which being

lately broken down, was become extremely dangerous in passing. The young

man  walked  before  them  with  great  alacrity.  As  they  were  crossing  the

bridge, the hermit said to the youth:

  "Come, I must show my gratitude to thy aunt."

  He then took him by the hair, and plunged him into the river. The boy

sank, appeared again on the surface of the water, and was swallowed up by

the current.

  "O monster! O thou most wicked of mankind!" cried Zadig.

  "Thou  promised  to  behave  with  greater  patience,"  said  the  hermit,

interrupting him. "Know, that under the ruins of that house which providence

hath set on fire, the master hath found an immense treasure I know, that this

young man, whose life providence hath shortened, would have assassinated

his aunt in the space of a year, and thee in that of two."

  "Who told thee so, barbarian?" cried Zadig, "and though thou hadst read

this event in thy book of destinies, art thou permitted to drown a youth who

never did thee any harm?"

  While the Babylonian was thus exclaiming, he observed that the old man

had no longer a beard, and that his countenance assumed the features and

complexion  of  youth.  The  hermit's  habit  disappeared,  and  four  beautifulwings covered a majestic body resplendent with light.

  "O  sent  of  heaven!  O  divine  angel!"  cried  Zadig,  humbly  prostrating

himself on the ground, "Hast thou then descended from the empyrean to teach

a weak mortal to submit to the eternal decrees of providence?"

  "Men," said the angel Jesrad, "judge of all without knowing any thing;

and, of all men, thou best deservest to be enlightened."

  Zadig begged to be permitted to speak:

  "I distrust myself," said he, "but may I presume to ask the favor of thee to

clear up one doubt that still remains in my mind. Would it not have been

better  to  have  corrected  this  youth,  and  made  him  virtuous,  than  to  have

drowned him?"

  The hermit.

  The poem, called The Hermit, by Thomas Parnell, D.D., expresses views

in regard to providence similar to those of Voltaire. The same thoughts may

also be found in the Divine Dialogues of Henry Moore. Indeed this "tale to

prose-men known to verse-men fam'd," has been used by many authors. Pope

says "the story was written originally in Spanish;" Goldsmith, in his Life of

Parnell, intimates that it was originally of Arabian invention, while, in fact, it

seems to bear internal evidence of Persian or Hindoo origin.-E.

  "Had he become virtuous," replied Jesrad, "and enjoyed a longer life, it

would have been his fate to have been assassinated himself, together with the

wife he would have married, and the child he would have had by her."

  "But why," said Zadig, "is it necessary that there should be crimes and

misfortunes, and that these misfortunes should fall on the good?"

  "The wicked," replied Jesrad, "are always unhappy. They serve to prove

and try the small number of the just that are scattered through the earth; and

there is no evil that is not productive of some good."

  "But," said Zadig, "suppose there was nothing but good and no evil at all."

  "Then," replied Jesrad, "this earth would be another earth: the chain of

events would be ranged in another order and directed by wisdom. But this

other order, which would be perfect, can exist only in the eternal abode of the

Supreme  Being,  to  which  no  evil  can  approach.  The  Deity  hath  createdmillions of worlds, among which there is not one that resembles another. This

immense variety is the effect of his immense power. There are not two leaves

among the trees of the earth, nor two globes in the unlimited expanse of

heaven, that are exactly similar; and all that thou seest on the little atom in

which thou art born, ought to be, in its proper time and place, according to

the  immutable  decrees  of  him  who  comprehends  all.  Men  think  that  this

child, who hath just perished, is fallen into the water by chance; and that it is

by the same chance that this house is burned. But there is no such thing as

chance. All is either a trial, or a punishment, or a reward, or a foresight.

Remember  the  fisherman,  who  thought  himself  the  most  wretched  of

mankind. Oromazes sent thee to change his fate. Cease then, frail mortal, to

dispute against what thou oughtest to adore."

  "But," said Zadig-

  As he pronounced the word "But," the angel took his flight toward the

tenth sphere. Zadig on his knees adored providence, and submitted. The angel

cried to him from on high:

  "Direct thy course toward Babylon."


  XIX.

  THE ENIGMAS.

  Zadig, entranced as it were, and like a man about whose head the thunder

had burst, walked at random. He entered Babylon on the very day when those

who had fought at the tournaments were assembled in the grand vestibule of

the palace to explain the enigmas, and to answer the questions of the grand

magi. All the knights were already present, except the knight in green armor.

As soon as Zadig appeared in the city, the people crowded around him; every

eye was fixed on him, every mouth blessed him, and every heart wished him

the empire. The envious man saw him pass; he frowned and turned aside. The

people conducted him to the place where the assembly was held. The queen,

when informed of his arrival, became a prey to the most violent agitations of

hope and fear. She was filled with anxiety and apprehension. She could not

comprehend why Zadig was without arms, nor why Itobad wore the white

armor.  When the knights who had fought were directed to appear in the assembly,

Zadig said. "I have fought as well as the other knights, but another here wears

my arms; and while I wait for the honor of proving the truth of my assertion,

I demand the liberty of presenting myself to explain the enigmas."

  The question was put to vote, and his reputation for probity was so well

established, that they admitted him without scruple.

  The first question proposed by the grand magi, was: "What, of all things in

the world, is the longest and the shortest, the swiftest and the slowest, the

most  divisible  and  the  most  extended,  the  most  neglected  and  the  most

regretted, without which nothing can be done, which devours all that is little,

and enlivens all that is great?"

  Itobad  was  to  speak.  He  replied,  that  so  great  a  man  as  he  did  not

understand enigmas; and that it was sufficient for him to have conquered by

his strength and valor. Some said that the meaning of the enigma was fortune;

some, the earth; and others, the light. Zadig said that it was time.

  "Nothing,"  added  he,  "is  longer,  since  it  is  the  measure  of  eternity.

Nothing  is  shorter,  since  it  is  insufficient  for  the  accomplishment  of  our

projects. Nothing more slow to him that expects, nothing more rapid to him

that enjoys. In greatness it extends to infinity, in smallness it is infinitely

divisible. All men neglect it, all regret the loss of it; nothing can be done

without it. It consigns to oblivion whatever is unworthy of being transmitted

to posterity, and it immortalizes such actions as are truly great."

  The assembly acknowledged that Zadig was in the right.

  The  next  question  was:  "What  is  the  thing  which  we  receive  without

thanks, which we enjoy without knowing how, and which we lose without

perceiving it?"

  Every one gave his own explanation. Zadig alone guessed that it was life;

and he explained all the other enigmas with the same facility. Itobad always

said that nothing was more easy, and that he could have answered them with

the  same  readiness,  had  he  chosen  to  have  given  himself  the  trouble.

Questions were then proposed on justice, on the sovereign good, and on the

art of government. Zadig's answers were judged to be the most solid, and the

people exclaimed:  "What a pity it is, that so great a genius should be so bad a knight!"

  "Illustrious lords," said Zadig, "I have had the honor of conquering in the

tournaments.  It  is  to  me  that  the  white  armor  belongs.  Lord  Itobad  took

possession of it during my sleep. He probably thought it would fit him better

than the green. I am now ready to prove in your presence, with my gown and

sword, against all that beautiful white armor which he took from me, that it is

I who have had the honor of conquering the brave of Otamus."

  Itobad  accepted  the  challenge  with  the  greatest  confidence.  He  never

doubted but that, armed as he was with a helmet, a cuirass, and brassarts, he

would obtain an easy victory over a champion in a cap and a night-gown.

Zadig drew his sword, saluting the queen, who looked at him with a mixture

of fear and joy. Itobad drew his, without saluting any one. He rushed upon

Zadig, like a man who had nothing to fear; he was ready to cleave him in

two. Zadig knew how to ward off his blows, by opposing the strongest part of

his  sword  to  the  weakest  of  that  of  his  adversary,  in  such  a  manner  that

Itobad's sword was broken. Upon which Zadig, seizing his enemy by the

waist, threw him on the ground; and fixing the point of his sword at the

extremity of his breast-plate, exclaimed: "Suffer thyself to be disarmed, or

thou art a dead man."

  Itobad greatly surprised at the disgrace that happened to such a man as he,

was obliged to yield to Zadig, who took from him with great composure, his

magnificent helmet, his superb cuirass, his fine brassarts, his shining cuisses;

clothed himself with them, and in this dress ran to throw himself at the feet of

Astarte.  Cador  easily  proved  that  the  armor  belonged  to  Zadig.  He  was

acknowledged  king  by  the  unanimous  consent  of  the  whole  nation,  and

especially by that of Astarte, who, after so many calamities, now tasted the

exquisite pleasure of seeing her lover worthy, in the eyes of the world, to be

her husband. Itobad went home to be called lord in his own house. Zadig was

king, and was happy. He recollected what the angel Jesrad had said to him.

He even remembered the grain of sand that became a diamond. He sent in

search of the robber Arbogad, to whom he gave an honorable post in his

army, promising to advance him to the first dignities, if he behaved like a true

warrior;  and  threatening  to  hang  him,  if  he  followed  the  profession  of  a

robber.  Setoc, with the fair Almona, was called from the heart of Arabia, and

placed at the head of the commerce of Babylon. Cador was preferred and

distinguished according to his great services. He was the friend of the king;

and the king was then the only monarch on earth that had a friend. The little

mute was not forgotten. A fine house was given to the fisherman; and Orcan

was condemned to pay him a large sum of money, and to restore him his

wife; but the fisherman, who had now become wise, took only the money.

  The  beautiful  Semira  could  not  be  comforted  for  having  believed  that

Zadig would be blind of an eye; nor did Azora cease to lament her attempt to

cut  off  his  nose:  their  griefs,  however,  he  softened  by  his  presents.  The

capricious beauty, Missouf, was left unnoticed. The envious man died of rage

and  shame.  The  empire  enjoyed  peace,  glory,  and  plenty.  This  was  the

happiest age of the earth. It was governed by love and justice. The people

blessed Zadig, and Zadig blessed heaven.


  THE SAGE AND THE ATHEIST.


    INTRODUCTION.


  You request me, sir, to give you some account of our worthy friend, and

his singular son. The leisure that the retirement of Lord Peterborough now

affords me, places it in my power to oblige you. You will be as astonished as

I was, and perhaps adopt my opinion on the subject.

  You scarcely knew the young and unfortunate Johnny, Freind's only son,

whom his father took with him to Spain when he received the appointment of

chaplain  to  our  armies,  in  1705.  You  started  for  Aleppo,  before  my  lord

besieged Barcelona; yet you were right when you said, John's countenance

was  amiable  and  interesting,  and  that  he  gave  proofs  of  intelligence  and

courage. It was quite true. Every one who knew him, loved him. At first he

was intended for the church; but, as he manifested much aversion for that

profession, which, indeed, requires great skill, management, and finesse, his

prudent father considered it a folly and a crime to oppose his inclination.

  John was not twenty years old when he assisted, as a volunteer, at the

attack on Mont-Joui, which was captured, and where the Prince of Hesse losthis life. Our poor Johnny was wounded, taken prisoner, and carried into the

town. The following is an account of his adventures from the attack of Mont-

Joui till the taking of Barcelona. It is as told by a Catalonian lady, a little too

free and too simple. Such stories do not find a way to the hearts of your wise

men. I received it from her when I entered Barcelona in the suite of Lord

Peterborough. You must read it without offence, as a true description of the

manners of the country.


  CHAPTER I.

  ADVENTURES OF JOHNNY, A YOUNG ENGLISHMAN. WRITTEN

BY DONNA LAS NALGAS.

  When we were informed that the same savages who came through the air

to  seize  on  Gibraltar,  were  come  to  besiege  our  beautiful  Barcelona,  we

began to offer prayers at Notre Dame de Manreze-assuredly the best mode of

defence.

  These people, who come from so far, are called by a name very hard to

pronounce,  that  is,  English.  Our  reverend  father  inquisitor,  Don  Jeronimo

Bueno  Caracucarador,  preached  against  these  brigands.  He  anathematized

them in Notre Dame d'Elpino. He assured us that the English had monkey-

tails, bears' paws, and parrot-heads; that they sometimes spoke like men, but

invariably made a great hissing; that they were moreover notorious heretics;

that though the Blessed Virgin was often indulgent to poor sinners, she never

forgave  heretics,  and  that  consequently  they  would  all  be  infallibly

exterminated, especially if they presumed to appear before Mont-Joui. He

had scarcely finished his sermon when he heard that Mont-Joui was taken by

storm.

  The same evening we learned that a young Englishman, who had been

wounded in the assault, was our prisoner. Throughout the town arose cries of

victory! victory! And the illuminations were very general.

  Donna Boca Vermeja, who had the honor to be the reverend inquisitor's

favorite, was very desirous to see what the English animal and heretic was

like. She was my intimate friend. I shared her curiosity. We were oblished to

wait till his wound was cured; and this did not take very long.  Don Jeronimo Bueno Caracucarador.

  Soon after, we learned that he was in the habit of visiting daily at the

residence of Elbob, my cousin german, who, as every one knows, is the best

surgeon  in  the  town.  My  friend  Boca  Vermeja's  impatience  to  see  this

singular  monster  increased  two-fold.  We  had  no  rest  ourselves,  and  gave

none to our cousin, the surgeon, till he allowed us to conceal ourselves in a

small closet, which we entered on tiptoe without saying a word and scarcely

venturing to breathe, just as the Englishman arrived. His face was not turned

toward us. He took off a small cap which enclosed his light hair, which then

fell in thick curls down the finest neck I ever beheld. His form presented a

plumpness, a finish, an elegance, approaching, in my opinion, the Apollo

Belvidere at Rome-a copy of which my uncle the sculptor possesses.

  Donna  Boca  Vermeja  was  transported  with  surprise,  and  delighted.  I

shared  her  ecstacy,  and  could  not  forbear  exclaiming:  "O  che  hermoso

Muchacho!"

  These words made the young man turn round. We then saw the face of an

Adonis on the body of a young Hercules. Donna Boca Vermeja nearly fell

backwards at the sight:

  "St. James!" she exclaimed, "Holy Virgin! is it possible heretics are such

fine men? How we have been deceived about them."

  Donna Boca was soon violently in love with the heretical monster. She is

handsomer than I am, I must confess; and I must also confess that I became

doubly jealous of her on that account. I took care to show her that to forsake

the reverend father inquisitor, Don Jeronimo Bueno Caracucarador, for an

Englishman, would be a crime falling nothing short of damnation.

  "Ah! my dear Las Nalgas," she said, (Las Nalgas is my name) "I would

forsake Melchizedek himself for so fine a young man."

  One of the inquisitors who attended four masses daily, to obtain from Our

Lady of Manreze the destruction of the English, heard of our admiration. The

Reverend  Father  Don  Caracucarador  whipped  us  both,  and  had  our  dear

Englishman  arrested  by  twenty-four  Alguazils  of  St.  Hermandad.  Johnny

killed four; and was at length captured by the remaining twenty. He was

confined  in  a  very  damp  cellar,  and  sentenced  to  be  burnt  the  followingSunday, in full ceremony, clothed in a San-bénito, wearing a sugar-loaf cap,

in honor of our Savior and the Virgin Mary, his mother. Don Caracucarador

prepared a fine sermon, but had no occasion for it, as the town was taken at

four o'clock on the Sunday morning.

  Here Donna Las Nalgas's tale terminates. This lady was not without a

description of wit, which in Spain we call agudéza.


  CHAPTER II.

  CONTINUATION OF THE ADVENTURES OF JOHN, THE YOUNG

ENGLISHMAN; ALSO THOSE OF HIS WORTHY FATHER, D.D., M.P.,

AND F.R.S.

  You know the skillful conduct of the Earl of Peterborough after he took

Barcelona, how successfully he prevented pillage, restored order, and rescued

the Duchess of Popoli from the hands of some drunken Germans, who robbed

and abused her. Conceive the surprise, grief, rage, and tears, of our friend

Freind,  on  learning  that  John  was  confined  in  the  dungeons  of  the  holy

inquisition, and condemned to the stake. You know that cold temperaments

are frequently most energetic when great events call them into action. You

should have seen this distracted father, whom you were accustomed to think

imperturbable, fly to the dungeon of his son more rapidly than the horses at

Newmarket hasten to the goal. The fifty soldiers who went with him were

soon out of breath, and always a hundred paces behind. At length he reached

the cell and entered it. What a scene! what tears! what joy! Twenty victims,

devoted to the same ceremony, are delivered. All the prisoners take arms and

fight with our soldiers. The buildings of the holy office are destroyed in ten

minutes, and they breakfasted beside the ruins, on the wine and ham of the

inquisitors.

  Condemned by the Inquisition.-He was confined to a very damp cellar,

and sentenced to be burnt the following Sunday, in full ceremony, clothed in

a San-bénito, wearing a sugar-loaf cap, in honor of our Savior and the Virgin

Mary, his mother.


  In  the  midst  of  the  roar  of  cannon,  the  sound  of  trumpets  and  drums,

announcing  our  victory  to  Catalonia,  our  friend  Freind  recovered  hisaccustomed tranquillity of manner. He was as calm as the sky after a day of

storm. He was raising to God a heart as serene as his countenance, when he

perceived a black spectral figure, clad in a surplice, issue from a vault, and

fall at his feet, crying for mercy.

  "Who are you?" said our friend. "Do you come from Hades?"

  "Almost," rejoined the other. "I am Don Jeronimo Bueno Caracucarador,

inquisitor. I solicit most humbly your forgiveness for wishing to roast your

son in public. I took him for a Jew."

  "Supposing that to be the case," said our friend with his customary sang

froid,  "does  it  become  you,  Señor  Caracucarador,  to  roast  people  alive

because  they  are  descended  from  a  sect  that  formerly  inhabited  a  rocky

canton near the Syrian desert? What does it matter to you whether a man is

circumcised or not? that he observe Easter at the full of the moon, or on the

following  Sunday?  It  is  very  bad  reasoning  to  say,  'That  man  is  a  Jew;

therefore I must have him burnt, and take his property.' The Royal Society of

London do not reason in that way.

  "Do you know, Señor Caracucarador, that Jesus Christ was a Jew-that he

was born, lived, and died a Jew? that he observed the passover like a Jew, at

the full of the moon? that all his apostles were Jews? that they went to the

temple after his death, as we are expressly told? that the first fifteen secret

bishops of Jerusalem were Jews? But my son is no Jew; he belongs to the

established church. How came it into your head to burn him alive?"

  The inquisitor, overawed by the learning of Monsieur Freind, and still

prostrate at his feet, replied:

  "Alas! sir, we know nothing about this at the University of Salamanca.

Forgive  me,  once  more.  The  true  reason  is,  your  son  took  from  me  my

favorite, Donna Boca Vermeja."

  "Ah! if he took your favorite, that's another thing. We should never take

'our neighbor's goods.' That is not, however, a sufficient reason for burning a

young  man  to  death.  As  Leibnitz  says,  'The  punishment  should  be  in

proportion  to  the  crime.'  You  Christians  on  the  other  side  of  the  British

Channel, especially toward the South, make no more of roasting each other,

be it the Counsellor Dubourg, M. Servetus, or those who were burned in thereign of Philippe II., surnamed El Discreto, than we do of roasting a joint of

beef in London. But bring Miss Boca Vermeja before me, that I may learn the

truth from her own mouth."

  Boca Vermeja appeared weeping, looking the handsomer for her tears, as

women generally do.

  "Is it true, Miss, that you are devotedly attached to M. Caracucarador, and

that my son has abducted you?"

  "Abducted  me?  The  English  gentleman!  I  never  met  with  any  one  so

amiable and good-looking as your son. You are very fortunate in being his

father.  I  could  follow  him  to  the  world's  end.  I  always  hated  that  ugly

inquisitor,  who  whipped  me  and  Mademoiselle  Las  Nalgas  till  he  nearly

brought blood. If you wish to make me happy, you will cause the old fellow

to be hanged at my bedroom window."

  Just as Boca Vermeja was thus speaking, the Earl of Peterborough sent for

the inquisitor Caracucarador, to have him hanged. You will not be surprised

to hear that Mr. Freind firmly opposed this measure.

  "Let your just displeasure," said he, "give way to generous feelings. A

man should never be put to death but when it is absolutely necessary for the

safety of others. The Spaniards say the English are barbarians, who kill all the

priests that come in their way. This might have injured the cause of the arch-

duke, for whom you have taken Barcelona. I have sufficient satisfaction in

rescuing my son, and putting it out of the power of this rascally monk to

exercise his inquisitorial functions."

  In  a  word,  the  wise  and  charitable  Freind  was  contented  with  getting

Caracucarador flogged, as he had whipped Miss Boca Vermeja and Miss Las

Nalgas.

  Such clemency affected the Catalonians. The persons rescued from the

inquisition felt that our religion was better than theirs. Nearly all requested to

be admitted members of the established church; even some bachelors of the

University  of  Salamanca,  who  chanced  to  be  at  Barcelona,  requested

instruction. The greater part soon became enlightened, with the exception of a

certain  Don  Inigo-y-Medroso,  y-Comodios,  y-Papalamiendos,  who

obstinately adhered to his opinions.  CHAPTER III.

  SUMMARY OF THE CONTROVERSY OF THE "BUTS," BETWEEN

MR.  FREIND  AND  DON  INIGO-Y-MEDROSO,  Y-COMODIOS,  Y-

PAPALAMIENDOS, BACHELOR OF SALAMANCA.

  The following is a summary of the pleasant disputation, which our dear

friend Freind and the Bachelor Don Papalamiendos held, in the presence of

the Earl of Peterborough. This familiar conversation was called the dialogue

of the "Buts." As you read it you will discover why.

  THE BACHELOR.-But, sir, notwithstanding all the fine things you have

said, you must admit that your respectable established church did not exist

before the time of Don Luther and Don Ecolampade; consequently, it is quite

new, and can hardly be said to belong to the family.

    FREIND.-You might as well say I am not a descendant of my grandfather,

because another branch of the family, living in Italy, seized on his will, and

my claims. I have fortunately found them again; and it is now quite clear that

I  am  my  grandfather's  grandson.  You  and  I  are,  as  it  were,  of  the  same

family; but with this difference. We read our grandfather's testament in our

mother tongue, while you are forbidden to read it in yours. You are the slaves

of a foreigner; we listen to the dictates of reason.

  THE BACHELOR.-But suppose your reason should lead you astray? For,

in  a  word,  you  have  no  faith  in  our  University  of  Salamanca,  which  has

declared the infallibility of the pope, and his indisputable control of the past,

the present, the future, and the paulo-post-future.

    FREIND.-Neither did the apostles. It is written that Peter, who denied his

master Jesus, was severely rebuked by Paul. I have not examined the case to

see which was in the wrong; perhaps, as is the case in most disputes, neither

was right; but I do not find one passage in the Acts of the Apostles to prove

that Peter was considered the master of his companions, and of the paulo-

post-future.

  THE BACHELOR.-But St. Peter was certainly archbishop of Rome; for

Sanchez tells us that this great man came there in the reign of Nero, and filled

the archbishop's throne twenty-five years under the same Nero, who onlyreigned  thirteen.  Besides,  it  is  a  matter  of  faith,  and  Don  Gullandus,  the

prototype of the inquisition, affirms it (for we never read the Holy Bible), that

St. Peter was at Rome during a certain year, for he dates one of his letters

from Babylon. Now, since Babylon is visibly the anagram of Rome, it is clear

that the pope by divine right is lord of the world; moreover, all the licentiates

of  Salamanca  have  shown  that  Simon  Grace-of-God,  first  sorcerer  and

counsellor of state at the court of Nero, sent his compliments by his dog to

Simon Barjona, otherwise called St. Peter, as soon as he came to Rome; that

St.  Peter,  who  was  scarcely  less  polite,  sent  also  his  dog  to  compliment

Simon  Grace-of-God;  and  then  they  diverted  themselves  by  trying  which

could soonest raise from the dead a cousin german of Nero's; that Grace-of-

God only succeeded in effecting a partial restoration, while Barjona won the

game by wholly restoring the dead man to life; that Grace-of-God sought to

have  his  revenge  by  flying  through  the  air  like  Saint  Dædalus;  and  that

Barjona broke his legs, by making him fall. On this account St. Peter received

the Martyr's crown, being crucified with his heels upward. Therefore we have

proved that his holiness the pope ought to reign over all who wear crowns;

that he is lord of the past, the present, and of all the futures in the world.

  FREIND.-It  is  clear  these  things  happened  in  the  days  when  Hercules

separated at a stroke the two mountains Calpe and Abyla, and crossed the

straits of Gibraltar in his goblet. But it is not on such histories, however

authentic they may be, that we base our religion. We found it on the gospel.

  THE BACHELOR.-But, sir, on what passages of the gospel? I have read a

portion of the gospel in our theological tracts. Do you base it on the descent

of the angel to announce to the Virgin Mary that she had conceived by the

Holy Ghost? On the journey of the three kings after the star? On the massacre

of all the children of the country? On the trouble the devil took to carry God

into the wilderness, to place him on a pinnacle of the temple, and on the

summit of a mountain from whence he beheld all the kingdoms of the world?

On the miracle of water changed into wine at a village wedding? On the

miracle of two thousand pigs drowned by the devil in a lake at the command

of Jesus? On-?

    FREIND.-Sir, we respect these things because they are in the gospel; but

we never speak of them, because they are too far above our weak human

reason.  THE BACHELOR.-But they say you never call the Holy Virgin, Mother

of God?

    FREIND.-We revere and cherish her. But we think she cares very little for

the titles given her in this world. She is never styled the Mother of God in the

gospel. In the year 431, there was a great dispute at the council of Ephesus to

ascertain if Mary was Theotocos; and if Jesus Christ, being at the same time

God and the son of Mary, Mary could be at the same time mother of God the

Father and God the Son. We do not enter into these disputes of Ephesus. The

Royal Society at London does not concern itself with such controversies.

  THE BACHELOR.-But, sir, you talk of Theotocos. What may Theotocos

mean, if you please?

  FREIND.-It  means  Mother  of  God.  What,  are  you  a  Bachelor  of

Salamanca, and don't understand Greek?

  THE BACHELOR.-But Greek! Of what use can Greek be to a Spaniard?

But, sir, do you believe that Jesus Christ has one nature, one person, and one

will; or two natures, two persons, and two wills; or, one will, one nature, and

two persons; or, two wills, two persons and one nature; or,-?

  FREIND.-This, also, belongs to the Ephesian controversy and does not

concern us.

  THE BACHELOR.-But what does concern you, then? Do you suppose

there  are  only  three  persons  in  God,  or  that  there  are  three  Gods  in  one

person? Does the second person proceed from the first person, and the third

from the two others, or from the second intrinsecus, or only from the first?

Has the father all the attributes of the son except paternity? And does the

third person proceed by infusion, by identification, or by spiration?

    FREIND.-This question is not mooted in the gospel. St. Paul never wrote

the name of the Trinity.

  THE BACHELOR.-But, you always refer to the gospel, and never make

mention  of  St.  Bonaventura,  of  Albert  the  Great,  of  Tambourini,  of

Gullandus, of Escobar.

  FREIND.-Because I do not call myself a Dominican, a Franciscan, or a

Jesuit. I am satisfied with being a Christian.  THE  BACHELOR.-But  if  you  are  a  Christian,  tell  me  if  you

conscientiously think the rest of mankind will be damned?

  FREIND.-It does not become me to limit the compassion or the justice of

God.

  THE BACHELOR.-But to come to the point, if you are a Christian, what

do you believe?

  FREIND.-I believe with Jesus Christ that we ought to love God and our

neighbor, forgive our enemies, and do good for evil. These are the maxims of

Jesus. So true are they, that no legislator, no philosopher, ever had other

principles before him, and it is impossible that there can be any other. These

truths  never  have  and  never  can  meet  with  contradiction,  save  from  our

passions.

  THE  BACHELOR.-But,  in  regard  to  the  passions,  is  it  true  that  your

bishops, priests, and deacons are all married?

    FREIND.-Quite true. St. Joseph, who passed for the father of Jesus, was

married. James the Less, surnamed Oblia, brother of our Lord, was his son,

who, after the death of Jesus, spent his life in the temple. St. Paul-the great

St. Paul-was a married man.

  THE BACHELOR.-But Grillandus and Molina assert the contrary.

  FREIND.-Let  them  say  what  they  please,  I  prefer  believing  St.  Paul

himself on the subject. In I. Corinthians, ix: 4-7. he says: "Have we not power

to eat and to drink? Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well

as other apostles, and as the brethren of the lord, and Cephas. Or I only and

Barnabas, have we not power to forbear working? Who goeth a warfare at

any time at his own charges? Who planteth a vineyard and eateth not of the

fruit thereof?"

  THE BACHELOR.-But, sir, did St. Paul really say that?

    FREIND.-Yes, he said that and very much more.

  THE BACHELOR.-But, really, that prodigy of the efficacy of grace?-

  FREIND.-It is true, sir, that his conversion was a great miracle. I admit,

from the Acts of the Apostles, that he was the most cruel satellite of the

enemies of Jesus. The Acts say that he assisted at the stoning of Stephen. Headmits himself, that when the Jews condemned to death a follower of Christ,

he would see to the execution of the sentence, "detuli sententiam", I admit

that Abdia, his disciple, and the translator Julius, the African, accused him of

putting to death James Oblia, the brother of our Lord; but his persecutions

increase the wonder of his conversion, and by no means prevented his having

a wife. I assure you he was married. St. Clement of Alexandria expressly

declares it.

  THE BACHELOR.-But St. Paul, then, was a worthy man of God! Really,

I am grieved to think he assassinated St. Stephen, and St. James, and am

surprised to find he traveled to the third heaven. But pray continue.

    FREIND.-We gather from St. Clement of Alexandria that St. Peter had

children;  one  St.  Petronilla  is  mentioned  among  them.  Eusebius,  in  his

History of the Church says that St. Nicolas, one of the first disciples, had a

very handsome wife; and that the disciples blamed him for being over-fond

and jealous. "Sirs," said he, "let any one take her who likes; I give her to

you."

  In the Jewish economy, which should have lasted for ever, but to which

nevertheless  the  Christian  dispensation  succeeded,  marriage  was  not  only

permitted, but expressly enjoined on priests, since they were always of the

same race. Celibacy was considered infamous.

  It is certain that celibacy could not have been considered a very pure and

honorable  state  by  the  first  Christians,  since  we  find  among  the  bishops

excommunicated by the first councils, chiefly those who oppose the marriage

of priests; such as Saturnians, Basilidians, Montanists, Encrasists, and other

ans  and  ists.  This  accounts  for  the  wife  of  Gregory  of  Nazianze  bearing

another Gregory of Nazianze, and enjoying the inestimable felicity of being

at  one  and  the  same  time  the  wife  and  mother  of  a  canonized  saint,-a

privilege which even St. Monica, the mother of St. Augustin, did not enjoy.

  By the same reason I might name as many and even more of the ancient

bishops who were married, and account for your not having had in the earlier

ages of the church bishops and popes who indulged in fornication, adultery,

and even worse crimes. Things are not so now. This is also the reason why

the Greek church, the mother of the Latin church, allows priests to marry. In

a word, the reason why I myself am married, and have a son, as fine a fellowas you can wish to see.

  Besides, my dear bachelor, have you not in your church seven sacraments

which  are  outward  signs  of  things  invisible?  Does  not  a  bachelor  of

Salamanca  enjoy  the  advantage  of  baptism  as  soon  as  he  comes  into  the

world;  of  confirmation  as  soon  as  he  has  committed  a  few  follies  or

understands those of others; of communion, though a little different from

ours, when he is fourteen years of age; of holy orders, when they shave the

crown of his head and give him a living of twenty, thirty, or forty thousand

piastres;  and  lastly  of  extreme  unction,  when  he  is  ill?  Must  he  then  be

deprived of the sacrament of marriage, when he is in health? Especially when

God united Adam and Eve in marriage: Adam, the first bachelor in the world,

since, according to your schools, he had knowledge by infusion; Eve, the first

female bachelor, since she tasted the tree of knowledge before her husband.

  THE BACHELOR.-But, if things are so, I may cease my "Buts." This is

certain,  I  adopt  your  religion;  I  will  belong  to  the  established  church  of

England; will marry an honest woman, who at least will pretend to love me

while I am young, take care of me when I grow old, and whom I will bury

decently, should I survive her. I think this is better than roasting men and

enticing  girls  after  the  fashion  of  my  cousin  Don  Caracucarador,  the

inquisitor of the faith.

  This is a faithful summary of the conversation between Mr. Freind and the

Bachelor Don Papalamiendos, since called by us Papa Dexando. This curious

dialogue was drawn up by Jacob Hull, one of my lord's secretaries.

  After this conversation the Bachelor took me aside and said:

  "This Englishman, whom I took at first for an anthropagus, must be a very

good man; for he is a theologian and can keep his temper."

  I informed him that Mr. Freind was tolerant, or a quaker, and a descendant

of  the  daughter  of  William  Penn,  who  founded  Philadelphia.  "Quaker,

Philadelphia," he cried, "I never heard of those sects."

  I gave him some information on the subject. He could scarcely believe me.

It seemed to him like another universe. And, indeed, he was in the right.


  CHAPTER IV.  JOHN RETURNS TO LONDON, AND IS LED INTO BAD COMPANY.

  While  our  worthy  philosopher  Freind  was  enlightening  the  priests  of

Barcelona, and his son John delighting the ladies, Lord Peterborough lost all

favor  with  the  queen  and  arch-duke  for  seizing  Barcelona  for  them.  The

courtiers censured him for taking the city contrary to all rule, with an army

less  strong  by  half  than  the  garrison.  At  first  the  arch-duke  was  highly

incensed; and our friend was obliged to print an apology for the general. Yet

this arch-duke, who had come to conquer Spain, had not the worth of his

chocolate. All Queen Anne had given him was squandered.

  Montecuculi, in his Memoirs, says three things are necessary to maintain a

war; 1st, money, 2nd, money, and 3rd, money. The arch-duke wrote from

Guadalaxara,  where  he  was  on  the  11th  of  August,  1706,  to  Lord

Peterborough, a long letter signed "Yo el Rey," in which he begged him to

hasten to Genoa and raise on credit £100,000. So our Sartorius, from general

of an army, thus became a Genoese banker. He communicated his distress to

our friend Freind. They started for Genoa. I went with them, for you know

my heart leads me thither. I admired the skill and spirit of conciliation my

friend displayed in this delicate business. I saw at once that intelligence may

meet every exigency. Our great Locke was a physician; he became the first

metaphysician in Europe, and restored the value of the British coinage. In

three  days  Freind  raised  the  £100,000;  but  the  court  of  Charles  the  VI.

contrived to squander it in three weeks. After this, the general, accompanied

by his theologian, was obliged to repair to London to justify himself before

the  parliament  for  conquering  Catalonia  against  all  rule,  and  for  ruining

himself in the common cause. The affair was protracted and vexatious, as are

all party disputes.

  You know that Mr. Freind was a member of parliament before he became

a  priest;  and  he  is  the  only  person  who  has  been  allowed  to  combine

functions so opposed. One day, when Freind was thinking over a speech he

intended  to  deliver  in  the  house  (of  which  he  was  a  most  respectable

member),  a  Spanish  lady  was  announced  as  desirous  of  seeing  him  on

particular business. It was Donna Boca Vermeja herself, and in tears. Our

good friend ordered a luncheon. She took some refreshment, dried her eyes,

and thus began:  "You will remember, sir, when you went to Genoa, you ordered your son

John to leave Barcelona for London, and to commence his duties as a clerk in

the  exchequer,  a  post  which  your  influence  had  obtained  for  him.  He

embarked in the Triton with a young bachelor of arts, Don Papa Dexando,

and others whom you had converted. You may well suppose that I, with my

dear friend Las Nalgas, accompanied them."

  Boca Vermeja then told him, again shedding tears, how John was jealous,

or affected to be jealous, of the bachelor,-how a certain Madame Clive-Hart,

a very bold, spiteful, masculine, young married lady, had enslaved his mind,-

how he lived with libertines who had no fear of God,-how, in a word, he

neglected Boca Vermeja for the artful Clive-Hart; and all because Clive-Hart

had a little more red and white in her complexion than poor Boca Vermeja.

  "I will look into the matter at leisure," said the worthy Mr. Freind. "I must

now attend parliament, to look after Lord Peterborough's business."

  Accordingly, to parliament he went; where I heard him deliver a firm and

concise discourse, free from commonplace epithets, and circumlocutions. He

never invoked a law or a testimony. He quoted, enforced, and applied them.

He  did  not  say  they  had  taken  the  religion  of  the  court  by  surprise,  by

accusing lord Peterborough of exposing Queen Anne's troops to risk; because

it  had  nothing  to  do  with  religion.  He  did  not  call  a  conjecture  a

demonstration,  nor  forget  his  respect  to  an  august  parliament,  by  using

common jokes. He did not call Lord Peterborough his client, because client

signifies a plebian protected by a senator. Freind spoke with confidence and

modesty; he was listened to in silence, only disturbed by cries of "Hear him,

hear him."

  The House of Commons passed a vote of thanks to Earl Peterborough,

instead of condemning him. His lordship obtained the same justice from the

House of Peers, and prepared to set out with his dear Freind to deliver the

kingdom of Spain to the arch-duke. This did not take place, solely because

things do not always turn out as we wish them to.

  On leaving the house, our first care was to enquire after the health of John.

We  learnt  that  he  was  leading  a  dissipated  and  debauched  life  with  Mrs.

Clive-Hart, and a party of young men,-intelligent,-but atheists, who believed:

  "That man is in no respect superior to the brutes;-that he lives and dies asthey do;-that both spring from and both return to the earth;-that wisdom and

virtue consist in enjoyment and in living with those we love, as Solomon says

at the end of the 'Coheleth,' which we call 'Ecclesiastes.'"

  These sentiments were chiefly advanced among them by one Warburton,

[1]  a  very  forward  licentious  fellow.  I  have  glanced  at  some  of  the  poor

author's MSS., which heaven grant may not one day be printed. Warburton

pretends that Moses did not believe in the immortality of the soul, because he

never  speaks  of  it,  and  considers  that  to  be  the  only  proof  of  his  divine

mission. This absurd conclusion leads to the supposition that the religion of

the Jews is false. Infidels thence argue that ours, being founded thereon, is

false also; and ours, which is the best of all, being false, all others are, if

possible, still more false: therefore there is no religion. Hence some conclude

that  there  is  no  God.  Let  us  add  to  these  conclusions,  that  this  little

Warburton is an intriguing, slandering fellow. See what peril!

  But worse than all, John was head over ears in debt, and had a strange way

of  paying.  One  of  his  creditors  came  to  him  with  a  claim  for  a  hundred

guineas, while we were in the house. John, who always appeared polite and

gentle,  fought  his  creditor,  and  paid  him  with  a  sword-wound.  It  was

apprehended the wounded man would die; and John, notwithstanding lord

Peterborough's protection, ran the risk of imprisonment and hanging.

  [1] In 1737 Bishop Warburton published his famous work, The Divine

Legation of Moses, in which he asserted, "that the doctrine of a future state of

reward  and  punishment  was  omitted  in  the  books  of  Moses,"  and  then

proceeded  to  demonstrate  "from  that  very  omission,  that  a  system  which

could dispense with a doctrine, the very bond and cement of human society,

must have come from God, and that the people to whom it was given must

have been placed under His immediate superintendence." In other words, the

divine origin of the Mosaic "system" is demonstrated, because Moses did not

teach to the chosen people the doctrine of a future life beyond the grave.

Voltaire clearly saw the fallacy of this fantastic argument, and has not failed

to severely satirize the right reverend author.


  Robert  Carruthers,  Esq.,  in  his  Life  of  Alexander  Pope  styles  Bishop

Warburton "a learned, turbulent, ambitious adventurer"-"an indefatigable andunscrupulous divine," and says of The Divine Legation of Moses, that it was

"so learned, so novel, so paradoxical, so arrogant and absurd, that it took the

world as it were by storm, and challenged universal attention."


  Dr. Johnson says that Warburton's "diction is coarse and impure, and his

sentences  are  unmeasured;"  and  a  writer  in  the  seventh  volume  of  the

Quarterly Review (as quoted by George Godfrey Cuningham, Esq., in his

Lives  of  Eminent  and  illustrious  Englishmen)  says:  "the  rudeness  and

vulgarity of his manners as a controvertist, removed all restraints of decency

or decorum in scattering his jests about him. His taste seems to have been

neither  just  nor  delicate."  He  combined  "the  powers  of  a  giant  with  the

temper of a ruffian."


  Gibbon, in his History of Christianity, pointedly alludes to the author of

The  Divine  Legation  of  Moses,  and  satirically  styles  the  omission  of  the

doctrine of immortality from the law of Moses, as "a mysterious dispensation

of providence." "The real merit of Warburton," he says, "was degraded by the

pride and presumption with which he pronounced his infallible decrees."-E.


  CHAPTER V.

  THEY WANT TO GET JOHN MARRIED.

  You remember the anguish of the venerable Freind when he learned that

John was in the prison of the inquisition at Barcelona. Imagine his rage when

he learned of the debauchery and dissipation of the unfortunate lad, his way

of  paying  debts,  and  his  danger  of  getting  hanged!  Yet  Freind  restrained

himself. This excellent man's self-command is really astonishing. His reason

regulates his heart, as a good master rules his servants. He does every thing

reasonably,  and  judges  wisely  with  as  much  celerity  as  hasty  people  act

rashly.

  "This is no time to lecture John," said he. "We must snatch him from the

precipice."

  You  must  know  that  the  day  previously,  our  friend  had  come  into  a

handsome sum, left him by George Hubert, his uncle. He went himself insearch of our great surgeon, Cheselden. We found him at home, and then

proceeded together to the wounded creditor. The wound was inspected. It was

not dangerous. Freind gave the sufferer a hundred guineas as a first step, and

fifty others by way of reparation, and then asked forgiveness for his son.

Indeed, he expressed his regret so touchingly, that the poor man embraced

him, and, weeping, wished to return the money.

  This sight moved and surprised young Mr. Cheselden, whose reputation is

becoming very great, and whose heart is as kind as his hand is skillful.

  I was carried beyond myself; never had I admired and loved our friend so

much.

  On returning home, I asked him if he did not intend to send for his son,

and to admonish him.

  "No," said he. "Let him feel his faults before I speak of them. Let us sup

together  to-night.  We  will  see  what  in  honesty  I  ought  to  do.  Examples

correct better than reprimands."

  While waiting for supper, I called on John. I found him in the state which

all men experience after their first crime,-that is, pale, with sunken eyes and

hoarse voice,-absent, and answering at random when spoken to.

  I told him what his father had just done.

  He looked at me steadily, then turned away to dash a tear from his eye. I

argued well from this, and began to hope that John would yet prove a worthy

man. I felt ready to clasp him in my arms, when Madame Clive-Hart came in,

accompanied by a wild fellow, called Birton.

  "Well," said the lady, laughing, "have you really killed a man to-day?

Some tiresome fellow. 'Tis well to rid the world of such people. When you

are next in the killing mood, pray think of my husband. He plagues me to

death."

  I surveyed this woman from head to foot. She was handsome, but there

was  something  sinister  in  her  countenance.  John  dared  not  reply,  and,

confused by my presence, looked downward.

  "What's the matter?" said Birton. "You look as if you had done something

wrong. I come to give you absolution. Here is a little book I have just boughtat Lintot's. It proves as clearly as two and two make four, that there is neither

God, nor vice, nor virtue,-a very consoling fact! So, let us drink together."

  On hearing this singular discourse, I withdrew quickly, and represented to

Mr. Freind how much his son required his advice.

  "I see it as clearly as you do," said this kind father; "but let us begin by

paying his debts."

  They were all discharged the next day. John came and threw himself at his

father's feet. Will you believe it? The father made no reproaches. He left him

to conscience; only observing, "Remember, my son, there is no happiness

apart from virtue."

  Mr. Freind then saw that the bachelor married Boca Vermeja, who really

loved him, notwithstanding her tears for John. Women know how to confuse

such  feelings  wonderfully.  One  would  almost  say  that  their  hearts  are  a

bundle of contradictions, perhaps because they were originally formed from

one of our ribs.

  Our generous Freind gave her also a dowry, and took care to secure places

for his converts. It is not enough to take care of people's souls, if we neglect

to provide for their present wants.

  After performing these good actions, with his astonishing sang froid, he

concluded he had nothing more to do to restore his son to virtue, than to

marry him to a young person of beauty, virtue, talents, and some wealth.

This, indeed, was the only way to wean him from the detestable Clive-Hart,

and others, whom he frequented.

  I had heard speak of a Miss Primerose, a young heiress, brought up by her

relative,  Lady  Hervey.  The  Earl  of  Peterborough  introduced  me  to  Lady

Hervey. I saw Miss Primerose, and considered her a proper person to fulfill

the  wishes  of  my  friend.  John,  in  the  midst  of  his  dissipation,  had  great

reverence and even affection for his father. He was chiefly affected that his

father had never blamed him for his follies. Debts paid without informing

him;  wise  counsels  seasonably  given,  and  without  reprimand;  proofs  of

friendship given from time to time, yet free from the familiarity which might

depreciate them. All this went to John's heart, for he was both intelligent and

sensitive.  Lord  Peterborough  introduced  the  father  and  son  to  Lady  Hervey.  I

perceived that the extreme beauty of John soon made a favorable impression

on  Miss  Primerose;  for  I  saw  her  look  stealthily  at  him  and  blush.  John

seemed only polite; and Primerose admitted to Lady Hervey that she wished

his politeness might become love.

  The young man soon discovered the worth of this charming girl, though he

was the complete slave of Clive-Hart. He was like the Indian invited to gather

celestial fruit, but restrained by the claws of a dragon.

  But  here  the  recollection  of  what  I  witnessed  overwhelms  me.  Tears

moisten my paper. When I recover, I will resume my tale.


  CHAPTER VI.

  A TERRIBLE ADVENTURE.

  The marriage of John and the lovely Primerose was about to be celebrated.

Freind never felt more joy. I shared it. But the occasion was changed into one

of deep sorrow and suffering.

  Clive-Hart loved John, though constantly faithless. They say this is the lot

of those women who, violating modesty, renounce their honor. Especially she

deceived John for her dear Birton and for another of the same school. They

lived together in debauch; and, what is perhaps peculiar to our nation, they

had all of them sense and worth. Unfortunately, they employed their sense

against God. Madame Clive-Hart's house was a rendezvous for atheists. Well

for  them  had  they  been  such  atheists  as  Epicurus,  Leontium,  Lucretius,

Memmius,  and  Spinoza,-the  most  upright  man  of  Holland,-or  Hobbes,  so

faithful to his unfortunate king, Charles I.

  But  however  it  may  be,  Clive-Hart,  jealous  of  the  pure  and  gentle

Primerose, could not endure the marriage. She devised a vengeance, which I

conceive to be unsurpassed even in London, where I believe our fathers have

witnessed crimes of every kind. She learned that Miss Primerose, returning

from  shopping,  would  pass  by  her  door.  She  took  advantage  of  the

opportunity, and had a sewer opened, communicating with her premises.

  Miss Primerose's carriage, on its return, was obliged to draw up at this

obstruction. Clive-Hart goes out, and entreats her to alight and take somerefreshment, while the passage is being cleared. This invitation made Miss

Primerose hesitate; but she perceived John standing in the hall, and, yielding

to an impulse stronger than her discretion, she got out. John offered her his

hand. She enters. Clive-Hart's husband was a silly drunkard, as hateful to his

wife  as  he  was  submissive  and  troublesome  by  his  civility.  He  presents

refreshments to the young lady, and drinks after her. Mrs. Clive-Hart takes

them away instantly and brings others. By this time the street is cleared. Miss

Primerose enters her carriage, and drives to her mother's.

  She  soon  falls  sick,  and  complains  of  giddiness.  They  suppose  it  is

occasioned by the motion of the carriage. But the illness increased, and the

next day she was dying.

  Mr. Freind and I hastened to the house. We found the lovely creature pale

and livid, a prey to convulsions,-her lips open, her eyes glazed, and always

staring. Black spots disfigured her face and throat. Her mother had fainted on

her bed. Cheselden employed in vain all the resources of his art. I will not

attempt to describe Freind's anguish. It was intense. I hurried to Clive-Hart's

house, and found that the husband was just dead, and that the wife had fled.

  I sought John. He could not be found. A servant told me that his mistress

had besought him not to leave her in her misfortune, and that they had gone

off together, accompanied by Birton, no one knew whither.

  Overcome by these rapid and numerous shocks, terrified at the frightful

suspicions which haunted me, I hastened to the dying lady.

  "Yet," said I to myself, "if this abominable woman threw herself on John's

generosity, it does not follow that he is an accomplice. John is incapable of so

horrible and cowardly a crime, which he had no interest in committing, which

deprives him of a charming wife, and renders him odious to the human race.

Weak, he has allowed himself to be drawn away by a wretch, of whose crime

he was ignorant. He did not see, as I have done, Primerose dying; he never

would  have  deserted  her  pillow  to  accompany  the  poisoner  of  his  bride.

Oppressed  by  these  thoughts,  I  entered,  shuddering,  the  room  which  I

expected contained a corpse."

  She was still living. Old Clive-Hart died soon, because his constitution

was  worn  out  by  debauchery;  but  young  Primerose  was  sustained  by  a

temperament as robust as her blood was pure. She saw me, and enquired, in atender tone, after John. A flood of tears gushed from my eyes. I could not

reply. I was unable to speak to the father. I was obliged to leave her to the

faithful hands that served her.

  We went to inform his lordship of this disaster. He is as kind to his friends

as terrible to his foes. Never was there a more compassionate man with so

stern a countenance. He took as much pains to assist the dying lady, and to

overtake the abandoned woman, and discover John, as he had done to give

Spain to the arch-duke. But all our search proved in vain. I thought it would

kill Freind. Now we flew to the residence of Miss Primerose, whose dying

was  protracted,  now  to  Rochester,  Dover,  Portsmouth.  Couriers  were

dispatched every where. We wandered about at random, like dogs that have

lost the scent;-while the unfortunate mother expected hourly the death of her

child.

  At length we learned that a handsome lady, accompanied by three young

men and some servants, had embarked at Newport, in Monmouthshire, in a

little  smuggling  vessel  that  was  in  the  roads,  and  had  sailed  for  North

America.

  Freind  sighed  deeply  at  this  intelligence,  then  suddenly  recovering

himself, and pressing my hand, he said:

  "I must go to America."

  I replied, weeping with admiration: "I will not leave you. But what can

you do?"

  "Restore my only son," said he, "to virtue and his country, or bury myself

with him."

  Indeed, from our information, we could not doubt but he had fled thither

with that horrible woman, Birton, and the other villains of the party.

  The good father took leave of Lord Peterborough, who returned soon after

to Catalonia; and we went to Bristol and freighted a ship for the Delaware

and the bay of Maryland.

  Freind, knowing these coasts to be in the heart of the English possessions,

thought it right to go thither, whether his son had sought concealment in the

North or South.  He supplied himself with money, letters of credit, and provisions, and left

a confidential servant in London, to write to him by ships that were leaving

every week for Maryland or Pennsylvania.

  We started. The crew, judging from the placid countenance of my friend,

thought we were on an excursion of pleasure. But when he was alone with

me, his sighs expressed the depth of his anguish. At times I congratulated

myself on the happiness of consoling such a noble mind.

  A west wind kept us a long time about the Sorlingues. We were obliged to

steer for New England. What enquiries we made on every coast! What time

and toil were thrown away! At length a northeast wind arising, we steered for

Maryland. There, it was said, John and his companions had taken refuge.

  The fugitives had sojourned on the coast more than a month, and had

astonished the whole colony by indulgences in luxury and debauch, till then

unknown  in  that  part  of  the  world.  Then  they  disappeared;  no  one  knew

whither.

  We  advanced  into  the  bay,  intending  to  go  to  Baltimore  for  fresh

information.


  CHAPTER VII.

  WHAT HAPPENED IN AMERICA.

  On the way we found, to the right, a very handsome house. It was low, but

convenient and neat, placed between a spacious barn and a large stable; the

whole  enclosed  by  a  garden,  well  stocked  with  fruits  of  the  country.  It

belonged to an old man, who invited us to alight at his retreat. He did not

look  like  an  Englishman;  his  accent  showed  us  he  was  a  foreigner.  We

anchored and went on shore. The old man welcomed us cordially, and gave

us the best cheer to be had in the New World.

  We discreetly insinuated our wish to know to whom we were indebted for

so kind a reception.

  "I am," said he, "of the race you call savages. I was born on the Blue

Mountains, which bound this country in the west. In my childhood I was

bitten by a rattlesnake, and abandoned. I was on the point of death. The father

of  the  present  Lord  Baltimore,  falling  in  with  me,  confided  me  to  hisphysician; and to him I owe my life. I soon discharged the debt; for I have

saved his in a skirmish with the neighboring tribes. He gave me, in return,

this habitation."

  Mr. Freind enquired if he was of Lord Baltimore's religion?

  "How," said he, "would you have me profess another man's religion? I

have my own."

  This short and energetic answer made us reflect a little.

  "You have, then," said I, "your own law and your own God?"

  "Yes," he replied, with an assurance wholly free from pride. "My God is

there," and he pointed to heaven. "My law is here," and he put his hand on his

breast.

  My friend was struck with admiration, and, pressing my hand, he said:

  "This simple nature reasons more wisely than all the bachelors with whom

we conversed at Barcelona."

  He was anxious to know if he could gain any information respecting his

son John. It was a weight that oppressed him. He enquired if his host had

heard  speak  of  some  young  people,  who  had  made  a  great  noise  in  the

neighborhood.

  "Indeed I have," said he, "I received them in my house; and they were so

satisfied with the reception I gave them, that they have carried away one of

my daughters."

  Judge of my friend's distress at this intelligence. In his emotion, he could

not avoid exclaiming:

  "What! Has my son run away with your daughter?"

  "Good Englishman," said the host, "do not let that grieve you. I am glad to

find he is your son. He is handsome, well made, and seems courageous. He

did not run away with my dear Parouba; for you must know that Parouba is

her name, because it is mine. Had he taken off Parouba, it would have been a

robbery; and my five sons, who are now hunting some forty or fifty miles

from here, would not have endured such an affront. It is a great sin to thieve.

My daughter went of her own accord with these young people. She has gone

to  see  the  country,  a  pleasure  one  cannot  deny  to  one  of  her  age.  Thesetravelers will bring her back to me before a month is passed. I am sure of it.

They promised to do so."

  These words would have made me laugh, had not the evident distress of

my friend severely afflicted me.

  In the evening, just as we were about to start to take advantage of the

wind, one of Parouba's sons arrived out of breath, his face expressing horror

and despair.

  "What is the matter, my son? I thought you were hunting far away. Are

you wounded by some savage beast?"

  "No, father,-not wounded, yet in pain."

  "But whence do you come, son?"

  "From a distance of forty miles, without stopping; and I am almost dead."

  The  aged  father  makes  him  sit  down.  They  give  him  restoratives.  Mr.

Freind and I, his little brothers and sisters, with the servants, crowd around

him. When he recovered his breath, he exclaimed:

  "Alas, my sister Parouba is a prisoner of war, and will no doubt be killed."

  The worthy Parouba was grieved at this recital. Mr. Freind, feeling for him

as a father, was struck to the very heart. At last, the son informed us that a

party of silly young Englishmen had attacked, for diversion, the people of the

mountains. He said, they had with them a very beautiful lady and her maid;

and he knew not how his sister came to be with them. The handsome English

lady had been scalped and killed; and his sister captured.

  "I come here for aid against the people of the Blue Mountains. I will kill

them too, and will retake my dear sister, or perish."

  Mr. Friend's habits of self-command supported him in this trying moment.

  "God has given me a son," said he. "Let him take both father and son,

when the eternal decree shall go forth. My friend, I am tempted to think God

sometimes acts by a special providence, since he avenges in America crimes

committed in Europe, and since this wicked Clive-Hart died as she deserved.

Perhaps the Sovereign of the universe does in his government punish even in

this world crimes committed here. I dare not assert; I wish to think so; indeed

I should believe it, were not such an opinion opposed to all metaphysicallaws."

  After  these  sad  reflections  on  an  event  common  in  America,  Freind

resumed his usual demeanor.

  "I have a good ship," said he to his host, "with abundant stores. Let us go

up the gulf as near as we may to the Blue Mountains. My most anxious

business now is to save your daughter. Let us go to your countrymen, say I

bear the pipe of peace-that I am the grandson of Penn. That name alone will

suffice."

  At the name of Penn, so much revered throughout North America, the

worthy Parouba and his son felt the greatest respect and the greatest hope.

We embarked, and in thirty-six hours reached Baltimore.

  We were scarcely in sight of this almost desert place, when we saw in the

distance a numerous band of mountaineers descending to the plain, armed

with axes, tomahawks, and those muskets which Europeans so foolishly sold

to them, to procure skins. Already you might hear their frightful howlings.

From  another  side  we  saw  four  persons  approaching  on  horseback,

accompanied by others on foot. We were taken for people of Baltimore, come

there for the purpose of fighting. The horsemen galloped toward us, sword in

hand. Our companions prepared to receive them. Mr. Freind, observing them

steadily, shuddered for a moment; but soon resuming his sang-froid.

  "Do not stir, my friends," said he. "Leave all to me."

  He advanced alone and unarmed toward the party. In a moment, we saw

the chief let fall the bridle from his horse, spring to the ground, and fall

prostrate. We uttered a cry of surprise, and advanced. It was John himself,

who, bathed in tears, had fallen at the feet of his father. Neither of them was

able to speak. Birton, and the two horsemen with him, alighted. But Birton, in

his characteristic way, said:

  "My dear Freind, I did not expect to see you here. You and I seem born for

adventures. I am glad to see you."

  Freind,  without  deigning  to  reply,  looked  toward  the  army  of

mountaineers, now approaching us. He walked toward them, accompanied by

Parouba, who acted as interpreter.

  "Fellow countrymen," said Parouba, "behold a descendant of Penn, whobrings you the pipe of peace."

  At these words, the eldest of the tribe raising his hands and eyes to heaven,

exclaimed:

  "A son of Penn! He is welcome! May the Penns live for ever! The great

Penn is our Manitou, our god. He and his were the only Europeans who did

not deceive us, and seize on our land. He bought the territory we gave up to

him; he paid for it liberally; he maintained peace among us; he brought us

remedies for the few diseases we had caught from the Europeans. He taught

us new arts. We never dug up against him and against his children the hatchet

of war. For the Penns we always entertain respect."

  Freind immediately sent for thirty hams, as many pies and fowls, with two

hundred bottles of Pontac, from the ship. He seated himself close to the chief

of the Blue Mountains. John and his companions assisted at the festival. John

would  rather  have  been  a  hundred  feet  under  the  earth.  His  father  said

nothing to him; and this silence increased his confusion.

  Birton, who cared for nothing, seemed very jovial. Freind, before he began

to eat, said to Parouba:

  "One person, very dear to you, is waiting here. I mean your daughter."

  The  chief  of  the  Blue  Mountains  ordered  her  to  be  brought.  She  had

suffered no injury; she smiled to her brother and father, as if she had only

returned from a walk.

  I took advantage of the freedom of the meal, to enquire why the warriors

of the Blue Mountains had put to death Madame Clive-Hart, and had done

nothing to Parouba's daughter.

  "Because we are just," returned the chief. "That proud English woman

belonged to the party that attacked us. She killed one of our men by firing a

pistol behind him. We did nothing to Parouba, as soon as we ascertained that

she was a daughter of our tribes, and only came here for diversion. Every one

should be treated according to his desert."

  Freind was affected by this maxim, but he represented to them that the

custom of burning captives at the stake, was degrading to worthy people; and

that, with so much virtue, they should be less ferocious.  The chief then asked us what we did with those whom we killed in battle.

  "We bury them."

  "I understand. You leave them for worms to eat. Cannibals think proper to

give themselves the preference. Their stomachs are a more honorable grave."

  Birton supported with pleasure the opinions of the mountaineer. He said,

the  custom  of  boiling  and  roasting  a  neighbor  must  be  both  ancient  and

natural, since it prevailed in both hemispheres; and therefore it must be an

innate idea;-that men were hunted before beasts, because it was easier to kill

men than wolves;-that if the Jews, in their books, so long unknown, imagined

that a certain Cain killed a certain Abel, it could only be with a view to eat

him-that the same Jews admit they had often fed on human flesh;-that the

best historians describe the Jews as eating the bleeding flesh of Romans,

whom they massacred in Egypt, Cyprus, and Asia, in their revolts against the

emperors Trajan and Adrian.

  We  allowed  him  to  indulge  in  these  coarse  jokes,  which,  though

unfortunately true at the bottom, had neither Grecian wit nor Roman urbanity.

  Freind, without answering him, addressed the natives. Parouba translated,

phrase  by  phrase.  Tillotson  himself  never  spoke  with  more  force.  The

insinuating  Smaldridge  never  displayed  more  touching  graces.  The  great

secret of eloquence is to convince. He proved to them, accordingly, that the

execrable custom of burning captives, inspired a ferocity destructive to the

human race; for this reason, they were strangers to the comforts of society

and the tillage of the ground.

  At last, they all swore by their great Manitou, that they would not burn

men and women again.

  Thus, from a single conversation, Freind became their legislator, like an

Orpheus  taming  tigers.  In  vain  may  the  Jesuits  describe  their  miracles  in

letters which are rarely curious or edifying; they can never equal our good

friend.

  After  loading  the  chiefs  of  the  Blue  Mountains  with  presents,  he

conducted the worthy Parouba back to his residence. Young Parouba, with

his sister, accompanied us. The others went hunting in the distant forest.

  John, Birton, and his companions, also embarked in the ship.  Freind  persisted  in  his  plan  of  not  reproaching  his  son,  whenever  the

young scamp did wrong. He left him to self-examination, and to consume his

heart, as Pythagoras has it. Nevertheless, he took up the letter thrice, which

had been received from England, and looked at his son as he read it. The

young  man  would  then  cast  his  eyes  on  the  ground;  and  respect  and

repentance might be read on his face.

  Birton continued as gay and noisy as if he had just returned from the play.

He was in character like the late Duke of Rochester, extreme in debauchery,

bravery, sentiments, language, and, in his Epicurean philosophy, attaching

himself only to the extraordinary and soon disgusted even then; having the

turn of mind that mistakes probabilities for demonstrations; more wise and

eloquent than any young man of his age; but too indolent to be profound in

any thing.

  While dining with us on board, Mr. Freind said to me:

  "Indeed, my dear friend, I hope God will inspire these young people with

purer morals, and that Clive-Hart's terrible example will be a lesson to them."

  Birton, hearing these words, said, in a disdainful tone:

  "For  a  long  time  I  had  been  dissatisfied  with  that  wicked  Clive-Hart.

Indeed, I scarcely care more for her than I do for a trussed fowl. But do you

believe there exists (I don't know where) a being perpetually occupied in

punishing the wicked men and women who people and depopulate the four

quarters of our little world? Do you forget that the terrible Mary, daughter of

Henry VIII., was happy till her death? and yet she had caused the execution

of  eight  hundred  citizens,  of  both  sexes,  on  the  pretext  that  they  did  not

believe in transubstantiation and the pope. Her father, nearly as cruel, and her

husband,  more  profoundly  wicked,  spent  their  lives  in  enjoyment.  Pope

Alexander IV., worse than these, was still more fortunate. All his crimes

succeeded. He died at the age of seventy-two, rich and powerful, courted by

the kings of the age. Where, then, is this just and avenging God?"

  Mr. Freind, with austerity and calmness, replied:

  "It seems to me, sir, you ought not to say 'there is no God.' Remember,

Locke and Newton never pronounced that word but in a tone of reverence,

that every one remarked."  "What care I" returned Birton, "for two men's grimaces? How did Newton

look, when he wrote his Commentary on the Apocalypse? Or Locke, when he

wrote the Dialogue between a Parrot and the Prince Maurice?"

  Then Freind repeated the golden words which should be graven on every

heart:

  "Let us forget the dreams of great men; and remember the truths they have

taught us."

  This reply gave way to a well-sustained conversation, more interesting

than that of the bachelor of Salamanca. I sat in a corner and took notes. The

company  drew  round  the  disputants.  The  worthy  Parouba,  his  son,  and

daughter,  John's  debauched  companions,  and  John  himself,  with  his  head

resting on his hands,-all listened with eager attention.


  CHAPTER VIII.

  DIALOGUE BETWEEN FREIND AND BIRTON ON ATHEISM.

  FREIND.-I will not repeat to you, sir, the metaphysical arguments of our

celebrated  Clarke;  I  only  exhort  you  to  read  them  again.  They  are  rather

intended to convince than affect you. I shall confine myself to arguments

calculated to touch your heart.

  BIRTON.-You  will  gratify  me  very  much.  I  like  to  be  amused  and

interested. I hate sophisms. Metaphysical arguments seem to me like balloons

filled with air used between the disputants. The bladders burst; and nothing

remains.

  FREIND.-It is possible there may be some obscurity-some bladders-in the

deep things of Clarke, the respectable Arian. Perhaps he was deceived on the

subject of actual infinity. Perhaps, when he took upon himself to comment on

God, he follows too closely a commentator of Homer, who attributes ideas to

his author which he never entertained.

  At the words "infinity," "Homer," "commentators," the worthy Parouba

and his daughter, and even a few of the English, seemed disposed to go and

take  an  airing  on  the  deck.  But  Freind  promising  to  be  intelligible,  they

consented  to  remain.  I  explained  in  a  whisper  to  Parouba  scientific

expressions,  which  a  native  of  the  Blue  Mountains  was  not  likely  tounderstand so well as a doctor of Oxford or Cambridge.

  FREIND.-It would be sad, indeed, if we could not be sure of the existence

of  God  without  being  metaphysicians.  In  all  England,  scarcely  a  hundred

minds would be found capable of fathoming the mysteries of the for and

against; and the rest of the world would be enveloped in ignorance,-a prey to

brutal passions,-swayed by instinct alone,-and only capable of reasoning on

the vulgar notions of their carnal interests. To find out God, I only require

you to make one effort,-to open your eyes.

  BIRTON.-I see your aim. You are returning to the worn-out arguments

that the sun turns on its axis in twenty-five days and a half, in spite of the

absurd inquisition of Rome;-that the light comes to us reflected from Saturn

in fifteen minutes, in spite of the absurd supposition of Descartes;-that every

fixed star is a sun, like ours, surrounded by planets; that the countless stars,

scattered through space, obey mathematical laws, discovered and proved by

the  great  Newton;-that  a  catechist  announces  God  to  children,  and  that

Newton reveals him to the sage, as a philosophical Frenchman said, who was

persecuted in his own country for asserting as much. Do not trouble yourself

to  bring  before  me  the  ceaseless  order  which  prevails  in  all  parts  of  the

universe. All that exists must have order of some sort. Rarefied matter must

take  a  higher  place  than  denser  substances.  The  strongest  press  upon  the

weakest. Bodies moved with a greater impulse, progress more rapidly than

those moved with less. Things arrange themselves in this way of their own

accord. In vain, after drinking a pint of wine, like Esdras, would you talk to

me  for  a  hundred  and  sixty  hours  together  without  shutting  the  mouth,  I

should not be convinced. Do you wish me to adopt an eternal being, infinite

and immutable, who saw fit, (I do not know when,) to create from nothing,

things which change every moment, and spiders to disembowel flies? Would

you have me suppose, with the gossip Niewentyt, that God gave us ears that

we  might  have  faith?  since  faith  cometh  by  hearing.  No!  No!  I  will  not

believe these quacks who have sold their drugs at a good price to fools. I

keep to the little book of a Frenchman, who maintains that nothing exists nor

can exist but nature; that nature does all, and is all; that it is impossible and

contradictory that any thing can exist beyond ALL. In a word, I only believe

in nature.

    FREIND.-What if I tell you there is no such thing as nature; and that in us,around us, a thousand millions of leagues from us, all is art, without any

exception.

    BIRTON.-What? All art! That's something new.

    FREIND.-Few  observe  that.  Nothing,  however,  is  more  true.  I  shall

always say, make use of your eyes, and you will recognize and adore God.

Think how those vast globes, which you see revolve in their immense orbits,

observe deep mathematical laws. There is then a great calculator whom Plato

called the eternal geometrician. You admire those newly invented machines,

called orreries, because Lord Orrery invented them by imitating the maker. It

is a feeble copy of our planetary system and its revolutions; also the periods

of the changes of the solstice and equinox which bring us from day to day a

new polar planet. This period, this slow course of about twenty-six thousand

years,  could  not  be  effected  in  our  feeble  hands  by  human  orreries.  The

machine is very imperfect; it must be turned by a handle; yet it is a chef-

d'œuvre of the skill of our artisans. Conceive, then, the power and patience,

the genius, of the eternal architect, if we may apply such terms to the supreme

being.

  When I described an orrery to Parouba, he said:

  "If  the  copy  indicates  genius,  how  much  more  must  there  be  in  the

original?"

  All  present,  English  and  American,  felt  the  force  of  these  words,  and

raised their hands to heaven.

  Birton remained thoughtful. Then he cried:

  "What, all art? Nature the result of art? Can it be possible?"

    FREIND.-Now,  consider  yourself;  examine  with  what  art,  never

sufficiently explored, all is constructed within and without for all your wishes

and actions. I do not pretend now to lecture on anatomy. You know well

enough there is not one superfluous vessel, nor one that does not, in the

exercise of its functions, depend on neighboring vessels. So artificial is the

arrangement  throughout  the  body,  that  there  is  not  a  single  vein  without

valves and sluices, making a passage for the blood. From the roots of the hair

to the toes, all is art, design, cause, and effect. Indeed, we cannot suppress

feelings of indignation toward those who presume to deny final causes, andhave the rashness to say that the mouth was not made to eat and speak with-

that the eyes are not admirably contrived for seeing, the ears for hearing, the

nerves for feeling. Such audacity is madness. I cannot conceive it.

  Let  us  admit  that  every  animal  renders  testimony  to  the  supreme

fabricator.

  The  smallest  herb  perplexes  human  intellect.  So  true  is  this  that  the

aggregate toil of all men could not create a straw unless the seed be sown in

the earth. Let it not be said that the seed must rot in the earth to produce.

Such nonsense should not be listened to now.

  The company felt the force of these proofs more forcibly than the others,

because  they  were  more  palpable.  Birton  murmured:  "Must  I  then

acknowledge God? We shall see. It is not yet proved."

  John remained thoughtful, and seemed affected.

  FREIND.-No, my friends. We make nothing, we can do nothing. It is in

our power to arrange, unite, calculate, weigh, measure, but, to make! What a

word! The essential Being, existing by Himself, alone can make. This is why

quacks, who labor at the philosopher's stone, prove themselves such fools.

They boast that they create gold, and they cannot even create clay. Let us

then  confess,  my  friends,  that  there  is  a  necessary  and  incomprehensible

Being who made us.

  BIRTON.-If he exist, where is he? Why is he concealed? Has any one ever

seen him? Should the creator of good hide himself?

  FREIND.-Did you ever see Sir Christopher Wren, the architect of Saint

Paul's, when you were in London? Yet it is clear that church is the work of a

great architect.

    BIRTON.-Every one knows that Wren erected, at a great expense, the vast

edifice in which Burgess, when he preaches, sends us to sleep. We know very

well why and how our fathers built it. But why and how did God make the

universe from nothing? You know well the ancient maxim: "Nothing can

create nothing; nothing returns to nothing." No one ever doubted that truth.

Your  Bible  itself  says  that  your  God  made  heaven  and  earth,  though  the

heaven, that is, the assemblage of stars, is as superior to the earth, as the earth

itself is to one blade of grass. But your Bible does not tell us that God madeheaven  and  earth  from  nothing.  It  does  not  pretend  that  the  Lord  made

woman from nothing. She was kneaded in a very singular way, from a rib

taken from her husband's side. According to the Bible, chaos existed before

the world; therefore matter must be as eternal as your God.

  A slight murmur then went round the company; "Birton might be right,"

they said.

  FREIND.-I think I have proved to you that there is a supreme intelligence;

an eternal power to whom we owe our passing existence. I have not engaged

to tell you the how and the why. God has given me sufficient reason to know

that he exists, but not enough to discover whether matter has been subject to

him from eternity, or whether he created it in time. What have you to do with

the creation of matter, provided you acknowledge a God the ruler of matter

and of yourself? You ask me where God is? I do not know. I ought not to

know. I know that he is; I know that he is my maker; that he makes all, and

that we ought to depend on his goodness.

  BIRTON.-His goodness! Are you jesting with me? Did you not tell me to

make use of my eyes? Make use of yours. Glance at the world, and then talk

of the goodness of God.

  Mr. Freind saw that he had now reached the most difficult part of the

dispute, and that Birton was preparing a rude assault. He saw that the hearers,

especially  the  Americans,  together  with  himself,  required  a  little  respite.

Recommending himself therefore to God, they went on deck for exercise.

When tea was served, the disputation was renewed.


  CHAPTER IX.

  ON ATHEISM.

  BIRTON.-You  must  not  expect  such  success,  sir,  on  the  subject  of

goodness, as you have had on ingenuity and power. First, I shall touch on the

misconstructions of our globe, in many instances opposed to the cleverness

so  much  boasted  of;  then  I  intend  to  dwell  on  the  perpetual  crimes  and

misfortunes of the inhabitants; and you will judge of the great ruler's paternal

affection for them.

  I shall begin by telling you that in Gloucestershire, my county, when webreed horses, we rear them with care, in fine pasturage and good stables, with

hay and oats. Pray, what shelter and food had these poor Americans, when

we discovered their continent? They were obliged to scour over thirty or forty

miles for food. All the northern coast of the old world is exposed to the same

cruel necessity; and from Swedish Laponia to the Sea of Japan, a hundred

tribes spend a life as short as it is wretched, in the most complete want,

amidst eternal snows.

  Fine climates are continually exposed to destructive scourges. There we

walk  over  burning  precipices,  covered  by  fertile  plains,  which  prove  but

deadly snares. There is no hell but this, doubtless; and it opens a hundred

times beneath our feet.

  They tell us of an universal deluge, an event physically impossible, and at

which all sensible people laugh. But they console us by saying it only lasted

ten months. I wonder it did not put out the fires which have since destroyed

so many flourishing towns. Your St. Augustin tells us of a hundred cities

burnt or swallowed up in Lydia, by an earthquake. Volcanoes have several

times devastated lovely Italy. As a crowning misfortune, the inhabitants of

the Arctic Circle are not exempt from these subterranean fires. The Icelander,

always in alarm, has hunger staring him in the face, and a hundred feet of

flame  or  ice  to  the  right  or  left,  under  their  Mount  Hecla;  for  the  great

volcanoes are always found among terrible mountains.

  It is in vain to say that mountains of two thousand toises in elevation are

nothing on a globe nine thousand miles in diameter, or like the irregularities

of an orange compared with the bulk of that fruit-that it is scarcely one foot to

every three thousand feet. Alas! What then are we, if high mountains are but

as figures one foot high for every three thousand feet, or four inches for every

nine thousand inches? We are then animals absolutely imperceptible; yet we

are liable to be crushed by all that surrounds us, though our infinite littleness,

so closely bordering on nothing, might seem to secure us from all accidents.

Besides the countless cities, destroyed and re-destroyed like as many ant-

hills, what shall we say to the seas of sand that cross the centre of Africa, and

whose burning waves, raised by the wind, have buried entire armies? What is

the use of the vast deserts on the borders of Syria,-deserts so horrible that the

ferocious animals, called Jews, imagined they had reached Paradise when

they passed from these scenes of horror into a little corner of land where theycould cultivate a few acres? It is not enough that man (the noble creature)

should be so ill lodged, clothed, and fed, for so many ages. He comes into the

world to live for a few days, perplexed by deceitful hopes and real vexations.

His body, contrived with useless art, is a prey to all the ills resulting from that

very art. He lives between the dangers of poison and plague. No one can

remember  the  list  of  ills  we  are  subject  to;  and  the  modest  doctors  of

Switzerland pretend they can cure them all.

  While  Birton  said  this,  the  company  listened  with  attention  and  even

emotion. Parouba said "Let us see how the doctor will get over this."

  Even John said in a low tone: "On my word, he is right. I was a fool to be

so soon touched by my father's conversation."

  Mr. Freind waited till their imaginations were a little recovered from the

assault, and then resumed the discussion.

  FREIND.-A young theologian would answer these sad truths by sophisms,

backed with quotations from St. Basil and St. Cyril. For my part, I shall admit

that there are many physical evils in the world. I will not even lessen the

number, though Mr. Birton has seen fit to exaggerate. I ask you, my dear

Parouba,  is  not  your  climate  made  for  you?  It  cannot  be  injurious,  since

neither you nor your companions wish to leave it. Esquimaux, Icelanders,

Laplanders, Asiatics, and Indians, never think of leaving theirs. The reindeer,

which God has sent to clothe and feed them, die when transported to another

zone. Laplanders themselves die in southern climates. The south of Siberia is

too warm for them; here they would be burnt. It is evident that God made

every kind of animal and vegetable for the clime in which it thrives. Negroes,

a race of men so different to ours, are so thoroughly formed for their country,

that thousands of them have preferred death to slavery elsewhere. The camel

and ostrich are quite at home in the sands of Africa. The bull abounds in

fertile countries, where the grass is ever fresh for his nourishment. Cinnamon

and spice only grow in India. Barley is only useful in those countries where

God has appointed it to grow. From one end of America to the other, you

have different kinds of food. The vine cannot be brought to perfection in

England, nor in Sweden and Canada. This is the reason that in some countries

the elements of religious rites consist in bread and wine; and they do well to

thank  God  for  the  food  and  beverage  his  goodness  has  provided;  andAmericans would do well to thank him for their Indian corn and arrow-root.

Throughout the world God has suited all animals, from the snail to man, to

the countries in which he has placed them. Let us not reproach Providence

when we owe him praises.

  But to consider scourges, such as inundations, volcanoes, earthquakes. If

you confine your attention to the accidents which sometimes happen to the

wheels of the eternal machine, you may well consider God as a tyrant; but

observe his ceaseless benefits, and he becomes a compassionate father. You

have quoted Augustin and his account of the destruction of a hundred cities;

but  remember  the  African  rhetorician  often  contradicts  himself  and  was

prodigal of exaggerations in his writings. He wrote of earthquakes as he did

of  the  efficacy  of  grace,  and  the  damnation  of  children  dying  without

baptism. Has he not said in his thirty-seventh sermon, that he had seen people

at Ethiopia with one eye in the middle of the forehead like the Cyclops, and a

whole race without heads?

  We, who are not fathers of the church, ought not to go beyond nor to stop

short of truth; and the truth is, that of the houses destroyed, we cannot reckon

that more than one out of every hundred thousand, is destroyed by the fires

necessary to the due performance of the operations of the world.

  So essential to the nature of the universe is fire, that but for it there would

be no sun nor stars, no animals, vegetables, or minerals. The fire, placed

under  the  earth,  is  subject  to  fixed  natural  laws.  Some  disasters  may

nevertheless occur. You cannot say a man is a poor artisan when an immense

machine, formed by him, lasts unimpaired for years. If a man invented a

hydraulic engine to water a province, would you disparage his work because

it destroys some insects?

  I  have  shown  you  that  the  machine  of  the  world  is  the  work  of  an

intelligent  and  powerful  being;  you,  who  are  intelligent,  ought  to  admire

him,-you, who are laden with his gifts, ought to adore him.

  But how, you inquire, can the wretches who are condemned to languish

under incurable evils-how can they admire and love? I must tell you, that

such ills are generally brought on ourselves, or come to us from our fathers,

who abused their bodies, and not from the great fabricator. No disease but

decrepitude  was  known  in  America  till  we  introduced  strong  liquors,  thesource of all evils.

  Let  us  remember  that  in  Milton's  Poem,  the  simple  Adam  is  made  to

inquire if he will live long. Yes, is the reply, if you take nothing to excess.

Observe this rule, my friends. Can you require that God should let you live

for  ages,  as  the  reward  of  your  gluttony,  your  drunkenness,  your

incontinence, and your indulgence in infamous passions, which corrupt the

blood and necessarily shorten life?

  I approved of this reply. Parouba liked it; but Birton was not moved. I read

in John's eyes that he was still doubtful. Birton rejoined in these terms:

  BIRTON.-Since you have made use of common arguments, with a few

novel remarks, I may be allowed to follow your plan. If so good and powerful

a God existed, surely he would not have suffered evil to enter the world, nor

have devoted his creatures to grief and crime. If he cannot prevent evil, he is

not almighty; if he will not, he is cruel.

  The annals of the Brahmins only extend back 8,000 years; those of the

Chinese only 5,000. Our knowledge is but of yesterday; but, in that brief

space, all is horror. Murder has been the practice from one end of the earth to

the other; and men have been weak enough to give to those men who slew the

greatest number of their fellow creatures, the titles of heroes, demi-gods, and

even gods.

  In  America  there  were  left  two  great  nations,  beginning  to  enjoy  the

sweets  of  peace  and  civilization,  when  the  Spaniards  came  there  to  slay

eleven millions. They hunted men down with dogs; and King Ferdinand of

Castile gave those dogs pensions for their services.

  The heroes who subdued the New World, massacred innocent and helpless

babes, murdered peaceable and defenceless Indians, and committed the most

inhuman  barbarities!  They  roasted  King  Guatimozin,  in  Mexico,  on  a

gridiron.  They  hastened  to  Peru  to  convert  the  Inca,  Atahualpa.  A  priest,

named  Almagro,  son  of  a  priest  condemned  to  be  hanged  in  Spain  for

highway robbery, went there with one Pizarro, to inform the Emperor of the

Peruvians, by the voice of another priest, that a third priest, named Alexander

IV., polluted by incest, assassination, and homicide, had given, with his full

consent (proprio motu) and with full power, not only Peru, but one half of the

New  World,  to  the  King  of  Spain;  and  that  Atahualpa  ought  instantly  tosubmit, under pain of suffering the indignation of the apostles Peter and Paul.

But as this king knew as little of Latin as the priest who read the papal bull,

he was instantly declared heretical and incredulous.

  They burned Atahualpa, as they had burned Guatimozin. They slew his

people; and all to gain that hard and yellow earth which has only served to

depopulate and impoverish Spain; for it has made her neglect the cultivation

of the earth, which really nourishes man.

  Now, my dear Mr. Freind, if the fantastic and ridiculous being men call

the devil, had wished to make men in his image, would he have made them

otherwise? Do not, then, attribute such an abominable work to God.

  This speech brought the party round again to Birton's views. I saw John

rejoice  in  himself;  even  young  Parouba  heard  with  horror  of  the  priest

Almagro-of the priest who read the Latin bull-of the priest Alexander IV.of

all Christians who committed, under pretence of devotion, such crimes to

obtain gold. I confess, I trembled for Freind. I despaired of his cause. He

replied, however, without embarrassment.

    FREIND.-Remember, my friends, there is a God. This I proved to you,

you agreed to it, and after being driven to admit that he exists, you strive to

find out his imperfections, vices, and wickedness.

  I am far from asserting, with some reasoners, that private ills form the

general good. This is too ridiculous a sentiment. I admit, with grief, that the

world contains much moral and physical evil: but, since it is certain that God

exists, it is also certain that all these evils cannot prevent God's existence. He

cannot be cruel. What interest could make him so? There are horrible evils in

the world, my friends. Let us not swell their number. It is impossible that God

can be other than good; but men are perverse, and make a detestable use of

the liberty that God has given and ought to have given,-that is, the power of

exercising their wills, without which they would be simple machines, formed

by a wicked being, to be broken at his caprice.

  All enlightened Spaniards agree that a small number of their ancestors

abused  this  liberty  so  far  as  to  commit  crimes  that  make  human  nature

shudder. The second Don Carlos did what he could to repair the atrocities

committed by the Spaniards under Ferdinand and Charles V.  If there be crime in the world, my friends, there is virtue as well.

  BIRTON.-Ah! ha! virtue! A good joke! I should like to see this virtue.

Where is she to be found?

  At these words I could not contain myself.

  "You may find her," said I, "in the worthy Mr. Freind, in Parouba, even in

yourself when your heart is cleansed of its vices."

  He blushed; and John also. The latter looked down and seemed to feel

remorse. His father surveyed him with compassion and resumed.

    FREIND.-Yes, dear friends. If there have always been crimes; there have

always been virtues too. Athens had such men as Socrates, as well as such as

Anitus. Rome had Catos, as well as Syllas. Nero frightened the world by his

atrocities,  but  Titus,  Trajan,  and  the  Antonines,  consoled  it  by  their

benevolence, My friend will explain to Parouba who these great men were.

Fortunately, I have Epictetus in my pocket. Epictetus was a slave, but the

equal of Marcus Aurelius in mind. Listen; and may all who pretend to teach

men hear what Epictetus says to himself,-"God made me; I feel this; and shall

I  dare  to  dishonor  him  by  infamous  thoughts,  criminal  actions,  and  base

desires?" His mind agreed with his conversation. Marcus Aurelius, on the

throne of Europe and two parts of our hemisphere, did not think otherwise

than the slave Epictetus. The one was never humiliated by meanness, nor the

other dazzled by greatness; and when they wrote their thoughts it was for the

use of their disciples, and not to be extolled in the papers. Pray, in your

opinion, were not Locke, Newton, Tillotson, Penn, Clarke, the good man

called  "The  Man  of  Ross,"  and  many  others,  in  and  beyond  your  island,

models of virtue?

  You have alluded to the cruel and unjust wars of which so many nations

have  been  guilty.  You  have  described  the  abominations  of  Christians  in

Mexico and Peru; you might add the St. Bartholomew of France and the Irish

massacre. But are there not people who have always held in abhorrence the

shedding of blood? Have not the Brahmins in all ages given this example to

the world? and, even in this country, have we not near us, in Pennsylvania,

our Philadelphians, whom they attempt in vain to ridicule by the name of

Quakers, and who have always hated war?  Have we not the Carolinas, where the great Locke dictated laws? In these

two  lands  of  virtue,  all  citizens  are  equal;  all  consciences  are  free;  all

religions good; provided they worship God. There all men are brethren. You

have seen, Mr. Birton, the inhabitants of the Blue Mountains lay down their

arms before a descendant of Penn. They felt the force of virtue. You persist in

disavowing  it.  Because  the  earth  produces  poisons  as  well  as  wholesome

plants, will you prefer the poisons?

  BIRTON.-Oh, sir, your poisons are not to the point. If God made them,

they are his work. He is master, and does all. His hand directs Cromwell's,

when  he  signs  the  death  warrant  of  Charles  I.  His  arm  conducts  the

headsman's, who severs his head from the body. No, I cannot admit that God

is a homicide.

  FREIND.-Nor  I.  Pray,  hear  me.  You  will  admit  that  God  governs  by

general laws. According to these laws, Cromwell, a monster of fanaticism

and envy, determines to sacrifice Charles I. to his own interest, which, no

doubt,  all  men  seek  to  promote,  though  they  do  not  understand  it  alike.

According to the laws of motion established by God, the executioner cuts off

his head. But assuredly it is not God who commits the assassination by a

particular act of his will. God was not Cromwell, nor Ravaillac, nor Balthazar

Gerard, nor the preaching friar, James Clement. God does not permit, nor

command, nor authorize crime. But he has made man; he has established

laws of motion; and these eternal laws are equally executed by the good man

who stretches out his hand to the poor, and by the hand of a villain who

assassinates his brother. In the same way that God did not extinguish the sun,

or swallow up Spain, to punish Cortez, Almagro, and Pizarro, so, also, he

does not send a company of angels to London, nor make a hundred thousand

pipes of Burgundy to descend from heaven to delight the hearts of his dear

Englishmen,  when  they  do  good.  His  general  providence  would  become

ridiculous, if thus made manifest to every individual; and this is so striking,

that God never punishes a criminal immediately, by a decided stroke of his

power. He lets the sun shine on the evil and the good. If some wretches

expire in their crimes, it is by the general laws that govern the world. I have

read in a great book, by a Frenchman called Mézeray, that God caused our

Henry V. to suffer a painful death, because he dared to sit on the throne of a

Christian king.  The physical part of a bad action is the effect of the primary laws given to

matter by the hand of God. All moral evil is the effect of the liberty which

man abuses.

  In a word, without plunging into the fogs of metaphysics, let us remember

that the existence of God is proved. We have no longer to argue on that point.

Take God from the world, and does the assassination of Charles I. become

more lawful? Do you feel less aversion toward his executioner? God exists.

Enough. If he exists, he is just. Be, then, just also.

    BIRTON.-Your  argument  has  strength  and  force,  though  it  does  not

altogether exonerate God from being the author of physical and moral evil. I

see your way of justifying him makes an impression on the assembly; but

might it not be contrived that these laws should not involve such particular

misfortunes? You have proved to me a powerful and eternal God, and I was

almost on the point of believing. But I have some terrible objections to make.

Come, John, courage; let us not be cast down.


  CHAPTER X.

  ON ATHEISM.

  Night  closed  in  beautifully.  The  atmosphere  presented  a  vault  of

transparent azure, spangled with golden stars. Such a spectacle always affects

man, and inspires him with pleasant reveries. The worthy Parouba admired

the heavens, like a German when he beholds St. Peter's at Rome, or the Opera

at Naples, for the first time.

  "What a boldly arched vault," said he to Freind.

  "It is no arch at all," replied Freind. "The blue dome you behold is nothing

more than a collection of vapors, which God has so disposed and combined

with the mechanism of your eyes, that, wherever you may be, you are still in

the centre of your promenade, and perceive what is called heaven, arched

above your head."

  "And those stars, Mr. Freind?"

  "As I have already said, they are so many suns, round which other worlds

revolve. Far from being attached to that blue vault, remember that they are at

various  and  prodigious  distances  from  us.  That  star  is  twelve  hundredmillions of miles from our sun."

  Then, showing him the telescope he had brought, he pointed out to him the

planets;-Jupiter,  with  his  four  moons;  Saturn,  with  his  five  moons  and

mysterious ring.

  "It is the same light," said he, "which proceeds from all these luminaries,

and comes to us from this planet, in a quarter of an hour, and from that star,

in six months."

  Parouba was deeply impressed, and said: "The heavens proclaim a God."

All  the  crew  looked  on  with  admiration.  But  the  pertinacious  Birton,

unmoved, continued as follows:

  BIRTON.-Be it so! There is a God, I grant it. But what is that to you and

me? What connection is there between the superior Being and worms of the

earth? What relation is there between his essence and ours? Epicurus, when

he supposed a God in the planets, did well to conclude that he took no part in

our horrors and follies; that we could neither please nor offend him; that he

had no need of us; nor we of him. You admit a God, more worthy of the

human mind than the God of Epicurus, or the gods of the east and west: but if

you assert, with so many others, that God made the world and man for his

own glory; that he formerly required sacrifices of oxen for his glory; that he

appeared for his glory in our biped form, you would, I think, be asserting an

absurdity. The love of glory is nothing but pride. A proud man is a conceited

fellow, such as Shakespeare would introduce in his plays. This epithet cannot

suit God-it does not agree with the divine nature-any more than injustice,

cruelty or inconstancy. If God condescended to regulate the universe, it could

only be to make others happy. Has he done so?

  FREIND.-He has doubtless succeeded with all just spirits. They will be

happy one day; if they are not so now.

    BIRTON.-Happy! How? When? Who told you so?

    FREIND.-His justice.

  BIRTON.-Will  you  tell  me  that  we  shall  live  eternally-that  we  have

immortal souls, after admitting that the Jews, whom you boast of having

succeeded,  did  not  entertain  this  notion  of  immortality  up  to  the  time  of

Herod? This idea of an immortal soul was invented by the Brahmins, adoptedby the Persians, Chaldeans, and Greeks, and was for a long time unknown to

the insignificant and superstitious Jewish tribes. Alas! sir, how do we know

that we have souls? or how do we know but other animals, who have similar

passions, wills, appetites, and memories, so incomprehensible to us, have not

souls as well?

  Hitherto I have thought that there is in nature a power by which we have

the faculty of life in all our body,-walking with our feet,-taking with our

hands,-seeing with our eyes, feeling with our nerves, thinking with our brain,-

and that all this is called the soul, which is merely a vague word, signifying

the  unknown  principle  of  our  faculties.  With  you,  I  will  call  God  the

intelligent  principle  animating  nature;  but  has  he  condescended  to  reveal

himself to us?

  FREIND. Yes, by his works.

  BIRTON.-Has he revealed his laws, or spoken to us?

    FREIND.-Yes, by the voice of conscience. Is it true, that, if you killed

your Father and mother, your conscience would be a prey to a remorse as

terrible  as  it  would  be  involuntary?  Is  not  this  truth  avowed  and  felt

throughout the world? To come down to lesser crimes,-do they not all revolt

us at the first glance,-make us turn pale when we commit them for the first

time,-and leave in our hearts the stings of repentance?

  BIRTON.-I must confess it.

  FREIND.-God, in thus speaking to your heart, has commanded you to

abstain  from  crime.  As  for  equivocal  actions,  which  some  condemn  and

others  approve,  what  can  we  do  better  than  follow  the  grand  rule  of

Zoroaster,-"When  you  are  not  sure  whether  the  action  you  are  about  to

commit is good or bad, abstain from it."

  BIRTON.-An  admirable  maxim,  and  doubtless  the  most  beautiful  ever

advanced in morals. I admit that, from time to time, God has raised up men to

teach virtue to their degraded fellows. I apologize to you for speaking lightly

of virtue.

    FREIND.-Rather apologize to the Supreme Being, who can reward and

punish eternally.

    BIRTON.-What! will God punish me for yielding to passions he has givenme?

  FREIND.-He has given you passions, with which you can do both good

and evil. I do not tell you he will punish eternally; nor how he will punish; for

no one can know that. The Brahmins were the first to conceive a place of

imprisonment for those who had revolted from God; they were shut up in a

description of hell, called Onderah, but were gradually liberated at various

periods.  Hence  we  have  our  mixture  of  virtues,  vices,  pleasures,  and

calamities. This conceit is ingenious;-and that of Pandora and Prometheus

more so. Less polished nations have vulgurly imitated the same fable. These

inventions are the fancies of Eastern philosophy. All I can say is, that if by

abusing your liberty you have done evil, you cannot say God will not punish

you.

  BIRTON.-I have tried to convince myself that he could not; but in vain. I

confess I have abused my liberty, and that God may well punish me. But I

cannot be punished when I have ceased to exist.

  FREIND.-The best course is to do well, while you exist.

  BIRTON.-To do well! Well, I confess I think you are right. It is the best

course.

  I wish, my dear friend, you had witnessed the effect of Freind's discourse

on  both  the  English  and  Americans.  The  light  saucy  Birton  became

thoughtful and modest. John fell at his father's feet, with tears in his eyes, and

his father embraced him. I shall now proceed to relate the last scene of this

interesting disputation.

  BIRTON.-I conceive that the great master of the universe is eternal; but

we, who are but of yesterday, may we presume to expect immortality? All

beings around us perish, from the insect devoured by the swallow, to the

elephant, eaten by worms.

    FREIND.-Nothing perishes; but all things change. The genus of animals

and vegetables subsist, develop, and multiply. Why can you not allow that

God might preserve the principle which makes us act and think, of whatever

nature it may be? God preserve me from making a system; but certainly there

is in us something that wills and thinks. This something, formerly called a

monad, is imperceptible. God has given it us, or, rather, God has given us toit. Are you sure he cannot preserve it in being? Can you give me any proof?

  BIRTON.-No! I have sought for a proof in all the atheistical books within

my reach; and especially in the third Book of Lucrece; but I never found any

thing but conjectures.

    FREIND.-And shall we on simple conjecture give ourselves up to fatal

passions, and live like brutes, with no other restraint upon us than the fear of

men, rendered eternally cruel to each other by their mutual dread? For we

always wish to destroy what we fear. Think, sir! think seriously, my son

John. To expect neither reward nor punishment is the true spirit of atheism.

What is the use of a God who has no power over you? As though one should

say, "There is a very powerful king in China," I reply, "Success to him, let

him keep in his territory,-I, in mine. I care no more for him than he cares for

me. He has no more control over me than a canon of Windsor over a member

of  parliament."  Then  should  I  be  a  God  to  myself,-Sacrificing  the  whole

world  to  my  caprice?  And,  recognizing  no  law,  I  should  only  consider

myself? If others are sheep, I should become the wolf. If they choose to play

the chicken, I should play the fox.

  I will presume, (God forbid it), that all Englishmen are atheists. I will

allow that there may be some peaceable citizens, quiet by nature, rich enough

to be honest, regulated by honor, and so attentive to demeanor, that they

contrive to live together in society. They cultivate the arts which improve

morals; they live at peace in the innocent gaiety of honest people. But the

poor  and  needy  atheist,  sure  of  impunity,  would  be  a  fool  if  he  did  not

assassinate or steal to get money. Then would all the bonds of society be

sundered.  All  secret  crimes  would  inundate  the  world,  and,  like  locusts,

though  at  first  imperceptible,  would  overspread  the  earth.  The  common

people would become hordes of thieves, like those of our day, of whom not a

tenth part are hung at our sessions. They would pass their wretched lives in

taverns, with bad women. They would fight together, and fall down drunk

amidst the pewter pots with which they break each other's heads. Nor would

they rise but to steal and murder again,to recommence the same round of

hideous brutality. Who, then, would restrain great kings in their fury? An

atheist king is more dangerous than a fanatical Ravaillac.

  Atheism  abounded  in  Italy  during  the  fifteenth  century.  What  was  theconsequence? It was as common a matter to poison another, as to invite him

to supper. The stroke of the stiletto was as frequent as an embrace. There

were  then  professors  of  crime;  as  we  now  have  professors  of  music  and

mathematics. Churches, even, were the favorite scenes of murder, and princes

were slain at the altar. In this way, Pope Sextus IV. and archbishop of Pisa

put to death two of the most accomplished princes of Europe. Explain, my

dear  friend,  to  Parouba  and  his  children,  what  I  mean  by  a  pope  and  an

archbishop; but tell them we have no such monsters now. But to resume: A

Duke of Milan was also slain in a church. Every one knows the astonishing

horrors of Alexander VI. Had such morals continued, Italy would have been

more desolate than Peru after the invasion.

  Faith, then, in a God who rewards good actions, punishes the bad, and

forgives lesser faults, is most useful to mankind. It is the only restraint on

powerful men, who insolently commit crimes on the public, and on others

who  skillfully  perpetrate  offences.  I  do  not  tell  you  to  mingle,  with  this

necessary faith, superstitious notions that disgrace it. Atheism is a monster

that  would  prey  on  mankind  only  to  satisfy  its  voracity.  Superstition  is

another phantom, preying upon men as a deity. I have often observed that an

atheist may be cured; but we rarely cure superstition radically. The atheist is

generally an inquiring man, who is deceived; the superstitious man is a brutal

fool, having no ideas of his own. An atheist might assault Ephigenia when on

the point of marrying Achilles; but a fanatic would piously sacrifice her on

the altar, and think he did service to Jupiter. An atheist would steal a golden

vessel from the altar to feast his favorites, but the fanatic would celebrate an

auto-da-fe in the same church, and sing hymns while he was causing Jews to

be burned alive. Yes, my friends, superstition and atheism are the two poles

of a universe in confusion. Tread these paths with a firm step; believe in a

good God, and be good. This is all that the great philosophers, Penn and

Locke, require of their people.

  Answer me, Mr. Birton,-and you, my friends,-what harm can the worship

of God, joined to the happiness of a virtuous life, do you? We might be

seized with mortal sickness, even now while I am speaking; who, then, would

not wish to have lived innocently? Read, in Shakespeare, the death of our

wicked  Richard  III.,  and  see  how  the  ghosts  of  those  he  had  murdered

haunted his imagination. Witness the death of Charles IX. after the horrors ofSt. Bartholomew. In vain his chaplain assured him he had done well. His

blood started from every pore; all the blood he had shed cried out against

him! Believe me, all these monsters were tortured by remorse, and died in

despair.

  Birton and his friends could contain themselves no longer. They fell at

Freind's feet, "Yes," said Birton, "I believe in God, and I believe you."


  CHAPTER XI.

  RETURN TO ENGLAND-JOHN'S MARRIAGE.

  We were already near Parouba's house; and we supped there. John could

eat nothing. He sat apart in tears. His father went to console him.

  "Ah!" said John, "I do not deserve such a father. I shall die of shame for

yielding to the fascination of that wicked Clive-Hart. I am the cause of Miss

Primerose's death; just now, when you talked of poison, I shuddered; for I

thought I saw Clive-Hart presenting the horrible draught to Primerose. How

could I have so far lost myself as to accompany so vile a creature? I was

blind. I did not discover my error till she was taken by the savages. In a fit of

rage she almost admitted her guilt. From that moment, I have loathed her;

and, for a punishment, the form of Primerose is ever before me, and seems to

say, 'I died because I loved you.'" His father said a blameless life could alone

repair his past errors.

  The next day we sailed for England, after giving presents to the Paroubas.

Tears mingled with our adieus; and Birton, who had been only giddy, already

seemed a reasonable person.

  When we were out at sea, Freind said to John, in my presence: "Do you

still cherish the memory of the amiable Primerose?" These words so wrung

the heart of the young man, that I feared he would throw himself into the sea.

  "Console yourself, then," said Freind. "Miss Primerose is alive, and loves

you still."

  Freind had received certain information on this subject from his servant,

who had written to him punctually by every ship. Mr. Mead, who has since

acquired so great a reputation by his skill in the counteraction of poisons, had

saved  the  young  lady's  life.  In  a  moment,  John  passed  from  despair  toextreme joy. I will not attempt to describe the change. It was the happiest

moment of his life. Birton and his friends shared his joy. What more shall I

say? The worthy Freind was as a father to all. The wedding was celebrated at

Dr. Mead's. Birton, now another man, also married; and he and John are now

among the best people in England.

  Admit, that a wise man can instruct fools.

  Epictetus, the slave. From a painting by Giuseppe Rossi.-Marcus Aurelius,

on  the  throne  of  Europe  and  two  parts  of  our  hemisphere,  did  not  think

otherwise than the slave Epictetus.


  Grand entrance to palace. (From Layard's Discoveries among the ruins of

Nineveh and Babylon.)


  PRINCESS OF BABYLON

  The Phœnix [1]

  I.

  ROYAL CONTEST FOR THE HAND OF FORMOSANTA.

  The  aged  Belus,  king  of  Babylon,  thought  himself  the  first  man  upon

earth; for all his courtiers told him so, and his historians proved it. We know

that  his  palace  and  his  park,  situated  at  a  few  parafangs  from  Babylon,

extended  between  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris,  which  washed  those

enchanted banks. His vast house, three thousand feet in front, almost reached

the clouds. The platform was surrounded with a balustrade of white marble,

fifty feet high, which supported colossal statues of all the kings and great

men of the empire. This platform, composed of two rows of bricks, covered

with a thick surface of lead from one extremity to the other, bore twelve feet

of earth; and upon the earth were raised groves of olive, orange, citron, palm,

cocoa, and cinnamon trees, and stock gillyflowers, which formed alleys that

the rays of the sun could not penetrate.

  The waters of the Euphrates running, by the assistance of pumps, in a

hundred canals, formed cascades of six thousand feet in length in the park,

and a hundred thousand jets d'eau, whose height was scarce perceptible. They

afterward flowed into the Euphrates, from whence they came. The gardens ofSemiramis,  which  astonished  Asia  several  ages  after,  were  only  a  feeble

imitation of these ancient prodigies, for in the time of Semiramis, every thing

began to degenerate amongst men and women.

  But what was more admirable in Babylon, and eclipsed every thing else,

was  the  only  daughter  of  the  king,  named  Formosanta.  It  was  from  her

pictures  and  statues,  that  in  succeeding  times  Praxiteles  sculptured  his

Aphrodita, and the Venus of Medicis. Heavens! what a difference between

the original and the copies! so that king Belus was prouder of his daughter

than of his kingdom. She was eighteen years old. It was necessary she should

have a husband worthy of her; but where was he to be found? An ancient

oracle had ordained, that Formosanta could not belong to any but him who

could bend the bow of Nimrod.

  This Nimrod, "a mighty hunter before the Lord," (Gen. x:9), had left a

bow seventeen Babylonian feet in length, made of ebony, harder than the iron

of mount Caucasus, which is wrought in the forges of Derbent; and no mortal

since Nimrod could bend this astonishing bow.

  It was again said, "that the arm which should bend this bow would kill the

most  terrible  and  ferocious  lion  that  should  be  let  loose  in  the  Circus  of

Babylon." This was not all. The bender of the bow, and the conquerer of the

lion, should overthow all his rivals; but he was above all things to be very

sagacious, the most magnificent and most virtuous of men, and possess the

greatest curiosity in the whole universe.

  Three  kings  appeared,  who  were  bold  enough  to  claim  Formosanta.

Pharaoh of Egypt, the Shah of India, and the great Khan of the Scythians.

Belus  appointed  the  day  and  place  of  combat,  which  was  to  be  at  the

extremity of his park, in the vast expanse surrounded by the joint waters of

the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris.  Round  the  lists  a  marble  amphitheatre  was

erected, which might contain five hundred thousand spectators. Opposite the

amphitheatre  was  placed  the  king's  throne.  He  was  to  appear  with

Formosanta,  accompanied  by  the  whole  court;  and  on  the  right  and  left

between the throne and the amphitheatre, there were other thrones and seats

for the three kings, and for all the other sovereigns who were desirous to be

present at this august ceremony.

  The  king  of  Egypt  arrived  the  first,  mounted  upon  the  bull  Apis,  andholding in his hand the cithern of Isis. He was followed by two thousand

priests, clad in linen vestments whiter than snow, two thousand eunuchs, two

thousand magicians, and two thousand warriors.

  The king of India came soon after in a car drawn by twelve elephants. He

had a train still more numerous and more brilliant than Pharaoh of Egypt.

  The last who appeared was the king of the Scythians. He had none with

him but chosen warriors, armed with bows and arrows. He was mounted

upon a superb tiger, which he had tamed, and which was as tall as any of the

finest Persian horses. The majestic and important mien of this king effaced

the appearance of his rivals; his naked arms, as nervous as they were white,

seemed already to bend the bow of Nimrod.

  These three lovers immediately prostrated themselves before Belus and

Formosanta. The king of Egypt presented the princess with two of the finest

crocodiles of the Nile, two sea horses, two zebras, two Egyptian rats, and two

mummies, with the books of the great Hermes, which he judged to be the

scarcest things upon earth.

  The king of India offered her a hundred elephants, each bearing a wooden

gilt  tower,  and  laid  at  her  feet  the  vedam,  written  by  the  hand  of  Xaca

himself.

  The king of the Scythians, who could neither write nor read, presented a

hundred warlike horses with black fox skin housings.

  The  princess  appeared  with  a  downcast  look  before  her  lovers,  and

reclined herself with such a grace as was at once modest and noble.

  Belus ordered the kings to be conducted to the thrones that were prepared

for them. "Would I had three daughters," said he to them, "I should make six

people this day happy!" He then made the competitors cast lots which should

try Nimrod's bow first. Their names inscribed were put into a golden casque.

That of the Egyptian king came out first, then the name of the King of India

appeared.  The  king  of  Scythia,  viewing  the  bow  and  his  rivals,  did  not

complain at being the third.

  Whilst these brilliant trials were preparing, twenty thousand pages and

twenty  thousand  youthful  maidens  distributed,  without  any  disorder,

refreshments  to  the  spectators  between  the  rows  of  seats.  Every  oneacknowledged that the gods had instituted kings for no other cause than every

day to give festivals, upon condition they should be diversified-that life is too

short for any other purpose-that lawsuits, intrigues, wars, the altercations of

theologists, which consume human life, are horrible and absurd-that man is

born only for happiness that he would not passionately and incessantly pursue

pleasure, were he not designed for it-that the essence of human nature is to

enjoy  ourselves,  and  all  the  rest  is  folly.  This  excellent  moral  was  never

controverted but by facts.

  Whilst preparations were making for determining the fate of Formosanta,

a  young  stranger,  mounted  upon  an  unicorn,  accompanied  by  his  valet,

mounted on a like animal, and bearing upon his hand a large bird, appeared at

the barrier. The guards were surprised to observe in this equipage, a figure

that had an air of divinity. He had, as hath been since related, the face of

Adonis  upon  the  body  of  Hercules;  it  was  majesty  accompanied  by  the

graces.  His  black  eye-brows  and  flowing  fair  tresses,  wore  a  mixture  of

beauty  unknown  at  Babylon,  and  charmed  all  observers.  The  whole

amphitheatre rose up, the better to view the stranger. All the ladies of the

court viewed him with looks of astonishment. Formosanta herself, who had

hitherto kept her eyes fixed upon the ground, raised them and blushed. The

three kings turned pale. The spectators, in comparing Formosanta with the

stranger, cried out, "There is no other in the world, but this young man, who

can be so handsome as the princess."

  The ushers, struck with astonishment, asked him if he was a king? The

stranger replied, that he had not that honor, but that he had come from a

distant country, excited by curiosity, to see if there were any king worthy of

Formosanta. He was introduced into the first row of the amphitheatre, with

his valet, his two unicorns, and his bird. He saluted, with great respect, Belus,

his daughter, the three kings, and all the assembly. He then took his seat, not

without blushing. His two unicorns lay down at his feet; his bird perched

upon his shoulder; and his valet, who carried a little bag, placed himself by

his side.

  The trials began. The bow of Nimrod was taken out of its golden case. The

first  master  of  the  ceremonies,  followed  by  fifty  pages,  and  preceded  by

twenty trumpets, presented it to the king of Egypt, who made his priests bless

it; and supporting it upon the head of the bull Apis, he did not question hisgaining this first victory. He dismounted, and came into the middle of the

circus. He tries, exerts all his strength, and makes such ridiculous contortions,

that the whole amphitheatre re-echoes with laughter, and Formosanta herself

could not help smiling.

  His high almoner approached him:

  "Let your majesty give up this idle honor, which depends entirely upon the

nerves and muscles. You will triumph in every thing else. You will conquer

the lion, as you are possessed of the favor of Osiris. The Princess of Babylon

is  to  belong  to  the  prince  who  is  most  sagacious,  and  you  have  solved

enigmas. She is to wed the most virtuous: you are such, as you have been

educated by the priests of Egypt. The most generous is to marry her, and you

have presented her with two of the handsomest crocodiles, and two of the

finest rats in all the Delta. You are possessed of the bull Apis, and the books

of Hermes, which are the scarcest things in the universe. No one can hope to

dispute Formosanta with you."

  "You are in the right," said the King of Egypt, and resumed his throne.

  The bow was then put in the hands of the king of India. It blistered his

hands for a fortnight; but he consoled himself in presuming that the Scythian

King would not be more fortunate than himself.

  The Scythian handled the bow in his turn. He united skill with strength.

The bow seemed to have some elasticity in his hands. He bent it a little, but

he could not bring it near a curve. The spectators, who had been prejudiced in

his favor by his agreeable aspect, lamented his ill success, and concluded that

the beautiful princess would never be married.

  The unknown youth leaped into the arena and addressing himself to the

king of Scythia said:

  "Your majesty need not be surprised at not having entirely succeeded.

These ebony bows are made in my country. There is a peculiar method in

using them. Your merit is greater in having bent it, than if I were to curve it."

  He then took an arrow and placing it upon the string, bent the bow of

Nimrod,  and  shot  the  arrow  beyond  the  gates.  A  million  hands  at  once

applauded  the  prodigy.  Babylon  re-echoed  with  acclamations;  and  all  the

ladies agreed it was fortunate for so handsome a youth to be so strong.  He then took out of his pocket a small ivory tablet, wrote upon it with a

golden  pencil,  fixed  the  tablet  to  the  bow,  and  then  presented  it  to  the

princess with such a grace as charmed every spectator. He then modestly

returned  to  his  place  between  his  bird  and  his  valet.  All  Babylon  was  in

astonishment; the three kings were confounded, whilst the stranger did not

seem to pay the least attention to what had happened.

  Formosanta was still more surprised to read upon the ivory tablet, tied to

the bow, these lines, written in the best Chaldean:

  L'arc de Nembrod est celui de la guerre;

  L'arc de l'amour est celui du bonheur;

  Vous le portez. Par vous ce Dieu vainqueur

  Est devenu le maitre de la terre.

  Trois Rois puissants, trois rivaux aujourd'hui,

  Osent pretendre a l'honneur de vous plaire.

  Je ne sais pas qui votre cœur prefere,

  Mais l'univers sera jaloux de lui.


  [The bow of Nimrod is that of war;

  The bow of love is that of happiness

  Which you possess. Through you this conquering God

  Has become master of the earth.

  Three powerful kings,-three rivals now,

  Dare aspire to the honor of pleasing you.

  I know not whom your heart may prefer,

  But the universe will be jealous of him.]


  This little madrigal did not displease the princess; but it was criticised by

some of the lords of the ancient court, who said that, in former times, Belus

would have been compared to the sun, and Formosanta to the moon; his neck

to a tower, and her breast to a bushel of wheat. They said the stranger had nosort of imagination, and that he had lost sight of the rules of true poetry, but

all the ladies thought the verses very gallant. They were astonished that a

man who handled a bow so well should have so much wit. The lady of honor

to the princess said to her:

  "Madam, what great talents are here entirely lost? What benefit will this

young man derive from his wit, and his skill with Nimrod's bow?"

  "Being admired!" said Formosanta.

  "Ah!" said the lady, "one more madrigal, and he might well be beloved."

  The king of Babylon, having consulted his sages, declared that though

none of these kings could bend the bow of Nimrod, yet, nevertheless, his

daughter was to be married, and that she should belong to him who could

conquer  the  great  lion,  which  was  purposely  kept  in  training  in  his  great

menagerie.

  The king of Egypt, upon whose education all the wisdom of Egypt had

been exhausted, judged it very ridiculous to expose a king to the ferocity of

wild beasts in order to be married. He acknowledged that he considered the

possession of Formosanta of inestimable value; but he believed that if the

lion should strangle him, he could never wed this fair Babylonian. The king

of India held similar views to the king of Egypt. They both concluded that the

king of Babylon was laughing at them, and that they should send for armies

to  punish  him-that  they  had  many  subjects  who  would  think  themselves

highly honored to die in the service of their masters, without it costing them a

single hair of their sacred heads,-that they could easily dethrone the king of

Babylon, and then they would draw lots for the fair Formosanta.

  This agreement being made, the two kings sent each an express into his

respective country, with orders to assemble three hundred thousand men to

carry off Formosanta.

  However, the king of Scythia descended alone into the arena, scimitar in

hand. He was not distractedly enamored with Formosanta's charms. Glory till

then had been his only passion, and it had led him to Babylon. He was willing

to show that if the kings of India and Egypt were so prudent as not to tilt with

lions, he was courageous enough not to decline the combat, and he would

repair the honor of diadems. His uncommon valor would not even allow himto avail himself of the assistance of his tiger. He advanced singly, slightly

armed  with  a  shell  casque  ornamented  with  gold,  and  shaded  with  three

horses' tails as white as snow.

  One  of  the  most  enormous  and  ferocious  lions  that  fed  upon  the

Antilibanian  mountains  was  let  loose  upon  him.  His  tremendous  paws

appeared capable of tearing the three kings to pieces at once, and his gullet to

devour them. The two proud champions fled with the utmost precipitancy and

in the most rapid manner to each other. The courageous Scythian plunged his

sword into the lion's mouth; but the point meeting with one of those thick

teeth that nothing can penetrate, was broken; and the monster of the woods,

more furious from his wound, had already impressed his fearful claws into

the monarch's sides.

  The unknown youth, touched with the peril of so brave a prince, leaped

into the arena swift as lightning, and cut off the lion's head with as much

dexterity as we have lately seen, in our carousals, youthful knights knock off

the heads of black images.

  Then drawing out a small box, he presented it to the Scythian king, saying

to him.

  "Your  majesty  will  here  find  the  genuine  dittany,  which  grows  in  my

country. Your glorious wounds will be healed in a moment. Accident alone

prevented  your  triumph  over  the  lion.  Your  valor  is  not  the  less  to  be

admired."

  The Scythian king, animated more with gratitude than jealousy, thanked

his benefactor; and, after having tenderly embraced him, returned to his seat

to apply the dittany to his wounds.

  The stranger gave the lion's head to his valet, who, having washed it at the

great fountain which was beneath the amphitheatre, and drained all the blood,

took an iron instrument out of his little bag, with which having drawn the

lion's forty teeth, he supplied their place with forty diamonds of equal size.

  His master, with his usual modesty, returned to his place; he gave the

lion's head to his bird:-"Beauteous bird," said he, "carry this small homage,

and lay it at the feet of Formosanta."

  "The unknown youth, touched with the peril of so brave a prince, leapedinto the arena swift as lightning, and cut off the lion's head."


  The bird winged its way with the dreadful triumph in one of its talons, and

presented it to the princess; bending with humility his neck, and crouching

before her. The sparkling diamonds dazzled the eyes of every beholder. Such

magnificence was unknown even in superb Babylon. The emerald, the topaz,

the sapphire, and the pyrope, were as yet considered as the most precious

ornaments. Belus and the whole court were struck with admiration. The bird

which presented this present surprised them still more. It was of the size of an

eagle, but its eyes were as soft and tender as those of the eagle are fierce and

threatening.  Its  bill  was  rose  color,  and  seemed  somewhat  to  resemble

Formosanta's handsome mouth. Its neck represented all the colors of Iris, but

still more striking and brilliant. Gold, in a thousand shades, glittered upon its

plumage. Its feet resembled a mixture of silver and purple. And the tails of

those beautiful birds, which have since drawn Juno's car, did not equal the

splendor of this incomparable bird.

  The attention, curiosity, astonishment, and ecstasy of the whole court were

divided between the jewels and the bird. It had perched upon the balustrade

between Belus and his daughter Formosanta. She petted it, caressed it, and

kissed it. It seemed to receive her attentions with a mixture of pleasure and

respect. When the princess gave the bird a kiss, it returned the embrace, and

then  looked  upon  her  with  languishing  eyes.  She  gave  it  biscuits  and

pistachios, which it received in its purple-silvered claw, and carried to its bill

with inexpressible grace.

  Belus, who had attentively considered the diamonds, concluded that scarce

any one of his provinces could repay so valuable a present. He ordered that

more  magnificent  gifts  should  be  prepared  for  the  stranger  than  those

destined for the three monarchs, "This young man," said he, "is doubtless son

to the emperor of China; or of that part of the world called Europe, which I

have heard spoken of; or of Africa, which is said to be in the vicinity of the

kingdom of Egypt."

  He immediately sent his first equerry to compliment the stranger, and ask

him whether he was himself the sovereign, or son to the sovereign of one of

those empires; and why, being possessed of such surprising treasures, he hadcome with nothing but his valet and a little bag?

  Whilst  the  equerry  advanced  toward  the  amphitheatre  to  execute  his

commission, another valet arrived upon an unicorn. This valet, addressing

himself to the young man, said. "Ormar, your father is approaching the end of

his life: I am come to acquaint you with it."

  The stranger raised his eyes to heaven, whilst tears streamed from them,

and answered only by saying, "Let us depart."

  The equerry, after having paid Belus's compliments to the conqueror of the

lion, to the giver of the forty diamonds, and to the master of the beautiful

bird, asked the valet, "Of what kingdom was the father of this young hero

sovereign?"

  The valet replied:

  "His father is an old shepherd, who is much beloved in his district."

  During this conversation, the stranger had already mounted his unicorn.

He said to the equerry:

  "My lord, vouchsafe to prostrate me at the feet of King Belus and his

daughter. I must entreat her to take particular care of the bird I leave with her,

as it is a nonpareil like herself."

  In uttering these last words he set off, and flew like lightning. The two

valets followed him, and in an instant he was out of sight.

  Formosanta could not refrain from shrieking. The bird, turning toward the

amphitheatre where his master had been seated, seemed greatly afflicted to

find him gone; then viewing steadfastly the princess, and gently rubbing her

beautiful hand with his bill, he seemed to devote himself to her service.

  Belus,  more  astonished  than  ever,  hearing  that  this  very  extraordinary

young man was the son of a shepherd, could not believe it. He dispatched

messengers after him; but they soon returned with the information, that the

three unicorns, upon which these men were mounted, could not be overtaken;

and that, according to the rate they went, they must go a hundred leagues a

day.

  Every one reasoned upon this strange adventure, and wearied themselves

with conjectures. How can the son of a shepherd make a present of forty largediamonds?  How  comes  it  that  he  is  mounted  upon  an  unicorn?  This

bewildered them, and Formosanta, whilst she caressed her bird, was sunk into

a profound reverie.

  [1] The phœnix-born of myth and fable-was supposed to have originated

in Arabia. In size it resembled an eagle, and was said to exist singly. At the

end of six hundred years, it built for itself a nest filled with myrrh and the

choicest spices. This was ignited by the ardent rays of the sun, and in it the

phœnix was consumed in flames of fragrance. It was believed, however, that

it  soon  rose  again,  from  its  own  ashes,  in  renewed  youth,  strength,  and

beauty; and therefore it was considered by the ancients as symbolical of "the

resurrection" and also of immortality.-E.


  II.

  THE  KING  OF  BABYLON  CONVENES  HIS  COUNCIL,  AND

CONSULTS THE ORACLE.

  Princess Aldea, Formosanta's cousin-german, who was very well shaped,

and almost as handsome as the King's daughter, said to her:

  "Cousin, I know not whether this demi-god be the son of a shepherd, but

methinks he has fulfilled all the conditions stipulated for your marriage. He

has bent Nimrod's bow; he has conquered the lion; he has a good share of

sense, having written for you extempore a very pretty madrigal. After having

presented you with forty large diamonds, you cannot deny that he is the most

generous of men. In his bird he possessed the most curious thing upon earth.

His virtue cannot be equaled, since he departed without hesitation as soon as

he learned his father was ill, though he might have remained and enjoyed the

pleasure of your society. The oracle is fulfilled in every particular, except that

wherein he is to overcome his rivals. But he has done more; he has saved the

life of the only competitor he had to fear; and when the object is to surpass

the other two, I believe you cannot doubt but that he will easily succeed."

  "All that you say is very true," replied Formosanta: "but is it possible that

the greatest of men, and perhaps the most amiable too, should be the son of a

shepherd?"

  The  lady  of  honor,  joining  in  the  conversation,  said  that  the  title  ofshepherd  was  frequently  given  to  kings-that  they  were  called  shepherds

because they attended very closely to their flocks-that this was doubtless a

piece of ill-timed pleasantry in his valet-that this young hero had not come so

badly equipped, but to show how much his personal merit alone was above

the fastidious parade of kings. The princess made no answer, but in giving

her bird a thousand tender kisses.

  A great festival was nevertheless prepared for the three kings, and for all

the princes who had come to the feast. The king's daughter and niece were to

do  the  honors.  The  king  distributed  presents  worthy  the  magnificence  of

Babylon. Belus, during the time the repast was being served, assembled his

council to discuss the marriage of the beautiful Formosanta, and this is the

way he delivered himself as a great politician:

  "I am old: I know not what is best to do with my daughter, or upon whom

to bestow her. He who deserves her is nothing but a mean shepherd. The

kings of India and Egypt are cowards. The king of the Scythians would be

very agreeable to me, but he has not performed any one of the conditions

imposed. I will again consult the oracle. In the meantime, deliberate among

you,  and  we  will  conclude  agreeably  to  what  the  oracle  says;  for  a  king

should follow nothing but the dictates of the immortal gods."

  He  then  repaired  to  the  temple:  the  oracle  answered  in  few  words

according  to  custom:  Thy  daughter  shall  not  be  married  until  she  hath

traversed  the  globe.  In  astonishment,  Belus  returned  to  the  council,  and

related this answer.

  All the ministers had a profound respect for oracles. They therefore all

agreed,  or  at  least  appeared  to  agree,  that  they  were  the  foundation  of

religion-that reason should be mute before them-that it was by their means

that  kings  reigned  over  their  people-that  without  oracles  there  would  be

neither virtue nor repose upon earth.

  At length, after having testified the most profound veneration for them,

they almost all concluded that this oracle was impertinent, and should not be

obeyed-that  nothing  could  be  more  indecent  for  a  young  woman,  and

particularly the daughter of the great king of Babylon, than to run about,

without any particular destination-that this was the most certain method to

prevent her being married, or else engage her in a clandestine, shameful, andridiculous union that,-in a word, this oracle had not common sense.

  The youngest of the ministers, named Onadase, who had more sense than

the rest, said that the oracle doubtless meant some pilgrimage of devotion,

and offered to be the princess's guide. The council approved of his opinion,

but  every  one  was  for  being  her  equerry.  The  king  determined  that  the

princess might go three hundred parasangs upon the road to Arabia, to the

temple  whose  saint  had  the  reputation  of  procuring  young  women  happy

marriages, and that the dean of the council should accompany her. After this

determination they went to supper.

  The shrine at Bassora.-A devotee at the shrine imploring the felicity of a

happy marriage.


  III.

  ROYAL FESTIVAL GIVEN IN HONOR OF THE KINGLY VISITORS.

THE BIRD CONVERSES ELOQUENTLY WITH FORMOSANTA.

  In the centre of the gardens, between two cascades, an oval saloon, three

hundred  feet  in  diameter  was  erected,  whose  azure  roof,  intersected  with

golden stars, represented all the constellations and planets, each in its proper

station; and this ceiling turned about, as well as the canopy, by machines as

invisible  as  those  which  direct  the  celestial  spheres.  A  hundred  thousand

flambeaux, inclosed in rich crystal cylinders, illuminated the gardens and the

dining-hall. A buffet, with steps, contained twenty thousand vases and golden

dishes; and opposite the buffet, upon other steps, were seated a great number

of musicians. Two other amphitheatres were decked out; the one with the

fruits of each season, the other with crystal decanters, that sparkled with the

choicest wines.

  The guests took their seats round a table divided into compartments that

resembled flowers and fruits, all in precious stones. The beautiful Formosanta

was placed between the kings of India and Egypt-the amiable Aldea next the

king of Scythia. There were about thirty princes, and each was seated next

one of the handsomest ladies of the court. The king of Babylon, who was in

the middle, opposite his daughter, seemed divided between the chagrin of

being yet unable to effect her marriage, and the pleasure of still beholding

her. Formosanta asked leave to place her bird upon the table next her; theking approved of it.

  The music, which continued during the repast, furnished every prince with

an opportunity of conversing with his female neighbor. The festival was as

agreeable as it was magnificent. A ragout was served before Formosanta,

which her father was very fond of. The princess said it should be carried to

his  majesty.  The  bird  immediately  took  hold  of  it,  and  carried  it  in  a

miraculous  manner  to  the  king.  Never  was  any  thing  more  astonishing

witnessed. Belus caressed it as much as his daughter had done. The bird

afterward took its flight to return to her. It displayed, in flying, so fine a tail,

and its extended wings set forth such a variety of brilliant colors-the gold of

its plumage made such a dazzling eclat, that all eyes were fixed upon it. All

the  musicians  were  struck  motionless,  and  their  instruments  afforded

harmony  no  longer.  None  ate,  no  one  spoke,  nothing  but  a  buzzing  of

admiration was to be heard. The Princess of Babylon kissed it during the

whole supper, without considering whether there were any kings in the world.

Those of India and Egypt felt their spite and indignation rekindle with double

force, and they resolved speedily to set their three hundred thousand men in

motion to obtain revenge.

  As for the king of Scythia, he was engaged in entertaining the beautiful

Aldea. His haughty soul despising, without malice, Formosanta's inattention,

had conceived for her more indifference than resentment. "She is handsome,"

said he, "I acknowledge: but she appears to me one of those women who are

entirely taken up with their own beauty, and who fancy that mankind are

greatly obliged to them when they deign to appear in public. I should prefer

an ugly complaisant woman, that exhibited some amiability, to that beautiful

statue. You have, madam, as many charms as she possesses, and you, at least,

condescend  to  converse  with  strangers.  I  acknowledge  to  you  with  the

sincerity of a Scythian, that I prefer you to your cousin."

  He was, however, mistaken in regard to the character of Formosanta. She

was not so disdainful as she appeared. But his compliments were very well

received by the princess Aldea. Their conversation became very interesting.

They were well contented, and already certain of one another before they left

the table. After supper the guests walked in the groves. The king of Scythia

and Aldea did not fail to seek for a place of retreat. Aldea, who was sincerity

itself, thus declared herself to the prince:  "I do not hate my cousin, though she be handsomer than myself, and is

destined for the throne of Babylon. The honor of pleasing you may very well

stand  in  the  stead  of  charms.  I  prefer  Scythia  with  you,  to  the  crown  of

Babylon without you. But this crown belongs to me by right, if there be any

right in the world; for I am of the elder branch of the Nimrod family, and

Formosanta is only of the younger. Her grandfather dethroned mine, and put

him to death."

  "Such, then, are the rights of inheritance in the royal house of Babylon!"

said the Scythian. "What was your grandfather's name?"

  "He was called Aldea, like me. My father bore the same name. He was

banished to the extremity of the empire with my mother; and Belus, after

their death, having nothing to fear from me, was willing to bring me up with

his daughter. But he has resolved that I shall never marry."

  "I will avenge the cause of your grandfather-of your father and also your

own  cause,"  said  the  king  of  Scythia.  "I  am  responsible  for  your  being

married. I will carry you off the day after to-morrow by day-break-for we

must dine to-morrow with the king of Babylon-and I will return and support

your rights with three hundred thousand men."

  "I  agree  to  it,"  said  the  beauteous  Aldea:  and,  after  having  mutually

pledged their words of honor, they separated.

  The incomparable Formosanta, before retiring to rest, had ordered a small

orange tree, in a silver case, to be placed by the side of her bed, that her bird

might perch upon it. Her curtains had long been drawn, but she was not in the

least disposed to sleep. Her heart was agitated, and her imagination excited.

The charming stranger was ever in her thoughts. She fancied she saw him

shooting an arrow with Nimrod's bow. She contemplated him in the act of

cutting off the lion's head. She repeated his madrigal. At length, she saw him

retiring  from  the  crowd  upon  his  unicorn.  Tears,  sighs,  and  lamentations

overwhelmed her at this reflection. At intervals, she cried out: "Shall I then

never see him more? Will he never return?"

  "He will surely return," replied the bird from the top of the orange tree.

"Can one have seen you once, and not desire to see you again?"

  "Heavens!  eternal  powers!  my  bird  speaks  the  purest  Chaldean."  Inuttering these words she drew back the curtain, put out her hand to him, and

knelt upon her bed, saying:

  "Art  thou  a  god  descended  upon  earth?  Art  thou  the  great  Oromasdes

concealed under this beautiful plumage? If thou art, restore me this charming

young man."

  "I am nothing but a winged animal," replied the bird; "but I was born at

the time when all animals still spoke; when birds, serpents, asses, horses, and

griffins, conversed familiarly with man. I would not speak before company,

lest your ladies of honor should have taken me for a sorcerer. I would not

discover myself to any but you."

  Formosanta  was  speechless,  bewildered,  and  intoxicated  with  so  many

wonders.  Desirous  of  putting  a  hundred  questions  to  him  at  once,  she  at

length asked him how old he was.

  "Only twenty-seven thousand nine hundred years and six months. I date

my age from the little revolution of the equinoxes, and which is accomplished

in  about  twenty-eight  thousand  of  your  years.  There  are  revolutions  of  a

much greater extent, so are there beings much older than me. It is twenty-two

thousand years since I learnt Chaldean in one of my travels. I have always

had a very great taste for the Chaldean language, but my brethren, the other

animals, have renounced speaking in your climate."

  "And why so, my divine bird?"

  "Alas!  because  men  have  accustomed  themselves  to  eat  us,  instead  of

conversing and instructing themselves with us. Barbarians! should they not

have  been  convinced,  that  having  the  same  organs  with  them,  the  same

sentiments, the same wants, the same desires, we have also what is called a

soul, the same as themselves;-that we are their brothers, and that none should

be dressed and eaten but the wicked? We are so far your brothers, that the

Supreme Being, the Omnipotent and Eternal Being, having made a compact

with  men,  expressly  comprehended  us  in  the  treaty.  He  forbade  you  to

nourish yourselves with our blood, and we to suck yours.

  "The fables of your ancient Locman, translated into so many languages,

will be a testimony eternally subsisting of the happy commerce you formerly

carried on with us. They all begin with these words: 'In the time when beastsspoke.'  It  is  true,  there  are  many  families  among  you  who  keep  up  an

incessant conversation with their dogs; but the dogs have resolved not to

answer, since they have been compelled by whipping to go a hunting, and

become accomplices in the murder of our ancient and common friends, stags,

deers, hares, and partridges.

  "You  have  still  some  ancient  poems  in  which  horses  speak,  and  your

coachmen daily address them in words; but in so barbarous a manner, and in

uttering such infamous expressions, that horses, though formerly entertaining

so great a kindness for you, now detest you.

  "The country which is the residence of your charming stranger, the most

perfect of men, is the only one in which your species has continued to love

ours, and to converse with us; and this is the only country in the world where

men are just."

  "And where is the country of my dear incognito? What is the name of his

empire? For I will no more believe he is a shepherd than that you are a bat."

  "His country, is that of the Gangarids, a wise, virtuous, and invincible

people, who inhabit the eastern shore of the Ganges. The name of my friend

is Amazan. He is no king; and I know not whether he would so humble

himself as to be one. He has too great a love for his fellow countrymen. He is

a  shepherd  like  them.  But  do  not  imagine  that  those  shepherds  resemble

yours; who, covered with rags and tatters, watch their sheep, who are better

clad than themselves; who groan under the burden of poverty, and who pay to

an extortioner half the miserable stipend of wages which they receive from

their masters. The Gangaridian shepherds are all born equal, and own the

innumerable herds which cover their vast fields and subsist on the abundant

verdure. These flocks are never killed. It is a horrid crime, in that favored

country,  to  kill  and  eat  a  fellow  creature.  Their  wool  is  finer  and  more

brilliant than the finest silk, and constitutes the greatest traffic of the East.

Besides, the land of the Gangarids produces all that can flatter the desires of

man. Those large diamonds that Amazan had the honor of presenting you

with, are from a mine that belongs to him. An unicorn, on which you saw him

mounted, is the usual animal the Gangarids ride upon. It is the finest, the

proudest,  most  terrible,  and  at  the  same  time  most  gentle  animal  that

ornaments the earth. A hundred Gangarids, with as many unicorns,[1] wouldbe sufficient to disperse innumerable armies. Two centuries ago, a king of

India  was  mad  enough  to  attempt  to  conquer  this  nation.  He  appeared,

followed by ten thousand elephants and a million of warriors. The unicorns

pierced the elephants, just as I have seen upon your table beads pierced in

golden brochets. The warriors fell under the sabres of the Gangarids like

crops of rice mowed by the people of the East. The king was taken prisoner,

with upwards of six thousand men. He was bathed in the salutary water of the

Ganges, and followed the regimen of the country, which consists only of

vegetables,  of  which  nature  hath  there  been  amazingly  liberal  to  nourish

every breathing creature. Men who are fed with carnivorous aliments, and

drenched with spirituous liquors, have a sharp adust blood, which turns their

brains  a  hundred  different  ways.  Their  chief  rage  is  a  fury  to  spill  their

brother's blood, and, laying waste fertile plains, to reign over church-yards.

Six full months were taken up in curing the king of India of his disorder.

When the physicians judged that his pulse had become natural, they certified

this to the council of the Gangarids. The council then followed the advice of

the unicorns and humanely sent back the king of India, his silly court, and

impotent warriors, to their own country. This lesson made them wise, and

from that time the Indians respected the Gangarids, as ignorant men, willing

to be instructed, revere the philosophers they cannot equal.

  "Apropos,  my  dear  bird,"  said  the  princess  to  him,  "do  the  Gangarids

profess any religion? have they one?"

  "Yes, we meet to return thanks to God on the days of the full moon; the

men in a great temple made of cedar, and the women in another, to prevent

their  devotion  being  diverted.  All  the  birds  assemble  in  a  grove,  and  the

quadrupeds  on  a  fine  down.  We  thank  God  for  all  the  benefits  he  has

bestowed  upon  us.  We  have  in  particular  some  parrots  that  preach

wonderfully well.

  "Such is the country of my dear Amazan; there I reside. My friendship for

him is as great as the love with which he has inspired you. If you will credit

me, we will set out together, and you shall pay him a visit."

  "Really, my dear bird, this is a very pretty invitation of yours," replied the

princess smiling, and who flamed with desire to undertake the journey, but

did not dare say so.  "I serve my friend," said the bird; "and, after the happiness of loving you,

the greatest pleasure is to assist you."

  Formosanta  was  quite  fascinated.  She  fancied  herself  transported  from

earth.  All  she  had  seen  that  day,  all  she  then  saw,  all  she  heard,  and

particularly what she felt in her heart, so ravished her as far to surpass what

those  fortunate  Mussulmen  now  feel,  who,  disencumbered  from  their

terrestrial  ties,  find  themselves  in  the  ninth  heaven  in  the  arms  of  their

Houris, surrounded and penetrated with glory and celestial felicity.

  [1] Pliny, the Roman naturalist, describes the unicorn as "a very ferocious

beast, similar in the rest of its body to a horse, with the head of a deer, the

feet of an elephant, the tail of a boar, a deep bellowing voice, and a single

black horn, two cubits in length, standing out in the middle of its forehead."

A familiar representation of this "ferocious beast" may be seen on the English

coat of arms.-E.


  IV.

  THE  BEAUTIFUL  BIRD  IS  KILLED  BY  THE  KING  OF  EGYPT.

FORMOSANTA  BEGINS  A  JOURNEY.  ALDEA  ELOPES  WITH  THE

KING OF SCYTHIA.

  Formosanta passed the whole night in speaking of Amazan. She no longer

called him any thing but her shepherd; and from this time it was that the

names of shepherd and lover were indiscriminately used throughout every

nation.

  Sometimes  she  asked  the  bird  whether  Amazan  had  had  any  other

mistresses.  It  answered,  "No,"  and  she  was  at  the  summit  of  felicity.

Sometimes she asked how he passed his life; and she, with transport, learned,

that it was employed in doing good; in cultivating arts, in penetrating into the

secrets of nature, and improving himself. She at times wanted to know if the

soul of her lover was of the same nature as that of her bird; how it happened

that  it  had  lived  twenty  thousand  years,  when  her  lover  was  not  above

eighteen or nineteen. She put a hundred such questions, to which the bird

replied with such discretion as excited her curiosity. At length sleep closed

their eyes, and yielded up Formosanta to the sweet delusion of dreams sent

by  the  gods,  which  sometimes  surpass  reality  itself,  and  which  all  thephilosophy of the Chaldeans can scarce explain.

  Formosanta did not awaken till very late. The day was far advanced when

the king, her father, entered her chamber. The bird received his majesty with

respectful politeness, went before him, fluttered his wings, stretched his neck,

and then replaced himself upon his orange tree. The king seated himself upon

his daughter's bed, whose dreams had made her still more beautiful. His large

beard approached her lovely face, and after having embraced her, he spoke to

her in these words:

  "My dear daughter, you could not yesterday find a husband agreeable to

my  wishes;  you  nevertheless  must  marry;  the  prosperity  of  my  empire

requires  it.  I  have  consulted  the  oracle,  which  you  know  never  errs,  and

which directs all my conduct. His commands are, that you should traverse the

globe. You must therefore begin your journey."

  "Ah! doubtless to the Gangarids," said the princess; and in uttering these

words, which escaped her, she was sensible of her indiscretion. The king,

who was utterly ignorant of geography, asked her what she meant by the

Gangarids? She easily diverted the question. The king told her she must go

on a pilgrimage, that he had appointed the persons who were to attend her-the

dean  of  the  counsellors  of  state,  the  high  almoner,  a  lady  of  honor,  a

physician, an apothecary, her bird, and all necessary domestics.

  Formosanta, who had never been out of her father's palace, and who, till

the  arrival  of  the  three  kings  and  Amazan,  had  led  a  very  insipid  life,

according to the etiquette of rank and the parade of pleasure, was charmed at

setting out upon a pilgrimage. "Who knows," said she, whispering to her

heart, "if the gods may not inspire Amazan with the like desire of going to the

same chapel, and I may have the happiness of again seeing the pilgrim?" She

affectionately thanked her father, saying she had always entertained a secret

devotion for the saint she was going to visit.

  Belus gave an excellent dinner to his guests, who were all men. They

formed  a  very  ill  assorted  company-kings,  ministers,  princes,  pontiffs-all

jealous of each other; all weighing their words, and equally embarassed with

their neighbors and themselves. The repast was very gloomy, though they

drank  pretty  freely.  The  princesses  remained  in  their  apartments,  each

meditating  upon  her  respective  journey.  They  dined  at  their  little  cover.Formosanta afterward walked in the gardens with her dear bird, which, to

amuse  her,  flew  from  tree  to  tree,  displaying  his  superb  tail  and  divine

plumage.

  The king of Egypt, who was heated with wine, not to say drunk, asked one

of  his  pages  for  a  bow  and  arrow.  This  prince  was,  in  truth,  the  most

unskillful archer in his whole kingdom. When he shot at a mark, the place of

the greatest safety was generally the spot he aimed at. But the beautiful bird,

flying as swiftly as the arrow, seemed to court it, and fell bleeding in the arms

of Formosanta. The Egyptian, bursting into a foolish laugh, retired to his

place. The princess rent the skies with her moans, melted into tears, tore her

hair, and beat her breast. The dying bird said to her, in a low voice:

  "Burn me, and fail not to carry my ashes to the east of the ancient city of

Aden or Eden, and expose them to the sun upon a little pile of cloves and

cinnamon." After having uttered these words it expired. Formosanta was for a

long time in a swoon, and revived again only to burst into sighs and groans.

Her father, partaking of her grief, and imprecating the king of Egypt, did not

doubt but this accident foretold some fatal event. He immediately went to

consult the oracle, which replied: A mixture of everything-life and death,

infidelity and constancy, loss and gain, calamities and good fortune. Neither

he  nor  his  council  could  comprehend  any  meaning  in  this  reply;  but,  at

length, he was satisfied with having fulfilled the duties of devotion.

  His daughter was bathed in tears, whilst he consulted the oracle. She paid

the funeral obsequies to the bird, which it had directed, and resolved to carry

its remains into Arabia at the risk of her life. It was burned in incombustible

flax, with the orange-tree on which it used to perch. She gathered up the

ashes in a little golden vase, set with rubies, and the diamonds taken from the

lion's mouth. Oh! that she could, instead of fulfilling this melancholy duty,

have burned alive the detestable king of Egypt! This was her sole wish. She,

in spite, put to death the two crocodiles, his two sea horses, his two zebras,

his two rats, and had his two mummies thrown into the Euphrates. Had she

possessed his bull Apis, she would not have spared him.

  The king of Egypt, enraged at this affront, set out immediately to forward

his three hundred thousand men. The king of India, seeing his ally depart, set

off also on the same day, with a firm intention of joining his three hundredthousand Indians to the Egyptian army, the king of Scythia decamped in the

night with the princess Aldea, fully resolved to fight for her at the head of

three hundred thousand Scythians, and to restore to her the inheritance of

Babylon, which was her right, as she had descended from the elder branch of

the Nimrod family.

  As for the beautiful Formosanta, she set out at three in the morning with

her caravan of pilgrims, flattering herself that she might go into Arabia, and

execute the last will of her bird; and that the justice of the gods would restore

her the dear Amazan, without whom life had become insupportable.

  When the king of Babylon awoke, he found all the company gone.

  "How mighty festivals terminate," said he; "and what a surprising vacuum

they leave when the hurry is over."

  But he was transported with a rage truly royal, when he found that the

princess Aldea had been carried off. He ordered all his ministers to be called

up, and the council to be convened. Whilst they were dressing, he failed not

to consult the oracle; but the only answer he could obtain was in these words,

so celebrated since throughout the universe: When girls are not provided for

in marriage by their relatives, they marry themselves.

  Orders were immediately issued to march three hundred thousand men

against the king of Scythia. Thus was the torch of a most dreadful war lighted

up, which was caused by the amusements of the finest festival ever given

upon earth. Asia was upon the point of being over-run by four armies of three

hundred thousand men each. It is plain that the war of Troy, which astonished

the world some ages after, was mere child's play in comparison to this; but it

should also be considered, that in the Trojans quarrel, the object was nothing

more than a very immoral old woman, who had contrived to be twice run

away with; whereas, in this case, the cause was tripartite-two girls and a bird.

  The king of India went to meet his army upon the large fine road which

then led straight to Babylon, at Cachemir. The king of Scythia flew with

Aldea by the fine road which led to Mount Imaus. Owing to bad government,

all these fine roads have disappeared in the lapse of time. The king of Egypt

had  marched  to  the  west,  along  the  coast  of  the  little  Mediterranean  sea,

which the ignorant Hebrews have since called the Great Sea.  Consulting the oracle.

  As to the charming Formosanta, she pursued the road to Bassora, planted

with  lofty  palm  trees,  which  furnished  a  perpetual  shade,  and  fruit  at  all

seasons.  The  temple  in  which  she  was  to  perform  her  devotions,  was  in

Bassora  itself.  The  saint  to  whom  this  temple  had  been  dedicated,  was

somewhat in the style of him who was afterward adored at Lampsacus, and

was generally successful in procuring husbands for young ladies. Indeed, he

was the holiest saint in all Asia.

  Formosanta had no sort of inclination for the saint of Bassora. She only

invoked her dear Gangaridian shepherd, her charming Amazan. She proposed

embarking  at  Bassora,  and  landing  in  Arabia  Felix,  to  perform  what  her

deceased bird had commanded.

  At  the  third  stage,  scarce  had  she  entered  into  a  fine  inn,  where  her

harbingers had made all the necessary preparations for her, when she learned

that the king of Egypt had arrived there also. Informed by his emissaries of

the  princess's  route,  he  immediately  altered  his  course,  followed  by  a

numerous escort. Having alighted, he placed sentinels at all the doors; then

repaired to the beautiful Formosanta's apartment, when he addressed her by

saying:

  "Miss, you are the lady I was in quest of. You paid me very little attention

when I was at Babylon. It is just to punish scornful capricious women. You

will, if you please, be kind enough to sup with me to-night; and I shall behave

to you according as I am satisfied with you."

  Formosanta saw very well that she was not the strongest. She judged that

good  sense  consisted  in  knowing  how  to  conform  to  one's  situation.  She

resolved to get rid of the king of Egypt by an innocent stratagem. She looked

at him through the corners of her eyes, (which in after ages has been called

ogling,) and then she spoke to him, with a modesty, grace, and sweetness, a

confusion, and a thousand other charms, which would have made the wisest

man a fool, and deceived the most discerning:

  "I acknowledge, sir, I always appeared with a downcast look, when you

did the king, my father, the honor of visiting him. I had some apprehensions

for my heart. I dreaded my too great simplicity. I trembled lest my father and

your  rivals  should  observe  the  preference  I  gave  you,  and  which  you  sohighly deserved. I can now declare my sentiments. I swear by the bull Apis,

which  after  you  is  the  thing  I  respect  the  most  in  the  world,  that  your

proposals have enchanted me. I have already supped with you at my father's,

and  I  will  sup  with  you  again,  without  his  being  of  the  party.  All  that  I

request of you is, that your high almoner should drink with us. He appeared

to  me  at  Babylon  to  be  an  excellent  guest.  I  have  some  Chiras  wine

remarkably good. I will make you both taste it. I consider you as the greatest

of kings, and the most amiable of men."

  This discourse turned the king of Egypt's head. He agreed to have the

almoner's company.

  "I have another favor to ask of you," said the princess, "which is to allow

me  to  speak  to  my  apothecary.  Women  have  always  some  little  ails  that

require attention, such as vapors in the head, palpitations of the heart, colics,

and the like, which often require some assistance. In a word, I at present

stand in need of my apothecary, and I hope you will not refuse me this slight

testimony of confidence."

  "Miss," replied the king of Egypt, "I know life too well to refuse you so

just a demand. I will order the apothecary to attend you whilst supper is

preparing. I imagine you must be somewhat fatigued by the journey; you will

also have occasion for a chambermaid; you may order her you like best to

attend you. I will afterward wait your commands and convenience."

  He then retired, and the apothecary and the chambermaid, named Irla,

entered. The princess had an entire confidence in her. She ordered her to

bring six bottles of Chiras wine for supper, and to make all the sentinels, who

had her officers under arrest, drink the same. Then she recommended her

apothecary to infuse in all the bottles certain pharmaceutic drugs, which make

those who take them sleep twenty-four hours, and with which he was always

provided.  She  was  implicitly  obeyed.  The  king  returned  with  his  high

almoner in about half an hour's time. The conversation at supper was very

gay. The king and the priest emptied the six bottles, and acknowledged there

was not such good wine in Egypt. The chambermaid was attentive to make

the servants in waiting drink. As for the princess, she took great care not to

drink any herself, saying that she was ordered by her physician a particular

regimen. They were all presently asleep.  The king of Egypt's almoner had one of the finest beards that a man of his

rank could wear. Formosanta lopped it off very skillfully; then sewing it to a

ribbon, she put it on her own chin. She then dressed herself in the priest's

robes, and decked herself in all the marks of his dignity, and her waiting maid

clad herself like the sacristan of the goddess Isis. At length, having furnished

herself with his urn and jewels, she set out from the inn amidst the sentinels,

who were asleep like their master. Her attendant had taken care to have two

horses ready at the door. The princess could not take with her any of the

officers of her train. They would have been stopped by the great guard.

  Formosanta and Irla passed through several ranks of soldiers, who, taking

the princess for the high priest, called her, "My most Reverend Father in

God," and asked his blessing. The two fugitives arrived in twenty-four hours

at Bassora, before the king awoke. They then threw off their disguise, which

might  have  created  some  suspicion.  They  fitted  out  with  all  possible

expedition  a  ship,  which  carried  them,  by  the  Straits  of  Ormus,  to  the

beautiful banks of Eden in Arabia Felix. This was that Eden, whose gardens

were  so  famous,  that  they  have  since  been  the  residence  of  the  best  of

mankind.  They  were  the  model  of  the  Elysian  fields,  the  gardens  of  the

Hesperides, and also those of the Fortunate Islands. In those warm climates

men imagined there could be no greater felicity than shades and murmuring

brooks. To live eternally in heaven with the Supreme Being, or to walk in the

garden  of  paradise,  was  the  same  thing  to  those  who  incessantly  spoke

without understanding one another, and who could scarce have any distinct

ideas or just expressions.

  As soon as the princess found herself in this land, her first care was to pay

her  dear  bird  the  funeral  obsequies  he  had  required  of  her.  Her  beautiful

hands  prepared  a  small  quantity  of  cloves  and  cinnamon.  What  was  her

surprise, when, having spread the ashes of the bird upon this funeral pyre, she

saw it blaze of itself! All was presently consumed. In the place of the ashes

there appeared nothing but a large egg, from whence she saw her bird issue

more  brilliant  than  ever.  This  was  one  of  the  most  happy  moments  the

princess had ever experienced in her whole life. There was but another that

could  ever  be  dearer  to  her;  it  was  the  object  of  her  wishes,  but  almost

beyond her hopes.

  "I plainly see," said she, to the bird, "you are the phœnix which I haveheard  so  much  spoken  of.  I  am  almost  ready  to  expire  with  joy  and

astonishment. I did not believe in your resurrection; but it is my good fortune

to be convinced of it."

  "Resurrection, in fact," said the phœnix to her, "is one of the most simple

things in the world. There is nothing more in being born twice than once.

Every  thing  in  this  world  is  the  effect  of  resurrection.  Caterpillars  are

regenerated into butterflies; a kernel put into the earth is regenerated into a

tree. All animals buried in the earth regenerate into vegetation, herbs, and

plants, and nourish other animals, of which they speedily compose part of the

substance. All particles which compose bodies are transformed into different

beings. It is true, that I am the only one to whom Oromasdes[1] has granted

the favor of regenerating in my own form."

  Formosanta, who from the moment she first saw Amazan and the phœnix,

had passed all her time in a round of astonishment, said to him:

  "I can easily conceive that the Supreme Being may form out of your ashes

a phœnix nearly resembling yourself; but that you should be precisely the

same person, that you should have the same soul, is a thing, I acknowledge, I

cannot very clearly comprehend. What became of your soul when I carried

you in my pocket after your death?"

  "Reflect one moment! Is it not as easy for the great Oromasdes to continue

action upon a single atom of my being, as to begin afresh this action? He had

before granted me sensation, memory, and thought. He grants them to me

again.  Whether  he  united  this  favor  to  an  atom  of  elementary  fire,  latent

within  me,  or  to  the  assemblage  of  my  organs,  is,  in  reality,  of  no

consequence. Men, as well as phœnixes, are entirely ignorant how things

come to pass, but the greatest favor the Supreme Being has bestowed upon

me,  is  to  regenerate  me  for  you.  Oh!  that  I  may  pass  the  twenty-eight

thousand years which I have still to live before my next resurrection, with

you and my dear Amazan."

  "My dear phœnix, remember what you first told me at Babylon, which I

shall never forget, and which flattered me with the hope of again seeing my

dear shepherd, whom I idolize; 'we must absolutely pay the Gangarids a visit

together,' and I must carry Amazan back with me to Babylon."

  "This is precisely my design," said the phœnix. "There is not a moment tolose. We must go in search of Amazan by the shortest road, that is, through

the  air.  There  are  in  Arabia  Felix  two  griffins,[2]  who  are  my  particular

friends, and who live only a hundred and fifty thousand leagues from here. I

am going to write to them by the pigeon post, and they will be here before

night. We shall have time to make you a convenient palankeen, with drawers,

in which you may place your provisions. You will be quite at your ease in

this vehicle, with your maid. These two griffins are the most vigorous of their

kind. Each of them will support one of the poles of the canopy between their

claws. But, once for all, time is very precious."

  He instantly went with Formosanta to order the carriage at an upholsterer's

of his acquaintance. It was made complete in four hours. In the drawers were

placed small fine loaves, biscuits superior to those of Babylon, large lemons,

pine-apples, cocoa, and pistachio nuts, Eden wine, which is as superior to that

of Chiras, as Chiras is to that of Surinam.

  The two griffins arrived at Eden at the appointed time. The vehicle was as

light  as  it  was  commodious  and  solid,  and  Formosanta  and  Irla  placed

themselves in it. The two griffins carried it off like a feather. The phœnix

sometimes  flew  after  it,  and  sometimes  perched  upon  its  roof.  The  two

griffins winged their way toward the Ganges with the velocity of an arrow

which  rends  the  air.  They  never  stopped  but  a  moment  at  night  for  the

travelers to take some refreshment, and the carriers to take a draught of water.

  They at length reached the country of the Gangarids. The princess's heart

palpitated with hope, love, and joy. The phœnix stopped the vehicle before

Amazan's  house;  but  Amazan  had  been  absent  from  home  three  hours,

without any one knowing whither he had gone.

  There are no words, even in the Gangaridian language, that could express

Formosanta's extreme despair.

  "Alas! this is what I dreaded," said the phœnix: "the three hours which you

passed at the inn, upon the road to Bassora, with that wretched king of Egypt,

have perhaps been at the price of the happiness of your whole life. I very

much fear we have lost Amazan, without the possibility of recovering him."

  He then asked the servants if he could salute the mother of Amazan? They

answered, that her husband had died only two days before, and she could

speak to no one. The phœnix, who was not without influence in the house,introduced the princess of Babylon into a saloon, the walls of which were

covered with orange-tree wood inlaid with ivory. The inferior shepherds and

shepherdesses, who were dressed in long white garments, with gold colored

trimmings, served up, in a hundred plain porcelain baskets, a hundred various

delicacies,  amongst  which  no  disguised  carcasses  were  to  be  seen.  They

consisted  of  rice,  sago,  vermicelli,  macaroni,  omelets,  milk,  eggs,  cream,

cheese,  pastry  of  every  kind,  vegetables,  fruits,  peculiarly  fragrant  and

grateful to the taste, of which no idea can be formed in other climates; and

they were accompanied with a profusion of refreshing liquors superior to the

finest wine.

  Whilst  the  princess  regaled  herself,  seated  upon  a  bed  of  roses,  four

peacocks, who were luckily mute, fanned her with their brilliant wings; two

hundred birds, one hundred shepherds and shepherdesses, warbled a concert

in two different choirs; the nightingales, thistlefinches, linnets, chaffinches,

sung the higher notes with the shepherdesses, and the shepherds sung the

tenor  and  bass.  The  princess  acknowledged,  that  if  there  was  more

magnificence at Babylon, nature was infinitely more agreeable among the

Gangarids; but whilst this consolatory and voluptuous music was playing,

tears flowed from her eyes, whilst she said to the damsel Irla:

  "These shepherds and shepherdesses, these nightingales, these linnets, are

making  love;  and  for  my  part,  I  am  deprived  of  the  company  of  the

Gangaridian hero, the worthy object of my most tender thoughts."

  Whilst she was taking this collation, her tears and admiration kept pace

with  each  other,  and  the  phœnix  addressed  himself  to  Amazan's  mother,

saying:

  "Madam, you cannot avoid seeing the princess of Babylon; you know-"

  "I know every thing," said she, "even her adventure at the inn, upon the

road to Bassora. A blackbird related the whole to me this morning; and this

cruel blackbird is the cause of my son's going mad, and leaving his paternal

abode."

  "You have not been informed, then, that the princess regenerated me?"

  "No, my dear child, the blackbird told me you were dead, and this made

me inconsolable. I was so afflicted at this loss, the death of my husband, andthe precipitate flight of my son, that I ordered my door to be shut to every

one. But since the princess of Babylon has done me the honor of paying me a

visit,  I  beg  she  may  be  immediately  introduced.  I  have  matters  of  great

importance to acquaint her with, and I choose you should be present."

  She then went to meet the princess in another saloon. She could not walk

very well. This lady was about three hundred years old; but she had still some

agreeable  vestiges  of  beauty.  It  might  be  conjectured,  that  about  her  two

hundred and fortieth, or two hundred and fiftieth year, she must have been a

most charming woman. She received Formosanta with a respectful nobleness,

blended  with  an  air  of  interest  and  sorrow,  which  made  a  very  lively

impression upon the princess.

  Formosanta immediately paid her the compliments of condolence upon

her husband's death.

  "Alas!" said the widow, "you have more reason to lament his death than

you imagine."

  "I am, doubtless, greatly afflicted," said Formosanta; "he was father to-."

Here  a  flood  of  tears  prevented  her  from  going  on.  "For  his  sake  only  I

undertook this journey, in which I have so narrowly escaped many dangers.

For him I left my father, and the most splendid court in the universe. I was

detained by a King of Egypt, whom I detest. Having escaped from this tyrant,

I have traversed the air in search of the only man I love. When I arrive, he

flies from me!" Here sighs and tears stopped her impassioned harangue.

  His mother then said to her:

  "When the king of Egypt made you his prisoner,-when you supped with

him at an inn upon the road to Bassora,-when your beautiful hands filled him

bumpers of Chiras wine, did you observe a blackbird that flew about the

room?"

  "Yes, really," said the princess, "I now recollect there was such a bird,

though at that time I did not pay it the least attention. But in collecting my

ideas, I now remember well, that at the instant when the king of Egypt rose

from the table to give me a kiss, the blackbird flew out at the window giving

a loud cry, and never appeared after."

  "Alas! madam," resumed Amazan's mother, "this is precisely the cause ofall our misfortunes; my son had dispatched this blackbird to gain intelligence

of your health, and all that passed at Babylon. He proposed speedily to return,

throw himself at your feet, and consecrate to you the remainder of his life.

You know not to what a pitch he adores you. All the Gangarids are both

loving and faithful; but my son is the most passionate and constant of them

all. The blackbird found you at an inn, drinking very cheerfully with the king

of Egypt and a vile priest; he afterward saw you give this monarch who had

killed the phœnix,-the man my son holds in utter detestation,-a fond embrace.

The blackbird, at the sight of this, was seized with a just indignation. He flew

away imprecating your fatal error. He returned this day, and has related every

thing. But, just heaven, at what a juncture! At the very time that my son was

deploring with me the loss of his father and that of the wise phœnix, the very

instant I had informed him that he was your cousin german-"

  "Oh heavens! my cousin, madam, is it possible? How can this be? And am

I  so  happy  as  to  be  thus  allied  to  him,  and  yet  so  miserable  as  to  have

offended him?"

  "My son is, I tell you," said the Gangaridian lady, "your cousin, and I shall

presently convince you of it; but in becoming my relation, you rob me of my

son. He cannot survive the grief that the embrace you gave to the king of

Egypt has occasioned him."

  "Ah! my dear aunt," cried the beautiful Formosanta, "I swear by him and

the all-powerful Oromasdes, that this embrace, so far from being criminal,

was the strongest proof of love your son could receive from me. I disobeyed

my father for his sake. For him I went from the Euphrates to the Ganges.

Having fallen into the hands of the worthless Pharaoh of Egypt, I could not

escape his clutches but by artifice. I call the ashes and soul of the phœnix,

which were then in my pocket, to witness. He can do me justice. But how can

your son, born upon the banks of the Ganges, be my cousin? I, whose family

have reigned upon the banks of the Euphrates for so many centuries?"

  "You know," said the venerable Gangaridian lady to her, "that your grand

uncle, Aldea, was king of Babylon, and that he was dethroned by Belus's

father?"

  "Yes, madam."

  "You  know  that  this  Aldea  had  in  marriage  a  daughter  named  Aldea,brought up in your court? It was this prince, who, being persecuted by your

father, took refuge under another name in our happy country. He married me,

and is the father of the young prince Aldea Amazan, the most beautiful, the

most courageous, the strongest, and most virtuous of mortals; and at this hour

the most unhappy. He went to the Babylonian festival upon the credit of your

beauty; since that time he idolizes you, and now grieves because he believes

that you have proved unfaithful to him. Perhaps I shall never again set eyes

upon my dear son."

  She then displayed to the princess all the titles of the house of Aldea.

Formosanta scarce deigned to look at them.

  "Ah! madam, do we examine what is the object of our desire? My heart

sufficiently  believes  you.  But  where  is  Aldea  Amazan?  Where  is  my

kinsman, my lover, my king? Where is my life? What road has he taken? I

will seek for him in every sphere the Eternal Being hath framed, and of which

he is the greatest ornament. I will go into the star Canope, into Sheath, into

Aldebaran;  I  will  go  and  tell  him  of  my  love  and  convince  him  of  my

innocence."

  The  phœnix  justified  the  princess  with  regard  to  the  crime  that  was

imputed to her by the blackbird, of fondly embracing the king of Egypt; but it

was necessary to undeceive Amazan and recall him. Birds were dispatched

on  every  side.  Unicorns  sent  forward  in  every  direction.  News  at  length

arrived that Amazan had taken the road toward China.

  "Well, then," said the princess, "let us set out for China. I will seek him in

defiance of both difficulty and danger. The journey is not long, and I hope I

shall bring you back your son in a fortnight at farthest."

  At these words tears of affection streamed from his mother's eyes and also

from  those  of  the  princess.  They  most  tenderly  embraced,  in  the  great

sensibility of their hearts.

  The phœnix immediately ordered a coach with six unicorns. Amazan's

mother furnished two thousand horsemen, and made the princess, her niece, a

present  of  some  thousands  of  the  finest  diamonds  of  her  country.  The

phœnix,  afflicted  at  the  evil  occasioned  by  the  blackbird's  indiscretion,

ordered all the blackbirds to quit the country; and from that time none have

been met with upon the banks of the Ganges.  [1] The god Ormuzd, (called Oromasdes by the Greeks), was regarded by

the Magi as the source of all good. His followers were in reality worshipers

of nature, and used neither temples, altars, nor statues, but performed their

simple rites on mountain tops. They adored Oromasdes as the source of all

light and purity, and regarded the sun and fire as symbols of the divinity.

They were, in the language of Wadsworth:


  "-zealous to reject

  Altar and Image, and the inclusive walls

  And roofs of temples built by human hands,-

  The loftiest heights ascending,

  Presented sacrifice to Moon and Stars

  And to the Winds and mother Elements,

  And the whole circle of the Heavens, for him

  A sensitive existence and a God."


  Byron,  in  Childe  Harold,  contrasts  the  "unwalled  temples,"  of  the

worshipers of Nature, with the "idol-dwellings," where images are adored:


  "Not vainly did the early Persian make

  His altar the high places and the peak

  Of earth-o'er-gazing mountains, and thus take

  A fit and unwalled temple, there to seek

  The Spirit, in whose honor shrines are weak,

  Upreared of human hands. Come and compare

  Columns and idol-dwellings, Goth or Greek,

  With Nature's realms of worship, earth and air,

  Nor fix on fond abodes to circumscribe thy prayer."  In Moore's Lalla Rookh will be found an exquisite sketch of the Magi, or

ancient Fire Worshipers,-


  "Those slaves of Fire, that morn and even

  Hal their creator's dwelling-place

  Among the living lights of heaven."-E.


  [2] On ancient coins and armorial bearings, the Griffin is represented as

having the head and wings of an eagle, joined to the body and paws of a lion,

thus representing strength and swiftness combined. It was supposed to watch

over mines of gold, and also whatever was secretly hidden. It built its nest

like  a  bird,  using  gold  as  the  material,  and  hence  it  was  necessary  to

vigilantly guard its treasures from the rapacity of mankind-who, says Milton,

in Paradise Lost, "by stealth purloined its guarded gold." The poets intimate

that the chariot of Apollo, the god of the sun, was drawn by griffins.-E.


  V.

    FORMOSANTA  VISITS  CHINA  AND  SCYTHIA  IN  SEARCH  OF

AMAZAN.

  The unicorns, in less than eight days, carried Formosanta, Irla, and the

phœnix, to Cambalu, the capital of China. This city was larger than that of

Babylon, and in appearance quite different. These fresh objects, these strange

manners, would have amused Formosanta could any thing but Amazan have

engaged her attention.

  As soon as the emperor of China learned that the princess of Babylon was

at the city gates, he dispatched four thousand Mandarins in ceremonial robes

to receive her. They all prostrated themselves before her, and presented her

with  an  address  written  in  golden  letters  upon  a  sheet  of  purple  silk.

Formosanta told them, that if she were possessed of four thousand tongues,

she would not omit replying immediately to every Mandarin; but that having

only one, she hoped they would be satisfied with her general thanks. They

conducted her, in a respectful manner, to the emperor.

  He was the wisest, most just and benevolent monarch upon earth. It washe  who  first  tilled  a  small  field  with  his  own  imperial  hands,  to  make

agriculture  respectable  to  his  people.  Laws  in  all  other  countries  were

shamefully confined to the punishment of crimes: he first allotted premiums

to  virtue.  This  emperor  had  just  banished  from  his  dominions  a  gang  of

foreign Bonzes, who had come from the extremities of the West, with the

frantic hope of compelling all China to think like themselves; and who, under

pretence  of  teaching  truths,  had  already  acquired  honors  and  riches.  In

expelling them, he delivered himself in these words, which are recorded in

the annals of the empire:

  "You may here do us much harm as you have elsewhere. You have come

to preach dogmas of intolerance, to the most tolerant nation upon earth. I

send you back, that I may never be compelled to punish you. You will be

honorably conducted to my frontiers. You will be furnished with every thing

necessary to return to the confines of the hemisphere from whence you came.

Depart in peace, if you can be at peace, and never return."

  The  princess  of  Babylon  heard  with  pleasure  of  this  speech  and

determination. She was the more certain of being well received at court, as

she was very far from entertaining any dogmas of intolerance. The emperor

of  China,  in  dining  with  her  tête-à-tête,  had  the  politeness  to  banish  all

disagreeable  etiquette.  She  presented  the  phœnix  to  him,  who  was  gently

caressed  by  the  emperor,  and  who  perched  upon  his  chair.  Formosanta,

toward the end of the repast, ingenuously acquainted him with the cause of

her journey, and entreated him to search for the beautiful Amazan in the city

of  Cambalu;  and  in  the  meanwhile  she  acquainted  the  emperor  with  her

adventures, without concealing the fatal passion with which her heart burned

for this youthful hero.

  "He did me the honor of coming to my court," said the emperor of China.

"I  was  enchanted  with  this  amiable  Amazan.  It  is  true  that  he  is  deeply

afflicted;  but  his  graces  are  thereby  the  more  affecting.  Not  one  of  my

favorites  has  more  wit.  There  is  not  a  gown  Mandarin  who  has  more

knowledge,-not  a  military  one  who  has  a  more  martial  or  heroic  air.  His

extreme  youth  adds  an  additional  value  to  all  his  talents.  If  I  were  so

unfortunate,  so  abandoned  by  the  Tien  and  Changti,  as  to  desire  to  be  a

conqueror, I would wish Amazan to put himself at the head of my armies,

and I should be sure of conquering the whole universe. It is a great pity thathis melancholy sometimes disconcerts him."

  "Ah! sir," said Formosanta, with much agitation and grief, blended with an

air of reproach, "why did you not request me to dine with him? This is a cruel

stroke you have given me. Send for him immediately, I entreat you."

  "He set out this very morning," replied the emperor, "without acquainting

me with his destination."

  Formosanta, turning toward the phœnix, said to him:

  "Did you ever know so unfortunate a damsel as myself?" Then resuming

the conversation, she said:

  "Sir, how came he to quit in so abrupt a manner, so polite a court, in

which, methinks, one might pass one's life?"

  "The  case  was  as  follows,"  said  he.  "One  of  the  most  amiable  of  the

princesses of the blood, falling desperately in love with him, desired to meet

him at noon. He set out at day-break, leaving this billet for my kinswoman,

whom it hath cost a deluge of tears:

  "Beautiful princess of the mongolian race. You are deserving of a heart

that was never offered up at any other altar. I have sworn to the immortal

gods never to love any other than Formosanta, princess of Babylon, and to

teach  her  how  to  conquer  one's  desires  in  traveling.  She  has  had  the

misfortune to yield to a worthless king of Egypt. I am the most unfortunate of

men; having lost my father, the phœnix, and the hope of being loved by

Formosanta. I left my mother in affliction, forsook my home and country,

being unable to live a moment in the place where I learned that Formosanta

loved another than me. I swore to traverse the earth, and be faithful. You

would despise me, and the gods punish me, if I violated my oath. Choose

another lover, madam, and be as faithful as I am."

  "Ah! give me that miraculous letter," said the beautiful Formosanta; "it

will afford me some consolation. I am happy in the midst of my misfortunes.

Amazan loves me! Amazan, for me, renounces the society of the princesses

of China. There is no one upon earth but himself endowed with so much

fortitude. He sets me a most brilliant example. The phœnix knows I did not

stand in need of it. How cruel it is to be deprived of one's lover for the most

innocent embrace given through pure fidelity. But, tell me, whither has hegone? What road has he taken? Deign to inform me, and I will immediately

set out."

  The  emperor  of  China  told  her,  that,  according  to  the  reports  he  had

received, her lover had taken the road toward Scythia. The unicorns were

immediately harnessed, and the princess, after the most tender compliments,

took leave of the emperor, and resumed her journey with the phœnix, her

chambermaid Irla, and all her train.

  As soon as she arrived in Scythia, she was more convinced than ever how

much  men  and  governments  differed,  and  would  continue  to  differ,  until

noble  and  enlightened  minds  should  by  degrees  remove  that  cloud  of

darkness which has covered the earth for so many ages; and until there should

be found in barbarous climes, heroic souls, who would have strength and

perseverance enough to transform brutes into men. There are no cities in

Scythia, consequently no agreeable arts. Nothing was to be seen but extensive

fields, and whole tribes whose sole habitations were tents and chars. Such an

appearance struck her with terror. Formosanta enquired in what tent or char

the king was lodged? She was informed that he had set out eight days before

with three hundred thousand cavalry to attack the king of Babylon, whose

niece, the beautiful princess Aldea, he had carried off.

  "What! did he run away with my cousin?" cried Formosanta. "I could not

have imagined such an incident. What! has my cousin, who was too happy in

paying her court to me, become a queen, and I am not yet married?" She was

immediately conducted, by her desire, to the queen's tent.

  Their  unexpected  meeting  in  such  distant  climes-the  uncommon

occurrences they mutually had to impart to each other, gave such charms to

this interview, as made them forget they never loved one another. They saw

each  other  with  transport;  and  a  soft  illusion  supplied  the  place  of  real

tenderness.  They  embraced  with  tears,  and  there  was  a  cordiality  and

frankness on each side that could not have taken place in a palace.

  Aldea remembered the phœnix and the waiting maid Irla. She presented

her cousin with zibelin skins, who in return gave her diamonds. The war

between the two kings was spoken of. They deplored the fate of soldiers who

were forced into battle, the victims of the caprice of princes, when two honest

men might, perhaps, settle the dispute in less than an hour, without a singlethroat being cut. But the principal topic was the handsome stranger, who had

conquered  lions,  given  the  largest  diamonds  in  the  universe,  written

madrigals, and had now become the most miserable of men from believing

the statements of a blackbird.

  "He is my dear brother," said Aldea. "He is my lover," cried Formosanta.

"You have, doubtless, seen him. Is he still here? for, cousin, as he knows he

is your brother, he cannot have left you so abruptly as he did the king of

China.

  "Have I seen him? good heavens! yes. He passed four whole days with

me.  Ah!  cousin,  how  much  my  brother  is  to  blame.  A  false  report  has

absolutely  turned  his  brain.  He  roams  about  the  world,  without  knowing

whither he is destined. Imagine to yourself his distraction of mind, which is

so great, that he has refused to meet the handsomest lady in all Scythia. He

set out yesterday, after writing her a letter which has thrown her into despair.

As for him, he has gone to visit the Cimmerians."

  "God be thanked!" cried Formosanta, "another refusal in my favor. My

good fortune is beyond my hopes, as my misfortunes surpass my greatest

apprehensions. Procure me this charming letter, that I may set out and follow

him,  loaded  with  his  sacrifices.  Farewell,  cousin.  Amazan  is  among  the

Cimmerians, and I fly to meet him."

  Aldea judged that the princess, her cousin, was still more frantic than her

brother Amazan. Hut as she had herself been sensible of the effects of this

epidemic  contagion,  having  given  up  the  delights  and  magnificence  of

Babylon for a king of Scythia; and as the women always excuse those follies

that are the effects of love, she felt for Formosanta's affliction, wished her a

happy journey, and promised to be her advocate with her brother, if ever she

was so fortunate as to see him again.


  VI.

  THE PRINCESS CONTINUES HER JOURNEY.

  From Scythia the princess of Babylon, with her phœnix, soon arrived at

the empire of the Cimmerians, now called Russia; a country indeed much less

populous than Scythia, but of far greater extent.  After a few days' journey, she entered a very large city, which has of late

been greatly improved by the reigning sovereign. The empress, however, was

not there at that time, but was making a journey through her dominions, on

the frontiers of Europe and Asia, in order to judge of their state and condition

with her own eyes,-to enquire into their grievances, and to provide the proper

remedies for them.

  The  principal  magistrate  of  that  ancient  capital,  as  soon  as  he  was

informed of the arrival of the Babylonian lady and the phœnix, lost no time in

paying her all the honors of his country; being certain that his mistress, the

most polite and generous empress in the world, would be extremely well

pleased to find that he had received so illustrious a lady with all that respect

which she herself, if on the spot, would have shown her.

  The princess was lodged in the palace, and entertained with great splendor

and elegance. The Cimmerian lord, who was an excellent natural philosopher,

diverted himself in conversing with the phœnix, at such times as the princess

chose  to  retire  to  her  own  apartment.  The  phœnix  told  him,  that  he  had

formerly traveled among the Cimmerians, but that he should not have known

the country again.

  "How comes it," said he, "that such prodigious changes have been brought

about in so short a time? Formerly, when I was here, about three hundred

years ago, I saw nothing but savage nature in all her horrors. At present, I

perceive industry, arts, splendor, and politeness."

  "This mighty revolution," replied the Cimmerian, "was begun by one man,

and is now carried to perfection by one woman;-a woman who is a greater

legislator than the Isis of the Egyptians, or the Ceres of the Greeks. Most law-

givers have been, unhappily, of a narrow genius and an arbitrary disposition,

which  conned  their  views  to  the  countries  they  governed.  Each  of  them

looked upon his own race as the only people existing upon the earth, or as if

they  ought  to  be  at  enmity  with  all  the  rest.  They  formed  institutions,

introduced  customs,  and  established  religions  exclusively  for  themselves.

Thus the Egyptians, so famous for those heaps of stones called pyramids,

have dishonored themselves with their barbarous superstitions. They despise

all other nations as profane; refuse all manner of intercourse with them; and,

excepting those conversant in the court, who now and then rise above theprejudices of the vulgar, there is not an Egyptian who will eat off a plate that

has ever been used by a stranger. Their priests are equally cruel and absurd. It

were better to have no laws at all, and to follow those notions of right and

wrong engraven on our hearts by nature, than to subject society to institutions

so inhospitable.

  "Our empress has adopted quite a different system. She considers her vast

dominions, under which all the meridians on the globe are united, as under an

obligation  of  correspondence  with  all  the  nations  dwelling  under  those

meridians.  The  first  and  most  fundamental  of  her  laws,  is  an  universal

toleration of all religions, and an unbounded compassion for every error. Her

penetrating  genius  perceives,  that  though  the  modes  of  religious  worship

differ, yet morality is every where the same. By this principle, she has united

her people to all the nations on earth, and the Cimmerians will soon consider

the Scandinavians and the Chinese as their brethren. Not satisfied with this,

she has resolved to establish this invaluable toleration, the strongest link of

society, among her neighbors. By these means, she obtained the title of the

parent  of  her  country;  and,  if  she  persevere,  will  acquire  that  of  the

benefactress of mankind.

  "Before her time, the men, who were unhappily possessed of power, sent

out legions of murderers to ravage unknown countries, and to water with the

blood of the children the inheritance of their fathers. Those assassins were

called heroes, and their robberies accounted glorious achievements. But our

sovereign courts another sort of glory. She has sent forth her armies to be the

messengers of peace; not only to prevent men from being the destroyers, but

to oblige them to be the benefactors of one another. Her standards are the

ensigns of public tranquillity."

  The phœnix was quite charmed with what he heard from this nobleman.

He told him, that though he had lived twenty-seven thousand nine hundred

years and seven months in this world, he had never seen any thing like it. He

then  enquired  after  his  friend  Amazan.  The  Cimmerian  gave  the  same

account of him that the princess had already heard from the Chinese and the

Scythians. It was Amazan's constant practice to run away from all the courts

he visited, the instant any lady noticed him in particular and seemed anxious

to make his acquaintance. The phœnix soon acquainted Formosanta with this

fresh instance of Amazan's fidelity-a fidelity so much the more surprising,since he could not imagine his princess would ever hear of it.

  Amazan had set out for Scandinavia, where he was entertained with sights

still more surprising. In this place, he beheld monarchy and liberty subsisting

together in a manner thought incompatible in other states; the laborers of the

ground shared in the legislature with the grandees of the realm. In another

place he saw what was still more extraordinary; a prince equally remarkable

for his extreme youth and uprightness, who possessed a sovereign authority

over his country, acquired by a solemn contract with his people.

  Amazan beheld a philosopher on the throne of Sarmatia, who might be

called a king of anarchy; for he was the chief of a hundred thousand petty

kings,  one  of  whom  with  his  single  voice  could  render  ineffectual  the

resolution of all the rest. Eolus had not more difficulty to keep the warring

winds  within  their  proper  bounds,  than  this  monarch  to  reconcile  the

tumultuous discordant spirits of his subjects. He was the master of a ship

surrounded with eternal storms. But the vessel did not founder, for he was an

excellent pilot.

  In traversing those various countries, so different from his own, Amazan

persevered in rejecting all the advances made to him by the ladies, though

incessantly distracted with the embrace given by Formosanta to the king of

Egypt, being resolved to set Formosanta an amazing example of an unshaken

and unparalleled fidelity.

  The princess of Babylon was constantly close at his heels, and scarcely

ever  missed  of  him  but  by  a  day  or  two;  without  the  one  being  tired  of

roaming, or the other losing a moment in pursuing him.

  Thus he traversed the immense continent of Germany, where he beheld

with  wonder  the  progress  which  reason  and  philosophy  had  made  in  the

north. Even their princes were enlightened, and had become the patrons of

freedom of thought. Their education had not been trusted to men who had an

interest  in  deceiving  them,  or  who  were  themselves  deceived.  They  were

brought up in the knowledge of universal morality, and in the contempt of

superstition.

  They had banished from all their estates a senseless custom which had

enervated and depopulated the southern countries. This was to bury alive in

immense  dungeons,  infinite  numbers  of  both  sexes  who  were  eternallyseparated from one another, and sworn to have no communication together.

This madness had contributed more than the most cruel wars to lay waste and

depopulate the earth.

  In opposing these barbarous institutions, so inimical to the laws of nature

and the best interests of society, the princes of the north had become the

benefactors of their race. They had likewise exploded other errors equally

absurd and pernicious. In short, men had at last ventured to make use of their

reason in those immense regions; whereas it was still believed almost every

where  else,  that  they  could  not  be  governed  but  in  proportion  to  their

ignorance.


  VII.

  AMAZAN VISITS ALBION.

  From Germany, Amazan arrived at Batavia; where his perpetual chagrin

was in a good measure alleviated, by perceiving among the inhabitants a faint

resemblance to his happy countrymen, the Gangarids. There he saw liberty,

security,  and  equality,-with  toleration  in  religion;  but  the  ladies  were  so

indifferent, that none made him any advances; an experience he had not met

with before. It is true, however, that had he been inclined to address them,

they would not have been offended; though, at the same time, not one would

have been the least in love; but he was far from any thoughts of making

conquests.

  Formosanta had nearly caught him in this insipid nation. He had set out

but a moment before her arrival.

  Amazan had heard so much among the Batavians in praise of a certain

island called Albion, that he was led by curiosity to embark with his unicorns

on board a ship, which, with a favorable easterly wind, carried him in a few

hours to that celebrated country, more famous than Tyre, or Atlantis.

  The beautiful Formosanta, who had followed him, as it were on the scent,

to the banks of the Volga, the Vistula, the Elbe, and the Weser, and had never

been above a day or two behind him, arrived soon after at the mouth of the

Rhine, where it disembogues its waters into the German Ocean.

  Here she learned that her beloved Amazan had just set sail for Albion. Shethought she saw the vessel on board of which he was, and could not help

crying out for joy; at which the Batavian ladies were greatly surprised, not

imagining that a young man could possibly occasion so violent a transport.

They  took,  indeed,  but  little  notice  of  the  phœnix,  as  they  reckoned  his

feathers would not fetch near so good a price as those of their own ducks, and

other water fowl. The princess of Babylon hired two vessels to carry herself

and her retinue to that happy island, which was soon to possess the only

object of her desires, the soul of her life, and the god of her idolatry.

  An unpropitious wind from the west suddenly arose, just as the faithful

and unhappy Amazan landed on Albion's sea-girt shore, and detained the

ships of the Babylonian princess just as they were on the point of sailing.

Seized with a deep melancholy, she went to her room, determined to remain

there till the wind should change; but it blew for the space of eight days, with

an unremitting violence. The princess, during this tedious period, employed

her maid of honor, Irla, in reading romances; which were not indeed written

by the Batavians; but as they are the factors of the universe, they traffic in the

wit as well as commodities of other nations. The princess purchased of Mark

Michael Rey, the bookseller, all the novels which had been written by the

Ausonians  and  the  Welch,  the  sale  of  which  had  been  wisely  prohibited

among those nations to enrich their neighbors, the Batavians. She expected to

find  in  those  histories  some  adventure  similar  to  her  own,  which  might

alleviate her grief. The maid of honor read, the phœnix made comments, and

the princess, finding nothing in the Fortunate Country Maid, in Tansai, or in

the Sopha, that had the least resemblance to her own affairs, interrupted the

reader every moment, by asking how the wind stood.


  VIII.

  AMAZAN LEAVES ALBION TO VISIT THE LAND OF SATURN.

  In the mean time Amazan was on the road to the capital of Albion, in his

coach and six unicorns, all his thoughts employed on his dear princess. At a

small distance he perceived a carriage overturned in a ditch. The servants had

gone in different directions in quest of assistance, but the owner kept his seat,

smoking  his  pipe  with  great  tranquillity,  without  manifesting  the  smallest

impatience. His name was my lord What-then, in the language from which Itranslate these memoirs.

  Amazan made all the haste possible to help him, and without assistance set

the carriage to rights, so much was his strength superior to that of other men.

My lord What-then took no other notice of him, than saying, "a stout fellow,

by Jove!" In the meantime the neighboring people, having arrived, flew into a

great passion at being called out to no purpose, and fell upon the stranger.

They abused him, called him an outlandish dog, and challenged him to strip

and box.

  Amazan seized a brace of them in each hand, and threw them twenty paces

from him; the rest seeing this, pulled off their hats, and bowing with great

respect, asked his honor for something to drink. His honor gave them more

money than they had ever seen in their lives before. My lord What-then now

expressed great esteem for him, and asked him to dinner at his country house,

about three miles off. His invitation being accepted, he went into Amazan's

coach, his own being out of order from the accident.

  After  a  quarter  of  an  hour's  silence,  my  lord  What-then,  looking  upon

Amazan for a moment, said. "How d'ye do?" which, by the way, is a phrase

without any meaning, adding, "You have got six fine unicorns there." After

which he continued smoking as usual.

  The traveler told him his unicorns were at his service, and that he had

brought  them  from  the  country  of  the  Gangarids.  From  thence  he  took

occasion to inform him of his affair with the princess of Babylon, and the

unlucky kiss she had given the king of Egypt; to which the other made no

reply,  being  very  indifferent  whether  there  were  any  such  people  in  the

world, as a king of Egypt, or a princess of Babylon.

  He remained dumb for another quarter of an hour; after which he asked his

companion a second time how he did, and whether they had any good roast

beef among the Gangarids.

  Amazan answered with his wonted politeness, "that they did not eat their

brethren on the banks of the Ganges." He then explained to him that system

which many ages afterward was surnamed the Pythagorean philosophy. But

my lord fell asleep in the meantime, and made but one nap of it till he came

to his own house.  He was married to a young and charming woman, on whom nature had

bestowed a soul as lively and sensible as that of her husband was dull and

stupid.  A  few  gentlemen  of  Albion  had  that  day  come  to  dine  with  her;

among whom there were characters of all sorts; for that country having been

almost always under the government of foreigners, the families that had come

over with these princes had imported their different manners. There were in

this  company  some  persons  of  an  amiable  disposition,  others  of  superior

genius, and a few of profound learning.

  The mistress of the house had none of that awkward stiffness, that false

modesty, with which the young ladies of Albion were then reproached. She

did not conceal by a scornful look and an affected taciturnity, her deficiency

of ideas: and the embarrassing humility of having nothing to say. Never was

a woman more engaging. She received Amazan with a grace and politeness

that were quite natural to her. The extreme beauty of this young stranger, and

the involuntary comparison she could not help making between him and her

prosaic husband, did not increase her happiness or content.

  Dinner being served, she placed Amazan at her side, and helped him to a

variety of puddings, he having informed her that the Gangarids never dined

upon any thing which had received from the gods the celestial gift of life. The

events of his early life, the manners of the Gangarids, the progress of arts,

religion,  and  government,  were  the  subjects  of  a  conversation  equally

agreeable and instructive all the time of the entertainment, which lasted till

night: during which my lord What-then did nothing but push the bottle about,

and call for the toast.

  After dinner, while my lady was pouring out the tea, still feeding her eyes

on the young stranger, he entered into a long conversation with a member of

parliament;  for  every  one  knows  that  there  was,  even  then,  a  parliament

called Wittenagemot, or the assembly of wise men. Amazan enquired into the

constitution,  laws,  manners,  customs,  forces,  and  arts,  which  made  this

country  so  respectable;  and  the  member  answered  him  in  the  following

manner.

  "For a long time we went stark naked, though our climate is none of the

hottest. We were likewise for a long time enslaved by a people who came

from the ancient country of Saturn, watered by the Tiber. But the mischief wehave done one another has greatly exceeded all that we ever suffered from

our first conquerors. One of our princes carried his superstition to such a

pitch, as to declare himself the subject of a priest, who dwells also on the

banks of the Tiber, and is called the Old Man of the Seven Mountains. It has

been the fate of the seven mountains to domineer over the greatest part of

Europe, then inhabited by brutes in human shape.

  Religious wars in Albion.

  "To  those  times  of  infamy  and  debasement,  succeeded  the  ages  of

barbarity and confusion. Our country, more tempestuous than the surrounding

ocean, has been ravaged and drenched in blood by our civil discords. Many

of our crowned heads have perished by a violent death. Above a hundred

princes of the royal blood have ended their days on the scaffold, whilst the

hearts of their adherents have been torn from their breasts, and thrown in

their faces. In short, it is the province of the hangman to write the history of

our island, seeing that this personage has finally determined all our affairs of

moment.

  "But to crown these horrors, it is not very long since some fellows wearing

black mantles, and others who cast white shirts over their jackets, having

become  aggressive  and  intolerent,  succeeded  in  communicating  their

madness to the whole nation. Our country was then divided into two parties,

the  murderers  and  the  murdered,  the  executioners  and  the  sufferers,

plunderers and slaves; and all in the name of God, and whilst they were

seeking the Lord.

  "Who would have imagined, that from this horrible abyss, this chaos of

dissension, cruelty, ignorance, and fanaticism, a government should at last

spring up, the most perfect, it may be said, now in the world; yet such has

been the event. A prince, honored and wealthy, all-powerful to do good, but

without power to do evil, is at the head of a free, warlike, commercial, and

enlightened nation. The nobles on one hand, and the representatives of the

people on the other, share the legislature with the monarch.

  "We  have  seen,  by  a  singular  fatality  of  events,  disorder,  civil  wars,

anarchy and wretchedness, lay waste the country, when our kings aimed at

arbitrary power: whereas tranquillity, riches, and universal happiness, have

only reigned among us, when the prince has remained satisfied with a limitedauthority.  All  order  had  been  subverted  whilst  we  were  disputing  about

mysteries,  but  was  re-established  the  moment  we  grew  wise  enough  to

despise them. Our victorious fleets carry our flag on every ocean; our laws

place our lives and fortunes in security; no judge can explain them in an

arbitrary manner, and no decision is ever given without the reasons assigned

for  it.  We  should  punish  a  judge  as  an  assassin,  who  should  condemn  a

citizen to death without declaring the evidence which accused him, and the

law upon which he was convicted.

  "It is true, there are always two parties among us, who are continually

writing  and  intriguing  against  each  other,  but  they  constantly  re-unite,

whenever it is needful to arm in defence of liberty and our country. These

two parties watch over one another, and mutually prevent the violation of the

sacred deposit of the laws. They hate one another, but they love the state.

They are like those jealous lovers, who pay court to the same mistress, with a

spirit of emulation.

  "From the same fund of genius by which we discovered and supported the

natural rights of mankind, we have carried the sciences to the highest pitch to

which they can attain among men. Your Egyptians, who pass for such great

mechanics-your Indians, who are believed to be such great philosophers-your

Babylonians, who boast of having observed the stars for the course of four

hundred and thirty thousand years-the Greeks, who have written so much,

and  said  so  little,  know  in  reality  nothing  in  comparison  to  our  inferior

scholars, who have studied the discoveries of Our great masters. We have

ravished more secrets from nature in the space of an hundred years, that the

human species had been able to discover in as many ages.

  "This is a true account of our present state. I have concealed from you

neither the good nor the bad; neither our shame nor our glory; and I have

exaggerated nothing."

  At this discourse Amazan felt a strong desire to be instructed in those

sublime sciences his friend had spoken of; and if his passion for the princess

of Babylon, his filial duty to his mother whom he had quitted, and his love

for his native country, had not made strong remonstrances to his distempered

heart, he would willingly have spent the remainder of his life in Albion. But

that unfortunate kiss his princess had given the king of Egypt, did not leavehis mind at sufficient ease to study the abstruse sciences.

  "I confess," said he, "having made a solemn vow to roam about the world,

and to escape from myself. I have a curiosity to see that ancient land of

Saturn-that people of the Tiber and of the Seven Mountains, who have been

heretofore your masters. They must undoubtedly be the first people on earth."

  "I advise you by all means," answered the member, "to take that journey,

if  you  have  the  smallest  taste  for  music  or  painting.  Even  we  ourselves

frequently carry our spleen and melancholy to the Seven Mountains. But you

will be greatly surprised when you see the descendants of our conquerors."

  This was a long conversation, and Amazan had spoken in so agreeable a

manner;  his  voice  was  so  charming;  his  whole  behavior  so  noble  and

engaging,  that  the  mistress  of  the  house  could  not  resist  the  pleasure  of

having a little private chat with him in her turn. She accordingly sent him a

little  billet-doux  intimating  her  wishes  in  the  most  agreeable  language.

Amazan  had  once  more  the  courage  to  resist  the  fascination  of  female

society, and, according to custom, wrote the lady an answer full of respect,-

representing to her the sacredness of his oath, and the strict obligation he was

under  to  teach  the  princess  of  Babylon  to  conquer  her  passions  by  his

example; after which he harnessed his unicorns and departed for Batavia,

leaving all the company in deep admiration of him, and the lady in profound

astonishment. In her confusion she dropped Amazan's letter. My lord What-

then read it next morning:

  "D-n it," said he, shrugging up his shoulders, "what stuff and nonsense

have we got here?" and then rode out a fox hunting with some of his drunken

neighbors.

  Amazan was already sailing upon the sea, possessed of a geographical

chart,  with  which  he  had  been  presented  by  the  learned  Albion  he  had

conversed with at lord What-then's. He was extremely astonished to find the

greatest part of the earth upon a single sheet of paper.

  His eyes and imagination wandered over this little space; he observed the

Rhine, the Danube, the Alps of Tyrol, there specified under their different

names, and all the countries through which he was to pass before he arrived

at the city of the Seven Mountains. But he more particularly fixed his eyes

upon the country of the Gangarids, upon Babylon, where he had seen his dearprincess, and upon the country of Bassora, where she had given a fatal kiss to

the  king  of  Egypt.  He  sighed,  and  tears  streamed  from  his  eyes  at  the

unhappy remembrance. He agreed with the Albion who had presented him

with the universe in epitome, when he averred that the inhabitants of the

banks of the Thames were a thousand times better instructed than those upon

the banks of the Nile, the Euphrates, and the Ganges.

  As he returned into Batavia, Formosanta proceeded toward Albion with

her  two  ships  at  full  sail.  Amazan's  ship  and  the  princess's  crossed  one

another and almost touched; the two lovers were close to each other, without

being  conscious  of  the  fact.  Ah!  had  they  but  known  it!  But  this  great

consolation tyrannic destiny would not allow.


  IX.

  AMAZAN VISITS ROME.

  No sooner had Amazan landed on the flat muddy shore of Batavia, than he

immediately set out toward the city of the Seven Mountains. He was obliged

to traverse the southern part of Germany. At every four miles he met with a

prince and princess, maids of honor, and beggars. He was greatly astonished

every where at the coquetries of these ladies and maids of honor, in which

they  indulged  with  German  good  faith.  After  having  cleared  the  Alps  he

embarked  upon  the  sea  of  Dalmatia,  and  landed  in  a  city  that  had  no

resemblance to any thing he had heretofore seen. The sea formed the streets,

and the houses were erected in the water. The few public places, with which

this  city  was  ornamented,  were  filled  with  men  and  women  with  double

faces-that  which  nature  had  bestowed  on  them,  and  a  pasteboard  one,  ill

painted, with which they covered their natural visage; so that this people

seemed composed of spectres. Upon the arrival of strangers in this country,

they  immediately  purchase  these  visages,  in  the  same  manner  as  people

elsewhere  furnish  themselves  with  hats  and  shoes.  Amazan  despised  a

fashion so contrary to nature. He appeared just as he was.

  Many ladies were introduced, and interested themselves in the handsome

Amazan. But he fled with the utmost precipitancy, uttering the name of the

incomparable princess of Babylon, and swearing by the immortal gods, that

she was far handsomer than the Venetian girls.  "Sublime traitoress," he cried, in his transports, "I will teach you to be

faithful!"

  Now the yellow surges of the Tiber, pestiferous fens, a few pale emaciated

inhabitants clothed in tatters which displayed their dry tanned hides, appeared

to  his  sight,  and  bespoke  his  arrival  at  the  gate  of  the  city  of  the  Seven

Mountains,-that city of heroes and legislators who conquered and polished a

great part of the globe.

  He expected to have seen at the triumphal gate, five hundred battalions

commanded by heroes, and in the senate an assembly of demi-gods giving

laws  to  the  earth.  But  the  only  army  he  found  consisted  of  about  thirty

tatterdemalions, mounting guard with umbrellas for fear of the sun. Having

arrived at a temple which appeared to him very fine, but not so magnificent

as that of Babylon, he was greatly astonished to hear a concert performed by

men with female voices.

  "This," said he, "is a mighty pleasant country, which was formerly the

land of Saturn. I have been in a city where no one showed his own face; here

is another where men have neither their own voices nor beards."

  He was told that these eunuchs had been trained from childhood, that they

might sing the more agreeably the praises of a great number of persons of

merit. Amazan could not comprehend the meaning of this.

  They then explained to him very pleasantly, and with many gesticulations,

according to the custom of their country, the point in question. Amazan was

quite confounded.

  "I have traveled a great way," said he, "but I never before heard such a

whim."

  After they had sung a good while, the Old Man of the Seven Mountains

went with great ceremony to the gate of the temple. He cut the air in four

parts with his thumb raised, two fingers extended and two bent, in uttering

these  words  in  a  language  no  longer  spoken:  "To  the  city  and  to  the

universe." Amazan could not see how two fingers could extend so far.

  He presently saw the whole court of the master of the world file off. This

court consisted of grave personages, some in scarlet, and others in violet

robes. They almost all eyed the handsome Amazan with a tender look; andbowed to him, while commenting upon his personal appearance.

  The  zealots  whose  vocation  was  to  show  the  curiosities  of  the  city  to

strangers, very eagerly offered to conduct him to several ruins, in which a

muleteer would not choose to pass a night, but which were formerly worthy

monuments of the grandeur of a royal people. He moreover saw pictures of

two  hundred  years  standing,  and  statues  that  had  remained  twenty  ages,

which appeared to him masterpieces of their kind.

  "Can you still produce such work?" said Amazan.

  "No, your excellency," replied one of the zealots; "but we despise the rest

of the earth, because we preserve these rarities. We are a kind of old clothes

men, who derive our glory from the cast-off garbs in our warehouses."

  Amazan was willing to see the prince's palace, and he was accordingly

conducted thither. He saw men dressed in violet colored robes, who were

reckoning the money of the revenues of the domains of lands, some situated

upon the Danube, some upon the Loire, others upon the Guadalquivir, or the

Vistula.

  "Oh! Oh!" said Amazan, having consulted his geographical map, "your

master, then, possesses all Europe, like those ancient heroes of the Seven

Mountains?"

  "He should possess the whole universe by divine right," replied a violet-

livery  man;  "and  there  was  even  a  time  when  his  predecessors  nearly

compassed universal monarchy, but their successors are so good as to content

themselves at present with some monies which the kings, their subjects, pay

to them in the form of a tribute."

  "Your master is then, in fact, the king of kings. Is that his title?" said

Amazan.

  The  Old  Man  of  the  Seven  Mountains.-"The  Old  Man  of  the  Seven

Mountains went with great ceremony to the gate of the temple. He cut the air

in four parts with his thumb raised, two fingers extended and two bent, in

uttering these words in a language no longer spoken: 'To the city and to the

universe.'"


  "Your excellency, his title is the servant of servants! He was originally afisherman and porter, wherefore the emblems of his dignity consist of keys

and nets; but he at present issues orders to every king in Christendom. It is

not a long while since he sent one hundred and one mandates to a king of the

Celts, and the king obeyed."


  THE SERVANT OF SERVANTS.

  The personal service of Pius IX. as it existed in 1873, without counting

Swiss gensdarmes, palatine guards, &c., is thus described by the author of

The Religion of Rome, page 21.

  "The  pope  for  his  own  exclusive  personal  service  has  four  palatine

cardinals, three prelates and a master, ten prelates of the private chamber,

amongst whom are a cup-bearer, and a keeper of the wardrobe; then two

hundred and fifteen domestic prelates. Then follow two hundred and forty-

nine  supernumerary  prelates  of  the  private  chamber,  four  private

chamberlains of the sword and cloak, Roman patricians, one of whom is a

master of Santo Ospizto.

  "What  things  are  these?  what  service  do  these  private  chamberlains

render? what is the use of this cloak and sword? We will undertake to say that

they do not know themselves. Let us proceed. Then come next a quarter-

master major, a correspondent general of the post, and one hundred and thirty

fresh private chamberlains of the sword and cloak! Oh! it is a labor to count

them!  Next  come  two  hundred  and  sixty-five  honorary  monsignori  extra

urbem, six honorary chamberlains of the sword and cloak, then eight private

chaplains. What a number of private affairs must the pope have? Then eighty-

one honorary chaplains extra urbem; then-but enough, enough, enough!

  "No! not enough for the pope. Then come two private monsignori of the

tonsure-still  private!-then  eighteen  supernumeraries:  two  adjutants  of  the

chamber, a private steward-again private!-then nineteen ushers, participants,

and twenty-four supernumeraries. Then-ah! there are no more. Let us cast up

those we have named; they amount only to a bagatelle of one thousand and

twenty-five persons! And take note, that there are not included in this list the

palatine administration, and the tribunal of the majordomo, the Swiss guards,

the gensdarmes, etc., etc.

  "If it be difficult for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, howshall he who inhabits the Vatican enter there?-who has treasures of all sorts,

money, precious gems, precious and countless works of art, vessels of silver

and gold, and who has on his head not one crown but three? who causes

himself to be borne on the shoulders of men; who causes them to kiss his

feet; who has millions of income, and a thousand persons to attend upon him?

  "There is, in fact, nothing to be compared with the effrontery with which

the Vatican enacts the comedy of poverty. Yes, it has reason to believe still in

miracles; it is an actual miracle which the Roman court works, in drawing

from the pockets of the poor the obolus necessary to buy them bread, to

spend it before their faces in Sybaritic luxury, in a palace of The Thousand

and One Nights. On the day of Epiphany, the Jesuits sent to the Vatican some

hundreds of women and children of the Trastevere, to carry to the pope a gift

of money. The children to succor the poverty of the pope, who consumes on

himself and household enough to maintain a whole city, gave him the money

which they had received in gifts from their parents, and the women of the

Trastevere,  the  few  pence  that  they  had  laid  aside  for  the  needs  of  their

families.

  "But what is most extraordinary is, that these women and children who

bestowed  their  charity  on  the  pope,  went  to  do  it  into  halls  full  of  gold,

marble, precious stones, velvet, silk, embroidery, paintings, and statues, into

the Vatican, that gigantic palace, which occupies a space of fifteen hundred

feet in length, and eight hundred in breadth, with twenty courts, two hundred

staircases, eleven thousand rooms, galleries and halls full of treasures, and

the construction of which has cost hundreds of millions. These children and

these women passing through so much wealth never were struck with the idea

that Pius IX. ought to be something more than a beggar; that there is no

monarch in the world who has an abode like the popes of Rome-the very

sight of the gifts sent by all the world to Pius IX. being enough to strike them

dumb with astonishment.

  "Now these women and these children don't comprehend this, and here is

the miracle. This Pius IX. ought to go into the cottages of these poor women

and take them money, instead of their going to carry it into the luxurious

palace of the pope.

  "The miracle becomes still greater every time that the Pope, replying tothose who bring money, talks of Jesus; for Jesus was in a stable, not in a

palace of eleven thousand rooms. Jesus would at once have sent away the

Swiss, the gensdarmes, the palatine guards, the chamberlains private and not

private, etc., and would have said to the people of the Trastevere, and of the

quarters of the poor: 'Come here into the Vatican, poor people, leave those

wretched  cabins  where  you  suffer  so  much;  come  to  me;  I  have  eleven

thousand rooms to offer you, one of which is quite enough for me, and so I

will divide these amongst those who have none.' This would have been said

by  Christ,  whom  Pius  IX.  invokes  so  often,  calling  himself  His  vicar  or

steward. But try, ye poor, to enter into the Vatican, and you will find at once

at the door a Swiss, who will chase you away by blows of his halberd. He

will let in anyone who comes to bring money, but not a soul who comes to

ask for it."-E.

  "Your fisherman must then have sent five or six hundred thousand men to

put these orders in execution?"

  "Not at all, your excellency. Our holy master is not rich enough to keep

ten thousand soldiers on foot: but he has five or six hundred thousand divine

prophets dispersed in other countries. These prophets of various colors are, as

they ought to be, supported at the expense of the people where they reside.

They proclaim, from heaven, that my master may, with his keys, open and

shut all locks, and particularly those of strong boxes. A Norman priest, who

held the post of confident of this king's thoughts, convinced him he ought to

obey, without questioning, the one hundred and one thoughts of my master;

for you must know that one of the prerogatives of the Old Man of the Seven

Mountains is never to err, whether he deigns to speak or deigns to write."

  "In faith," said Amazan, "this is a very singular man; I should be pleased

to dine with him."

  "Were your excellency even a king, you could not eat at his table. All that

he could do for you, would be to allow you to have one served by the side of

his,  but  smaller  and  lower.  But  if  you  are  inclined  to  have  the  honor  of

speaking to him, I will ask an audience for you on condition of the buona

mancia, which you will be kind enough to give me." "Very readily," said the

Gangarid. The violet-livery man bowed: "I will introduce you to-morrow,"

said he. "You must make three very low bows, and you must kiss the feet ofthe Old Man of the Seven Mountains." At this information Amazan burst into

so violent a fit of laughing that he was almost choked; which, however, he

surmounted,  holding  his  sides,  whilst  the  violent  emotions  of  the  risible

muscles forced the tears down his cheeks, till he reached the inn, where the fit

still continued upon him.

  At dinner, twenty beardless men and twenty violins produced a concert.

He  received  the  compliments  of  the  greatest  lords  of  the  city  during  the

remainder of the day; but from their extravagant actions, he was strongly

tempted  to  throw  two  or  three  of  these  violet-colored  gentry  out  of  the

window. He left with the greatest precipitation this city of the masters of the

world, where young men were treated so whimsically, and where he found

himself necessitated to kiss an old man's toe, as if his cheek were at the end

of his foot.


  X.

  AN UNFORTUNATE ADVENTURE IN GAUL.

  In  all  the  provinces  through  which  Amazan  passed,  he  remained  ever

faithful to the princess of Babylon, though incessantly enraged at the king of

Egypt. This model of constancy at length arrived at the new capital of the

Gauls. This city, like many others, had alternately submitted to barbarity,

ignorance, folly, and misery. The first name it bore was Dirt and Mire; it then

took that of Isis, from the worship of Isis, which had reached even here. Its

first senate consisted of a company of watermen. It had long been in bondage,

and submitted to the ravages of the heroes of the Seven Mountains; and some

ages after, some other heroic thieves who came from the farther banks of the

Rhine, had seized upon its little lands.

  Time, which changes all things, had formed it into a city, half of which

was very noble and very agreeable, the other half somewhat barbarous and

ridiculous. This was the emblem of its inhabitants. There were within its

walls at least a hundred thousand people, who had no other employment than

play  and  diversion.  These  idlers  were  the  judges  of  those  arts  which  the

others cultivated. They were ignorant of all that passed at court; though they

were only four short miles distant from it: but it seemed to them at least six

hundred thousand miles off. Agreeableness in company, gaiety and frivolty,formed  the  important  and  sole  considerations  of  their  lives.  They  were

governed  like  children,  who  are  extravagantly  supplied  with  gewgaws,  to

prevent  their  crying.  If  the  horrors  were  discussed,  which  two  centuries

before had laid waste their country, or if those dreadful periods were recalled,

when one half of the nation massacred the other for sophisms, they, indeed,

said, "this was not well done;" then, presently, they fell to laughing again, or

singing of catches.

  Kissing an old man's toe.

  KISSING THE POPE'S FOOT.


  On page 181 of The Religion of Rome, the author asks the questions:

"Why does the pope cause his foot, or rather his slipper, to be kissed? And

when did this custom begin?" His explanation is as follows:

  "Theophilus Rainaldo and the Bollandist fathers, as well as other Roman

Catholic authors, tell us a gallant story of Pope St. Leo I., called the Great,

which, if it were true, might show the origin of the practice. They say that a

young and very handsome devotee was admitted on Easter day, to kiss the

hand of Pope St. Leo after the mass. The pope felt himself very much excited

by this kiss, and remembering the words of the Savior, 'If thy hand offend

thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee' (Matt. v. 30), he at once cut off his hand.

But as he was unable to perform mass with only one hand, the people were in

a great rage. The pope therefore prayed to God to restore his hand, and God

complied:  his  hand  was  again  united  to  the  stump.  And  to  avoid  such

dilemmas in future, Leo ordered that thereafter no one should kiss his hand,

but  only  his  foot.  A  very  little  common  sense  is  sufficient  to  make  us

understand that such was not the origin of this custom.

  "The first who invented this degrading act of kissing feet was the Emperor

Caligula. He, in his quality of Pontifex Maximus, ordered the people to kiss

his  foot.  Succeeding  emperors  refused  such  an  act  of  base  slavery.  But

Heliogabalus, as emperor, and Pontifex Maximus, again introduced it. After

him, the custom fell into disuse; but the Christian emperors retaining some of

the wicked fables given to the pagan emperors, permitted the kissing of the

foot as a compliment on the presentation of petitions. We may cite a few

instances. The acts of the Council of Chalcedon say that Fazius, Bishop ofTyre,  in  his  petition  to  the  emperor,  said,  'I  supplicate,  prostrate,  at  your

immaculate and divine feet.' Bassianus, Bishop of Ephesus, says, 'I prostrate

myself  at  your  feet.'  Eunomius,  Bishop  of  Nicomedia,  says,  'I  prostrate

myself before the footsteps of your power.' The Abbot Saba says, 'I am come

to adore the footsteps of your piety. Prococius, in his History of Mysteries,

says that the Emperor Justinian, at the instigation of the proud Theodora, his

wife, was the first amongst the Christian emperors who ordered prostrations

before himself and his wife, and the kissing of their feet.

  "The ecclesiastics, the bishops, and, finally, the popes, were not exempt

from paying this homage to the emperors. The prelates of Syria held this

language  to  the  Emperor  Justinian.  'The  pope  of  holy  memory,  and  the

archbishop of ancient Rome, has come to your pious conversation, and has

been honored by your holy feet.' Pope Gregory I., writing to Theodorus, the

physician of the Emperor Mauritius, in the year A.D. 593, said: 'My tongue

cannot sufficiently express the great benefits that I have received from God

Almighty and from our great emperor, for which I can only love him and kiss

his feet.' In the year A.D. 681 Pope Agathon, sending his legates to the sixth

council, writes to the Emperor Constantine Pogonatus: 'As prostrate in your

presence, and embracing your feet, I implore you,' etc. In the seventh century,

therefore,  not  only  did  the  popes  not  have  their  feet  kissed,  but  they

themselves were obliged to kiss those of the emperor. Becoming sovereigns

of Rome, they soon began to adopt the same custom. Pope Eugenius II., who

died in 827, was the first who made it the law to kiss the papal foot. From

that time it was necessary to kneel before the popes. Gregory VII. ordered all

princes to submit to this practice.

  "From what we have said it is clear that the origin of feet-kissing was

entirely pagan and idolatrous. That this custom is in total contradiction to the

precepts of the Gospel would be a waste of words to assert. Jesus Christ was

so  far  from  desiring  people  to  kiss  his  feet,  that  he  set  himself  on  one

occasion to wash the feet of his disciples. These are the words of the Gospel:

'He riseth from supper, and laid aside his garments; and took a towel and

girded himself. After that he poured water into a basin, and began to wash the

disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded.'

  "This act of Jesus Christ is in perfect keeping (John xiii. 4.5) with all his

precepts, with his inculcations of modesty, equality, humility, and with hiscondemnation of those who set themselves above others. Who would have

said that a day would come in which those claiming to be his vicars should

cause people to kiss their feet? How thoroughly has Catholicism borrowed

from paganism its idolatries? And notwithstanding this flagrant violation of

the religion of Christ, what a herd of people go and press their lips on the

slipper  of  the  pope,  as  was  done  formerly  to  the  Roman  emperors,  the

pontifices maximi, that is to say, the priests of Jove."-E.

  In proportion as the idlers were polished, agreeable, and amiable, it was

observed that there was a greater and more shocking contrast between them

and those who were engaged in business.

  Among  the  latter,  or  such  as  pretended  so  to  be,  there  was  a  gang  of

melancholy fanatics, whose absurdity and knavery divided their character,-

whose appearance alone diffused misery,-and who would have overturned the

world, had they been able to gain a little credit. But the nation of idlers, by

dancing  and  singing,  forced  them  into  obscurity  in  their  caverns,  as  the

warbling birds drive the croaking bats back to their holes and ruins.

  A smaller number of those who were occupied, were the preservers of

ancient barbarous customs, against which nature, terrified, loudly exclaimed.

They  consulted  nothing  but  their  worm-eaten  registers.  If  they  there

discovered a foolish or horrid custom, they considered it as a sacred law. It

was  from  this  vile  practice  of  not  daring  to  think  for  themselves,  but

extracting their ideas from the ruins of those times when no one thought at

all,  that  in  the  metropolis  of  pleasure  there  still  remained  some  shocking

manners.  Hence  it  was  that  there  was  no  proportion  between  crimes  and

punishments. A thousand deaths were sometimes inflicted upon an innocent

victim, to make him acknowledge a crime he had not committed.

  The  extravagancies  of  youth  were  punished  with  the  same  severity  as

murder or parricide. The idlers screamed loudly at these exhibitions, and the

next day thought no more about them, but were buried in the contemplation

of some new fashion.

  This  people  saw  a  whole  age  elapse,  in  which  the  fine  arts  attained  a

degree of perfection that far surpassed the most sanguine hopes. Foreigners

then repaired thither, as they did to Babylon, to admire the great monuments

of architecture, the wonders of gardening, the sublime efforts of sculpture andpainting. They were charmed with a species of music that reached the heart

without astonishing the ears.

  True poetry, that is to say, such as is natural and harmonious, that which

addresses the heart as well as the mind, was unknown to this nation before

this happy period. New kinds of eloquence displayed sublime beauties. The

theatres in particular reëchoed with masterpieces that no other nation ever

approached.  In  a  word,  good  taste  prevailed  in  every  profession  to  that

degree, that there were even good writers among the Druids.

  So many laurels that had branched even to the skies, soon withered in an

exhausted soil. There remained but a very small number, whose leaves were

of  a  pale  dying  verdure.  This  decay  was  occasioned  by  the  facility  of

producing;  laziness  preventing  good  productions,  and  by  a  satiety  of  the

brilliant, and a taste for the whimsical. Vanity protected arts that brought

back times of barbarity; and this same vanity, in persecuting persons of real

merit, forced them to quit their country. The hornets banished the bees.

  There  were  scarce  any  real  arts,  scarce  any  real  genius,  talent  now

consisted in reasoning right or wrong upon the merit of the last age. The

dauber  of  a  sign-post  criticised  with  an  air  of  sagacity  the  works  of  the

greatest painters; and the blotters of paper disfigured the works of the greatest

writers. Ignorance and bad taste had other daubers in their pay. The same

things were repeated in a hundred volumes under different titles. Every work

was either a dictionary or a pamphlet. A Druid gazetteer wrote twice a week

the obscure annals of an unknown people possessed with the devil, and of

celestial prodigies operated in garrets by little beggars of both sexes. Other

Ex-Druids, dressed in black, ready to die with rage and hunger, set forth their

complaints in a hundred different writings, that they were no longer allowed

to cheat mankind-this privilege being conferred on some goats clad in grey;

and some Arch-Druids were employed in printing defamatory libels.

  Amazan was quite ignorant of all this, and even if he had been acquainted

with it, he would have given himself very little concern about it, having his

head filled with nothing but the princess of Babylon, the king of Egypt, and

the inviolable vow he had made to despise all female coquetry in whatever

country his despair should drive him.

  The  gaping  ignorant  mob,  whose  curiosity  exceeds  all  the  bounds  ofnature and reason, for a long time thronged about his unicorns. The more

sensible women forced open the doors of his hotel to contemplate his person.

  Gaiety  and  frivolity.-"There  are  within  its  walls  at  least  a  hundred

thousand people, who had no other employment than play and diversion."


  He  at  first  testified  some  desire  of  visiting  the  court;  but  some  of  the

idlers, who constituted good company and casually went thither, informed

him that it was quite out of fashion, that times were greatly changed, and that

all amusements were confined to the city. He was invited that very night to

sup with a lady whose sense and talents had reached foreign climes, and who

had traveled in some countries through which Amazan had passed. This lady

gave him great pleasure, as well as the society he met at her house. Here

reigned a decent liberty, gaiety without tumult, silence without pedantry, and

wit  without  asperity.  He  found  that  good  company  was  not  quite  ideal,

though the title was frequently usurped by pretenders. The next day he dined

in a society far less amiable, but much more voluptuous. The more he was

satisfied with the guests, the more they were pleased with him. He found his

soul soften and dissolve, like the aromatics of his country, which gradually

melt in a moderate heat, and exhale in delicious perfumes.

  After dinner he was conducted to a place of public entertainment which

was enchanting; but condemned, however, by the Druids, because it deprived

them  of  their  auditors,  which,  therefore,  excited  their  jealousy.  The

representation here consisted of agreeable verses, delightful songs, dances

which expressed the movements of the soul, and perspectives that charmed

the eye in deceiving it. This kind of pastime, which included so many kinds,

was  known  only  under  a  foreign  name.  It  was  called  an  Opera,  which

formerly  signified,  in  the  language  of  the  Seven  Mountains,  work,  care,

occupation, industry, enterprise, business. This exhibition enchanted him. A

female singer, in particular, charmed him by her melodious voice, and the

graces that accompanied her. This child of genius, after the performance, was

introduced to him by his new friends. He presented her with a handful of

diamonds; for which she was so grateful, that she could not leave him all the

rest of the day. He supped with her and her companions, and during the

delightful repast he forgot his sobriety, and became heated and oblivious with

wine. What an instance of human frailty!  The  beautiful  princess  of  Babylon  arrived  at  this  juncture,  with  her

phœnix, her chambermaid Irla, and her two hundred Gangaridian cavaliers

mounted on their unicorns. It was a long while before the gates were opened.

She immediately asked, if the handsomest, the most courageous, the most

sensible, and the most faithful of men was still in that city? The magistrates

readily concluded that she meant Amazan. She was conducted to his hotel.

How great was the palpitation of her heart!-the powerful operation of the

tender passion. Her whole soul was penetrated with inexpressible joy, to see

once more in her lover the model of constancy. Nothing could prevent her

entering  his  chamber;  the  curtains  were  open;  and  she  saw  the  beautiful

Amazan asleep and stupefied with drink.

  Formosanta  expressed  her  grief  with  such  screams  as  made  the  house

echo. She swooned into the arms of Irla. As soon as she had recovered her

senses, she retired from this fatal chamber with grief blended with rage.

  "Oh! just heaven; oh, powerful Oromasdes!" cried the beautiful princess of

Babylon, bathed in tears. "By whom, and for whom am I thus betrayed? He

that could reject for my sake so many princesses, to abandon me for the

company of a strolling Gaul! No! I can never survive this affront."

  "This is the disposition of all young people," said Irla to her, "from one

end of the world to the other. Were they enamoured with a beauty descended

from heaven, they would at certain moments forget her entirely."

  "It is done," said the princess, "I will never see him again whilst I live. Let

us depart this instant, and let the unicorns be harnessed."

  The phœnix conjured her to stay at least till Amazan awoke, that he might

speak with him.

  "He does not deserve it," said the princess. "You would cruelly offend me.

He would think that I had desired you to reproach him, and that I am willing

to be reconciled to him. If you love me, do not add this injury to the insult he

has offered me."

  The phœnix, who after all owed his life to the daughter of the king of

Babylon, could not disobey her. She set out with all her attendants.

  "Whither are you going?" said Irla to her.  "I do not know," replied the princess; "we will take the first road we find.

Provided I fly from Amazan for ever, I am satisfied."

  Ancient barbarous customs.

  ANCIENT BARBAROUS CUSTOMS.


  William Howitt, in a note to his translation of The Religion of Rome,

(page 19), points out very clearly the evils which have resulted to man from

the sinister teaching of the upholders of ancient barbarous customs:-

  "If anyone would satisfy himself of what Popery is at its centre; what it

does where it has had its fullest sway, let him make a tour into the mountains

in the vicinity of Rome, and see in a country exceedingly beautiful by nature,

what  is  the  condition  of  an  extremely  industrious  population.  In  the  rock

towns of the Alban, Sabine, and Volscian hills, you find a swarming throng

of  men,  women,  and  children,  asses,  pigs,  and  hens,  all  groveling  in

inconceivable filth, squalor, and poverty. Filth in the streets, in the houses,

everywhere; fleas, fever, and small-pox, and the densest ignorance darkening

minds of singular natural cleverness. A people brilliant in intellect, totally

uneducated, and steeped in the grossest superstition.

  "These  dens  of  dirt,  disease  and,  till  lately,  or  brigandage,  are  the

evidences of a thousand years of priestly government! They, and the country

around them, are chiefly the property of the great princely and ducal families

which sprung out of the papal neposm of Rome, and have by successive

popes,  their  founders,  been  loaded  with  the  wealth  of  the  nation.  These

families  live  in  Rome,  in  their  great  palaces,  amidst  every  luxury  and

splendor, surrounded by the finest works of art, and leave their tenants and

dependents without any attention from them. Some steward or middleman

screws the last soldo from them for rent; and when crops fail, lifts not a

finger to alleviate their misery.

  "And the Papal Government, too-a government pretendedly based on the

direct ordination of Him who went about doing good-what has it done for

them? Nothing but debauch their minds with idle ceremonies and unscriptural

dogmas,-legends, priests, monks and beggary! The whole land is a land of

beggars,  made  so  by  inculcated  notions  of  a  spurious  charity.  Every

countrywoman, many men, and every child, boy or girl, are literally beggars-beggars importunate, unappeasable, irrepressible! What a condition of mind

for a naturally noble and capable people to be reduced to by-a religion!"

  The phœnix, who was wiser than Formosanta, because he was divested of

passion, consoled her upon the road. He gently insinuated to her that it was

shocking to punish one's self for the faults of another; that Amazan had given

her  proofs  sufficiently  striking  and  numerous  of  his  fidelity,  so  that  she

should forgive him for having forgotten himself for one moment in social

company; that this was the only time in which he had been wanting of the

grace of Oromasdes; that it would render him only the more constant in love

and virtue for the future; that the desire of expiating his fault would raise him

beyond himself; that it would be the means of increasing her happiness; that

many great princesses before her had forgiven such slips, and had had no

reason to be sorry afterward; and he was so thoroughly possessed of the art of

persuasion, that Formosanta's mind grew more calm and peaceable. She was

now sorry she had set out so soon. She thought her unicorns went too fast, but

she did not dare return. Great was the conflict between her desire of forgiving

and that of showing her rage-between her love and vanity. However, her

unicorns pursued their pace; and she traversed the world, according to the

prediction of her father's oracle.

  When Amazan awoke, he was informed of the arrival and departure of

Formosanta and the phœnix. He was also told of the rage and distraction of

the princess, and that she had sworn never to forgive him.

  "Then," said he, "there is nothing left for me to do, but follow her, and kill

myself at her feet."

  The report of this adventure drew together his festive companions, who all

remonstrated with him. They said that he had much better stay with them;

that nothing could equal the pleasant life they led in the centre of arts and

refined  delicate  pleasures;  that  many  strangers,  and  even  kings,  preferred

such  an  agreeable  enchanting  repose  to  their  country  and  their  thrones.

Moreover,  his  vehicle  was  broken,  and  another  was  being  made  for  him

according to the newest fashion; that the best tailor of the whole city had

already  cut  out  for  him  a  dozen  suits  in  the  latest  style;  that  the  most

vivacious,  amiable,  and  fashionable  ladies,  at  whose  houses  dramatic

performances  were  represented,  had  each  appointed  a  day  to  give  him  aregale. The girl from the opera was in the meanwhile drinking her chocolate,

laughing, singing, and ogling the beautiful Amazan-who by this time clearly

perceived she had no more sense than a goose.

  A  sincerity,  cordiality,  and  frankness,  as  well  as  magnanimity  and

courage, constituted the character of this great prince, he related his travels

and misfortunes to his friends. They knew that he was cousin-german to the

princess. They were informed of the fatal kiss she had given the king of

Egypt. "Such little tricks," said they, "are often forgiven between relatives,

otherwise one's whole life would pass in perpetual uneasiness."

  Nothing could shake his design of pursuing Formosanta; but his carriage

not being ready, he was compelled to remain three days longer among the

idlers, who were still feasting and merry-making. He at length took his leave

of them, by embracing them and making them accept some of his diamonds

that were the best mounted, and recommending to them a constant pursuit of

frivolity  and  pleasure,  since  they  were  thereby  made  more  agreeable  and

happy.

  "The  Germans,"  said  he,  "are  the  greyheads  of  Europe;  the  people  of

Albion are men formed; the inhabitants of Gaul are the children,-and I love to

play with children."


  XI.

  AMAZAN AND FORMOSANTA BECOME RECONCILED.

  The guides had no difficulty in following the route the princess had taken.

There  was  nothing  else  talked  of  but  her  and  her  large  bird.  All  the

inhabitants were still in a state of fascination. The banks of the Loire, of the

Dordogue-the Garonne, and the Gironde, still echoed with acclamation.

  When  Amazan  reached  the  foot  of  the  Pyrenees,  the  magistrates  and

Druids  of  the  country  made  him  dance,  whether  he  would  or  not,  a

Tambourin; but as soon as he cleared the Pyrenees, nothing presented itself

that was either gay or joyous. If he here and there heard a peasant sing, it was

a  doleful  ditty.  The  inhabitants  stalked  with  much  gravity,  having  a  few

strung beads and a girted poniard. The nation dressed in black, and appeared

to be in mourning.  Dancing a tambourin.-"When Amazan reached the foot of the Pyrenees,

the magistrates and druids of the country made him dance, whether he would

or  not,  a  Tambourin;  but  as  soon  as  he  cleared  the  Pyrenees,  nothing

presented itself that was either gay or joyous."


  If Amazan's servants asked passengers any questions, they were answered

by signs; if they went into an inn, the host acquainted his guests in three

words,  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  house,  but  that  the  things  they  so

pressingly wanted might be found a few miles off.

  When  these  votaries  to  taciturnity  were  asked  if  they  had  seen  the

beautiful  princess  of  Babylon  pass,  they  answered  with  less  brevity  than

usual: "We have seen her-she is not so handsome-there are no beauties that

are not tawny-she displays a bosom of alabaster, which is the most disgusting

thing in the world, and which is scarce known in our climate."

  Amazan advanced toward the province watered by the Betis. The Tyrians

discovered this country about twelve thousand years ago, about the time they

discovered the great Atlantic Isle, inundated so many centuries after. The

Tyrians cultivated Betica, which the natives of the country had never done,

being of opinion that it was not their place to meddle with anything, and that

their neighbors, the Gauls, should come and reap their harvests. The Tyrians

had brought with them some Palestines, or Jews, who, from that time, have

wandered  through  every  clime  where  money  was  to  be  gained.  The

Palestines,  by  extraordinary  usury,  at  fifty  per  cent.,  had  possessed

themselves of almost all the riches of the country. This made the people of

Betica imagine the Palestines were sorcerers; and all those who were accused

of witchcraft were burnt, without mercy, by a company of Druids, who were

called the Inquisitors, or the Anthropokaies. These priests immediately put

their victims in a masquerade habit, seized upon their effects, and devoutly

repeated the Palestines' own prayers, whilst burning them by a slow fire, por

l'amor de Dios.

  The princess of Babylon alighted in that city which has since been called

Sevilla.  Her  design  was  to  embark  upon  the  Betis  to  return  by  Tyre  to

Babylon, and see again king Belus, her father; and forget, if possible, her

perdious  lover-or,  at  least,  to  ask  him  in  marriage.  She  sent  for  twoPalestines, who transacted all the business of the court. They were to furnish

her with three ships. The phœnix made all the necessary contracts with them,

and settled the price after some little dispute.

  The  hostess  was  a  great  devotee,  and  her  husband,  who  was  no  less

religious, was a Familiar: that is to say, a spy of the Druid Inquisitors or

Anthropokaies.

  He failed not to inform them, that in his house was a sorceress and two

Palestines, who were entering into a compact with the devil, disguised like a

large gilt bird.

  The Inquisitors having learned that the lady possessed a large quantity of

diamonds, swore point blank that she was a sorceress. They waited till night

to imprison the two hundred cavaliers and the unicorns, (which slept in very

extensive stables), for the Inquisitors are cowards.

  Having strongly barricaded the gates, they seized the princess and Irla; but

they could not catch the phœnix, who flew away with great swiftness. He did

not doubt of meeting with Amazan upon the road from Gaul to Sevilla.

  He met him upon the frontiers of Betica, and acquainted him with the

disaster that had befallen the princess.

  Amazan was struck speechless with rage. He armed himself with a steel

cuirass damasquined with gold, a lance twelve feet long, two javelins, and an

edged sword called the Thunderer, which at one single stroke would rend

trees, rocks, and Druids. He covered his beautiful head with a golden casque,

shaded with heron and ostrich feathers. This was the ancient armor of Magog,

which his sister Aldea gave him when upon his journey in Scythia. The few

attendants he had with him all mounted their unicorns.

  Amazan, in embracing his dear phœnix, uttered only these melancholy

expressions: "I am guilty! Had I not dined with the child of genius from the

opera, in the city of the idlers, the princess of Babylon would not have been

in  this  alarming  situation.  Let  us  fly  to  the  Anthropokaies."  He  presently

entered Sevilla. Fifteen hundred Alguazils guarded the gates of the inclosure

in which the two hundred Gangarids and their unicorns were shut up, without

being allowed anything to eat. Preparations were already made for sacrificing

the princess of Babylon, her chambermaid Irla, and the two rich Palestines.  The high Anthropokaie, surrounded by his subaltern Anthropokaies, was

already  seated  upon  his  sacred  tribunal.  A  crowd  of  Sevillians,  wearing

strung  beads  at  their  girdles,  joined  their  two  hands,  without  uttering  a

syllable, when the beautiful Princess, the maid Irla, and the two Palestines

were brought forth, with their hands tied behind their backs and dressed in

masquerade habits.

  The phœnix entered the prison by a dormer window, whilst the Gangarids

began  to  break  open  the  doors.  The  invincible  Amazan  shattered  them

without. They all sallied forth armed, upon their unicorns, and Amazan put

himself at their head. He had no difficulty in overthrowing the Alguazils, the

Familiars, or the priests called Anthropokaies. Each unicorn pierced dozens at

a time. The thundering Amazan cut to pieces all he met. The people in black

cloaks and dirty frize ran away, always keeping fast hold of their blest beads,

por l'amor de Dios.

  Amazan collared the high Inquisitor upon his tribunal, and threw him upon

the pile, which was prepared about forty paces distant; and he also cast upon

it the other Inquisitors, one after the other. He then prostrated himself at

Formosanta's feet. "Ah! how amiable you are," said she; "and how I should

adore you, if you had not forsaken me for the company of an opera singer."

  Whilst  Amazan  was  making  his  peace  with  the  princess,  whilst  his

Gangarids cast upon the pile the bodies of all the Anthropokaies, and the

flames ascended to the clouds, Amazan saw an army that approached him at a

distance. An aged monarch, with a crown upon his head, advanced upon a car

drawn by eight mules harnessed with ropes. An hundred other cars followed.

They  were  accompanied  by  grave  looking  men  in  black  cloaks  or  frize,

mounted  upon  very  fine  horses.  A  multitude  of  people,  with  greasy  hair,

followed silently on foot.

  Amazan  immediately  drew  up  his  Gangarids  about  him,  and  advanced

with his lance couched. As soon as the king perceived him, he took off his

crown, alighted from his car, and embraced Amazan's stirrup, saying to him:

"Man sent by the gods, you are the avenger of human kind, the deliverer of

my country. These sacred monsters, of which you have purged the earth,

were my masters, in the name of the Old Man of the Seven Mountains. I was

forced to submit to their criminal power. My people would have deserted me,if I had only been inclined to moderate their abominable crimes. From this

moment I breathe, I reign, and am indebted to you for it."

  He afterward respectfully kissed Formosanta's hand, and entreated her to

get into his coach (drawn by eight mules) with Amazan, Irla, and the phœnix.

  The two Palestine bankers, who still remained prostrate on the ground

through  fear  and  terror,  now  raised  their  heads.  The  troop  of  unicorns

followed the king of Betica into his palace.

  As  the  dignity  of  a  king  who  reigned  over  a  people  of  characteristic

brevity, required that his mules should go at a very slow pace, Amazan and

Formosanta had time to relate to him their adventures. He also conversed

with  the  phœnix,  admiring  and  frequently  embracing  him.  He  easily

comprehended how brutal and barbarous the people of the west should be

considered, who ate animals, and did not understand their language; that the

Gangarids alone had preserved the nature and dignity of primitive man; but

he  particularly  agreed,  that  the  most  barbarous  of  mortals  were  the

Anthropokaies, of whom Amazan had just purged the earth. He incessantly

blessed and thanked him. The beautiful Formosanta had already forgotten the

affair in Gaul, and had her soul filled with nothing but the valor of the hero

who  had  preserved  her  life.  Amazan  being  made  acquainted  with  the

innocence of the embrace she had given to the king of Egypt, and being told

of the resurrection of the phœnix, tasted the purest joy, and was intoxicated

with the most violent love.

  They dined at the palace, but had a very indifferent repast. The cooks of

Betica were the worst in Europe. Amazan advised the king to send for some

from Gaul. The king's musicians performed, during the repast, that celebrated

air which has since been called the Follies of Spain. After dinner, matters of

business came upon the carpet.

  The king enquired of the handsome Amazan, the beautiful Formosanta,

and the charming phœnix, what they proposed doing. "For my part," said

Amazan,  "my  intention  is  to  return  to  Babylon,  of  which  I  am  the

presumptive  heir,  and  to  ask  of  my  uncle  Belus  the  hand  of  my  cousin-

german, the incomparable Formosanta."

  "My design certainly is," said the princess, "never to separate from my

cousin-germain. But I imagine he will agree with me, that I should return firstto my father, because he only gave me leave to go upon a pilgrimage to

Bassora, and I have wandered all over the world."

  "For  my  part,"  said  the  phœnix,  "I  will  follow  every  where  these  two

tender, generous lovers."

  "You are in the right," said the king of Betica; "but your return to Babylon

is not so easy as you imagine. I receive daily intelligence from that country

by  Tyrian  ships,  and  my  Palestine  bankers,  who  correspond  with  all  the

nations of the earth. The people are all in arms toward the Euphrates and the

Nile. The king of Scythia claims the inheritance of his wife, at the head of

three hundred thousand warriors on horseback. The kings of Egypt and India

are also laying waste the banks of the Tygris and the Euphrates, each at the

head  of  three  hundred  thousand  men,  to  revenge  themselves  for  being

laughed  at.  The  king  of  Ethiopia  is  ravaging  Egypt  with  three  hundred

thousand men, whilst the king of Egypt is absent from his country. And the

king of Babylon has as yet only six hundred thousand men to defend himself.

  "I  acknowledge  to  you,"  continued  the  king,  "when  I  hear  of  those

prodigious  armies  which  are  disembogued  from  the  east,  and  their

astonishing  magnificence-when  I  compare  them  to  my  trifling  bodies  of

twenty or thirty thousand soldiers, which it is so difficult to clothe and feed; I

am  inclined  to  think  the  eastern  subsisted  long  before  the  western

hemisphere.  It  seems  as  if  we  sprung  only  yesterday  from  chaos  and

barbarity."

  "Sire," said Amazan, "the last comers frequently outstrip those who first

began the career. It is thought in my country that man was first created in

India; but this I am not certain of."

  "And," said the king of Betica to the phœnix, "what do you think?"

  "Sire," replied the phœnix, "I am as yet too young to have any knowledge

concerning antiquity. I have lived only about twenty-seven thousand years;

but my father, who had lived five times that age, told me he had learned from

his father, that the eastern country had always been more populous and rich

than the others. It had been transmitted to him from his ancestors, that the

generation of all animals had begun upon the banks of the Ganges. For my

part, said he, I have not the vanity to be of this opinion. I cannot believe that

the foxes of Albion, the marmots of the Alps, and the wolves of Gaul, aredescended from my country. In the like manner, I do not believe that the firs

and oaks of your country descended from the palm and cocoa trees of India."

  "But from whence are we descended, then?" said the king.

  "I do not know," said the phœnix; "all I want to know is, whither the

beautiful princess of Babylon and my dear Amazan may repair."

  "I  very  much  question,"  said  the  king,  "whether  with  his  two  hundred

unicorns he will be able to destroy so many armies of three hundred thousand

men each."

  "Why not?" said Amazan. The king of Betica felt the force of this sublime

question,  "Why  not?"  but  he  imagined  sublimity  alone  was  not  sufficient

against innumerable armies.

  "I advise you," said he, "to seek the king of Ethiopia. I am related to that

black prince through my Palestines. I will give you recommendatory letters to

him. As he is at enmity with the king of Egypt, he will be but too happy to be

strengthened  by  your  alliance.  I  can  assist  you  with  two  thousand  sober,

brave men; and it will depend upon yourself to engage as many more of the

people who reside, or rather skip, about the foot of the Pyrenees, and who are

called Vasques or Vascons. Send one of your warriors upon an unicorn, with

a few diamonds. There is not a Vascon that will not quit the castle, that is, the

thatched  cottage  of  his  father,  to  serve  you.  They  are  indefatigable,

courageous, and agreeable; and whilst you wait their arrival, we will give you

festivals, and prepare your ships. I cannot too much acknowledge the service

you have done me."

  Amazan  realized  the  happiness  of  having  recovered  Formosanta,  and

enjoyed  in  tranquillity  her  conversation,  and  all  the  charms  of  reconciled

love,-which are almost equal to a growing passion.

  A troop of proud, joyous Vascons soon arrived, dancing a tambourin. The

haughty and grave Betican troops were now ready. The old sun-burnt king

tenderly embraced the two lovers. He sent great quantities of arms, beds,

chests,  boards,  black  clothes,  onions,  sheep,  fowls,  flour,  and  particularly

garlic, on board the ships, and wished them a happy voyage, invariable love,

and many victories.

  Proud Carthage was not then a sea-port. There were at that time only a fewNumidians there, who dried fish in the sun. They coasted along Bizacenes,

the  Syrthes,  the  fertile  banks  where  since  arose  Cyrene  and  the  great

Chersonese.

  They at length arrived toward the first mouth of the sacred Nile. It was at

the extremity of this fertile land that the ships of all commercial nations were

already received in the port of Canope, without knowing whether the god

Canope had founded this port, or whether the inhabitants had manufactured

the god-whether the star Canope had given its name to the city, or whether

the city had bestowed it upon the star. All that was known of this matter was,

that the city and the star were both very ancient; and this is all that can be

known of the origin of things, of what nature soever they may be.

  It was here that the king of Ethiopia, having ravaged all Egypt, saw the

invincible Amazan and the adorable Formosanta come on shore. He took one

for  the  god  of  war,  and  the  other  for  the  goddess  of  beauty.  Amazan

presented to him the letter of recommendation from the king of Spain. The

king of Ethiopia immediately entertained them with some admirable festivals,

according to the indispensable custom of heroic times. They then conferred

about their expedition to exterminate the three hundred thousand men of the

king of Egypt, the three hundred thousand of the emperor of the Indies, and

the three hundred thousand of the great Khan of the Scythians, who laid siege

to the immense, proud, voluptuous city of Babylon.

  The two hundred Spaniards, whom Amazan had brought with him, said

that they had nothing to do with the king of Ethiopia's succoring Babylon;

that it was sufficient their king had ordered them to go and deliver it; and that

they were formidable enough for this expedition.

  The  Vascons  said  they  had  performed  many  other  exploits;  that  they

would alone defeat the Egyptians, the Indians, and the Scythians; and that

they would not march unless the Spaniards were placed in the rear-guard.

  The  two  hundred  Gangarids  could  not  refrain  from  laughing  at  the

pretensions of their allies, and they maintained that with only one hundred

unicorns, they could put to flight all the kings of the earth. The beautiful

Formosanta  appeased  them  by  her  prudence,  and  by  her  enchanting

discourse.  Amazan  introduced  to  the  black  monarch  his  Gangarids,  his

unicorns, his Spaniards, his Vascons, and his beautiful bird.  Every thing was soon ready to march by Memphis, Heliopolis, Arsinoe,

Petra,  Artemitis,  Sora,  and  Apamens,  to  attack  the  three  kings,  and  to

prosecute this memorable war, before which all the wars ever waged by man

sink into insignificance.

  Fame  with  her  hundred  tongues  has  proclaimed  the  victories  Amazan

gained  over  the  three  kings,  with  his  Spaniards,  his  Vascons,  and  his

unicorns. He restored the beautiful Formosanta to her father. He set at liberty

all his mistress's train, whom the king of Egypt had reduced to slavery. The

great Khan of the Scythians declared himself his vassal; and his marriage was

confirmed with princess Aldea. The invincible and generous Amazan, was

acknowledged the heir to the kingdom of Babylon, and entered the city in

triumph with the phœnix, in the presence of a hundred tributary kings. The

festival of his marriage far surpassed that which king Belus had given. The

bull Apis was served up roasted at table. The kings of Egypt and India were

cup-bearers to the married pair; and these nuptials were celebrated by five

hundred illustrious poets of Babylon.

  Oh,  Muses!  daughters  of  heaven,  who  are  constantly  invoked  at  the

beginning of a work, I only implore you at the end. It is needless to reproach

me with saying grace, without having said benedicite. But, Muses! you will

not be less my patronesses. Inspire, I pray you, the Ecclesiastical Gazetteer,

the  illustrious  orator  of  the  Convulsionnaires,  to  say  every  thing  possible

against The Princess of Babylon, in order that the work may be condemned

by the Sorbonne, and, therefore, be universally read. And prevent, I beseech

you,  O  chaste  and  noble  Muses,  any  supplemental  scribblers  spoiling,  by

their fables, the truths I have taught mortals in this faithful narrative.

  Clio, the muse of history. From a painting by Antonio Canova.-"Prevent, I

beseech  you,  O  chaste  and  noble  Muses,  any  supplemental  scribblers

spoiling,  by  their  fables,  the  truths  I  have  taught  mortals  in  this  faithful

narrative."


  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.

  The Tax Collector.

  I.  NATIONAL POVERTY.

  An old man, who is forever pitying the present times, and extolling the

past, was saying to me: "Friend, France is not so rich as it was under Henry

the IVth."

  "And why?"

  "Because the lands are not so well cultivated; because hands are wanting

for the cultivation; and because the day-laborer having raised the price of his

work, many land owners let their inheritances he fallow."

  "Whence comes this scarcity of hands?"

  "From this, that whoever finds in himself anything of a spirit of industry,

takes up the trades of embroiderer, chaser, watchmaker, silk weaver, attorney,

or divine. It is also because the revocation of the Edict of Nantes has left a

great void in the kingdom; because nuns and beggars of all kinds have greatly

multiplied; because the people in general avoid as much as possible the hard

labor of cultivation, for which we are born by God's destination, and which

we have rendered ignominious by our own opinions; so very wise are we!

  "Another  cause  of  our  poverty  lies  in  our  new  wants.  We  pay  our

neighbors four millions of livres on one article, and five or six upon another,

such, for example, as a stinking powder for stuffing up our noses brought

from America. Our coffee, tea, chocolate, cochineal, indigo, spices, cost us

above sixty millions a year. All these were unknown to us in the reign of

Henry the IVth, except the spices, of which, however, the consumption was

not so great as it is now. We burn a hundred times more wax-lights than were

burnt then; and get more than the half of the wax from foreign countries,

because we neglect our own hives. We see a hundred times more diamonds in

the ears, round the necks, and on the hands of our city ladies of Paris, and

other great towns, than were worn by all the ladies of Henry the IVth's court,

the Queen included. Almost all the superfluities are necessarily paid for with

ready specie.

  "Observe especially that we pay to foreigners above fifteen millions of

annuities on the Hôtel-de-Ville; and that Henry the IVth, on his accession,

having found two millions of debt in all on this imaginary Hôtel, very wisely

paid off a part, to ease the state of this burden.  "Consider that our civil wars were the occasion of the treasures of Mexico

being poured into the kingdom, when Don Philip el Discreto took it into his

head to buy France, and that since that time, our foreign wars have eased us

of a good half of our money.

  "These  are  partly  the  causes  of  our  poverty;  a  poverty  which  we  hide

under varnished ceilings, or with the help of our dealers in fashion. We are

poor with taste. There are some officers of revenue, there are contractors or

jobbers, there are merchants, very rich; their children, their sons-in-law, are

also very rich, but the nation in general is unfortunately not so."

  This old man's discourse, well or ill grounded, made a deep impression on

me; for the curate of my parish, who had always had a friendship for me, had

taught me a little of geometry and of history: and I begin to reflect a little,

which is very rare in my province. I do not know whether he was right or not

in every thing, but being very poor, I could very easily believe that I had a

great many companions of my misery.


  II.

  DISASTER OF THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.

  I very readily make known to the universe that I have a landed estate

which would yield me forty crowns a year, were it not for the tax laid on it.

  There came forth several edicts from certain persons, who, having nothing

better to do, govern the state at their fire-side, the preamble of these edicts

was,  "that  the  legislative  and  executive  was  born,  jure  divino,  the  co-

proprietor of my land;" and that I owe it at least the half of what I possess.

The enormity of this legislative and executive power made me bless myself.

What would it be if that power which presides over "the essential order of

society," were to take the whole of my little estate? The one is still more

divine than the other.

  The comptroller general knows that I used to pay, in all, but twelve livres;

that even this was a heavy burden on me, and that I should have sunk under

it, if God had not given me the talent of making wicker baskets, which helped

to carry me through my trials. But how should I, on a sudden, be able to give

the king twenty crowns?  The new ministers also said in their preamble, that it was not fit to tax

anything but the land, because every thing arises from the land, even rain

itself, and consequently that nothing was properly liable to taxation, but the

fruits of the land.

  During  the  last  war,  one  of  their  collectors  came  to  my  house,  and

demanded of me, for my quota, three measures of corn, and a sack of beans,

the whole worth twenty crowns, to maintain the war-of which I never knew

the reason, having only heard it said, that there was nothing to be got by it for

our country, and a great deal to lose. As I had not at that time either corn, or

beans,  or  money,  the  legislative  and  executive  power  had  me  dragged  to

prison; and the war went on as well as it could.

  On my release from the dungeon, being nothing but skin and bone, whom

should I meet but a jolly fresh colored man in a coach and six? He had six

footmen, to each of whom he gave for his wages more than the double of my

revenue. His head-steward, who, by the way, looked in as good plight as

himself, had of him a salary of two thousand livres, and robbed him every

year of twenty thousand more. His mistress had in six months stood him in

forty thousand crowns. I had formerly known him when he was less well to

pass than myself. He owned, by way of comfort to me, that he enjoyed four

hundred thousand livres a year.

  "I suppose, then," said I, "that you pay out of this income two hundred

thousand  to  the  state,  to  help  to  support  that  advantageous  war  we  are

carrying on; since I, who have but just a hundred and twenty livres a year, am

obliged to pay half of them."

  "I," said he, "I contribute to the wants of the state? You are surely jesting,

my friend. I have inherited from an uncle his fortune of eight millions, which

he got at Cadiz and at Surat; I have not a foot of land; my estate lies in

government contracts, and in the funds. I owe the state nothing. It is for you

to give half of your substance,-you who are a proprietor of land. Do you not

see, that if the minister of the revenue were to require anything of me in aid

of our country, he would be a blockhead, that could not calculate? for every

thing is the produce of the land. Money and the paper currency are nothing

but pledges of exchange. If, after having laid the sole tax, the tax that is to

supply the place of all others, on those commodities, the government were toask money of me; do you not see, that this would be a double load? that it

would be asking the same thing twice over? My uncle sold at Cadiz to the

amount of two millions of your corn, and of two millions of stuffs made of

your wool; upon these two articles he gained cent. per cent. You must easily

think that this profit came out of lands already taxed. What my uncle bought

for tenpence of you, he sold again for above fifty livres at Mexico; and thus

he made a shift to return to his own country with eight millions clear.

  "You must be sensible, then, that it would be a horrid injustice to re-

demand  of  him  a  few  farthings  on  the  tenpence  he  paid  you.  If  twenty

nephews like me, whose uncles had gained each eight millions at Buenos

Ayres, at Lima, at Surat, or at Pondicherry, were, in the urgent necessities of

the state, each to lend to it only two hundred thousand livres, that would

produce four millions. But what horror would that be! Pay then thou, my

friend, who enjoyest quietly the neat and clear revenue of forty crowns; serve

thy country well, and come now and then to dine with my servants in livery."

  This plausible discourse made me reflect a good deal, but I cannot say it

much comforted me.


  III.

    CONVERSATION WITH A GEOMETRICIAN.

  It sometimes happens that a man has no answer to make, and yet is not

persuaded. He is overthrown without the feeling of being convinced. He feels

at the bottom of his heart a scruple, a repugnance, which hinders him from

believing what has been proved to him. A geometrician demonstrates to you,

that between a circle and a tangent, you may thread a number of curves, and

yet cannot get one straight line to pass. Your eyes, your reason, tell you the

contrary. The geometrician gravely answers you, that it is an infinitesimal of

the second order. You stare in stupid silence, and quit the field all astonished,

without having any clear idea, without comprehending anything, and without

having any reply to make.

  Consult but a geometrician of more candor, and he explains the mystery to

you.

  "We suppose," says he, "what cannot be in nature, lines which have lengthwithout breadth. Naturally and philosophically speaking, it is impossible for

one  real  line  to  penetrate  another.  No  curve,  nor  no  right  line  can  pass

between two real lines that touch one another. These theorems that puzzle

you are but sports of the imagination, ideal chimeras. Whereas true geometry

is the art of measuring things actually existent."

  I  was  perfectly  well  satisfied  with  the  confession  of  the  sensible

mathematician,  and,  with  all  my  misfortune,  could  not  help  laughing  on

learning that there was a quackery even in that science, which is called the

sublime science. My geometrician was a kind of philosophical patriot, who

had deigned to chat with me sometimes in my cottage. I said to him:

  "Sir, you have tried to enlighten the cockneys of Paris, on a point of the

greatest concern to mankind, that of the duration of human life. It is to you

alone that the ministry owes its knowledge of the due rate of annuities for

lives, according to different ages. You have proposed to furnish the houses in

town with what water they may want, and to deliver us at length from the

shame and ridicule of hearing water cried about the streets, and of seeing

women inclosed within an oblong hoop, carrying two pails of water, both

together of about thirty pounds weight, up to a fourth story. Be so good, in

the name of friendship, to tell me, how many two-handed bipeds there may

be in France?"

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-It is assumed, that there may be about twenty

millions, and I am willing to adopt this calculation as the most probable, till it

can be verified, which it would be very easy to do, and which, however, has

not hitherto been done, because one does not always think of every thing.

  THE  MAN  OF  FORTY  CROWNS.-How  many  acres,  think  you,  the

whole territory of France contains?

  THE  GEOMETRICIAN.-One  hundred  and  thirty  millions,  of  which

almost the half is in roads, in towns, villages, moors, heaths, marshes, sands,

barren  lands,  useless  convents,  gardens  of  more  pleasure  than  profit,

uncultivated grounds, and bad grounds ill cultivated. We might reduce all the

land which yields good returns to seventy-five millions of square acres; but

let us state them at fourscore millions. One cannot do too much for one's

country.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-How much may you think each acrebrings in yearly, one year with another, in corn, seeds of all kinds, wine, fish-

ponds, wood, metals, cattle, fruit, wool, silk, oil, milk, clear of all charges,

without reckoning the tax?

  THE  GEOMETRICIAN.-Why,  if  they  produce  each  twenty-five  livres,

(about twenty English shillings), it is a great deal; but not to discourage our

countrymen, let us put them at thirty livres. There are acres which produce

constantly  regenerating  value,  and  which  are  estimated  at  three  hundred

livres: there are others which only produce three livres. The mean proportion

between three and three hundred is thirty; for you must allow that three is to

thirty as thirty is to three hundred. If, indeed, there were comparatively many

acres at thirty livres, and very few at three hundred, our account would not

hold good; but, once more, I would not be over punctilious.

  THE  MAN  OF  FORTY  CROWNS.-Well,  sir;  how  much  will  these

fourscore millions of acres yield of revenue, estimated in money?

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-The account is ready made; they will produce

two thousand four hundred millions of livres of the present currency.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-I have read that Solomon possessed,

of his own property, twenty-five thousand millions of livres, in ready money;

and  certainly  there  are  not  two  thousand  four  hundred  millions  of  specie

circulating in France, which, I am told, is much greater and much richer than

Solomon's country.

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-There lies the mystery. There may be about nine

hundred  millions  circulating  throughout  the  kingdom;  and  this  money,

passing from hand to hand, is sufficient to pay for all the produce of the land,

and of industry. The same crown may pass ten times from the pocket of the

cultivator, into that of the ale-housekeeper, and of the tax-gatherer.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-I apprehend you. But you told me that

we are, in all, about twenty millions of inhabitants, men, women, old and

young. How much, pray, do you allow for each?

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-One hundred and twenty livres, or forty crowns.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-You have just guessed my revenue. I

have four acres, which, reckoning the fallow years with those of produce,

bring  me  in  one  hundred  and  twenty  livres;  which  is  little  enough,  Godknows.

  But if every individual were to have his contingent, would that be no more

than five louis d'ors a year?

  THE  GEOMETRICIAN.-Certainly  not,  according  to  our  calculation,

which I have a little amplified. Such is the state of human nature. Our life and

our fortune have narrow limits. In Paris, they do not, one with another, live

above twenty-two or twenty-three years, and, one with another, have not, at

the most, above a hundred and twenty livres a year to spend. So that your

food, your raiment, your lodging, your movables, are all represented by the

sum of one hundred and twenty livres.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-Alas! What have I done to you, that

you thus abridge me of my fortune and life? Can it then be true, that I have

but three and twenty years to live, unless I rob my fellow-creatures of their

share?

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-This is incontestable in the good city of Paris.

But from these twenty-three years you must deduct ten, at the least, for your

childhood, as childhood is not an enjoyment of life; it is a preparation; it is

the porch of the edifice; it is the tree that has not yet given fruits; it is the

dawn of a day. Then again, from the thirteen years which remain to you,

deduct the time of sleep, and that of tiresomeness of life, and that will be at

least  a  moiety.  You  will  then  have  six  years  and  a  half  left  to  pass  in

vexation, in pain, in some pleasures, and in hopes.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-Merciful heaven! At this rate, your

account does not allow us above three years of tolerable existence.

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.That is no fault of mine. Nature cares very little

for individuals. There are insects which do not live above one day, but of

which the species is perpetual. Nature resembles those great princes, who

reckon  as  nothing  the  loss  of  four  hundred  thousand  men,  so  they  but

accomplish their august designs.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-Forty Crowns and three years of life!

What resource can you imagine against two such curses?

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-As to life, it would be requisite to render the air

of  Paris  more  pure-that  men  should  eat  less  and  take  more  exercise-thatmothers should suckle their own children-that people should be no longer so

ill-advised as to dread inoculation. This is what I have already said; and as to

fortune, why, even marry and rear a family.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-How! Can the way to live more at

ease be to associate to my own bad circumstances those of others?

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-Five or six bad circumstances put together form

a tolerable establishment. Get a good wife, and we will say only two sons and

two daughters; this will make seven hundred and twenty livres for your little

family, that is to say, if distributive justice were to take place, and that each

individual had an hundred and twenty livres a year. Your children, in their

infancy, stand you in almost nothing; when grown up they will ease and help

you. Their mutual aid will save you a good part of your expenses, and you

may live very happy, like a philosopher. Always provided, however, that

those worthy gentlemen who govern the state have not the barbarity to extort

from each of you twenty crowns a year. But the misfortune is, we are no

longer in the golden age, where the men, born all equals, had an equal part in

the nutritive productions of uncultivated land. The case is now far from being

so good a one, as that every two-handed biped possesses land to the value of

an hundred and twenty livres a year.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-'Sdeath! You ruin us. You said but

just now, that in a country of fourscore millions of inhabitants, each of them

ought to enjoy an hundred and twenty livres a year, and now you take them

away from us again!

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-I was computing according to the registers of the

golden age, but we must reckon according to that of iron. There are many

inhabitants who have but the value of ten crowns a year, others no more than

four or five, and above six millions of men who have absolutely nothing.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-Nothing? Why they would perish of

hunger in three days' time.

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-Not in the least. The others, who possess their

portions, set them to work, and share with them. It is from this arrangement

that  the  pay  comes  for  the  divine,  the  confectioner,  the  apothecary,  the

preacher, the actor, the attorney, and the hackney-coachman. You thought

yourself very ill off, to have no more than a hundred and twenty livres a year,reduced to a hundred and eight by your tax of twelve livres. But consider the

soldiers who devote their blood to their country at the rate of fourpence a day.

They have not above sixty-three livres a year for their livelihood, and yet

they make a comfortable shift, by a number of them joining their little stock

and living in common.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-So then an ex-Jesuit has more than

five times the pay of a soldier. And yet the soldiers have done more service to

the state under the eyes of the king at Fontenoy, at Laufelt, at the siege of

Fribourg, than the reverend Father Le Valette ever did in his life.

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-Nothing can be truer: nay, every one of these

turned-adrift Jesuits, having now become free, has more to spend than what

he cost his convent. There are even some among them who have gained a

good deal of money by scribbling pamphlets against the parliaments, as for

example, the reverend father Patouillet, and the reverend father Monote. In

short, in this world every one sets his wits to work for a livelihood. One is at

the head of a manufactory of stuffs; another of porcelain; another undertakes

the opera; another the Ecclesiastical Gazette; another a tragedy in familiar

life, or a novel or romance in the English style; this maintains the stationer,

the  ink-maker,  the  bookseller,  the  hawker,  who  might  else  be  reduced  to

beggary. There is nothing, then, but the restitution of the hundred and twenty

livres to those who have nothing, that makes the state flourish.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-A pretty way of flourishing, truly!

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-And yet there is no other. In every country it is

the rich that enable the poor to live. This is the sole source of the industry of

commerce. The more industrious a nation itself is, the more it gains from

foreign countries. Could we, on our foreign trade, get ten millions a year by

the  balance  in  our  favor,  there  would,  in  twenty  years,  be  two  hundred

millions more in the nation. This would afford ten livres a head more, on the

supposition of an equitable distribution; that is to say, that the dealers would

make each poor person earn ten livres the more, once paid, in the hopes of

making still more considerable gains. But commerce, like the fertility of the

earth, has its bounds, otherwise its progression would be ad infinitum. Nor,

besides, is it clear, that the balance of our trade is constantly favorable to us;

there are times in which we lose.  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-I have heard much talk of population.

If our inhabitants were doubled, so that we numbered forty millions of people

instead of twenty, what would be the consequence?

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-It would be this: that, one with another, each

would have, instead of forty, but twenty crowns to live upon; or that the land

should produce double the crops it now does; or that there should be double

the national industry, or of gain from foreign countries; or that half of the

people should be sent to America; or that one half of the nation should eat the

other.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-Let us then remain satisfied with our

twenty  millions  of  inhabitants,  and  with  our  hundred  and  twenty  livres  a

head, distributed as it shall please the Lord. Yet this situation is a sad one,

and your iron age is hard indeed.

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-There is no nation that is better off; and there are

many that are worse. Do you believe that there is in the North wherewithal to

afford to each inhabitant the value of an hundred and twenty of our livres a

year? If they had had the equivalent of this, the Huns, the Vandals, and the

Franks  would  not  have  deserted  their  country,  in  quest  of  establishments

elsewhere, which they conquered, fire and sword in hand.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-If I were to listen to you, you would

persuade me presently that I am happy with my hundred and twenty livres.

  THE  GEOMETRICIAN.-If  you  would  but  think  yourself  happy,  you

would then be so.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-A man cannot imagine what actually

is not, unless he be mad.

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-I have already told you, that in order to be more

at your ease, and more happy than you are, you should take a wife; to which I

tack, however, this clause, that she has, as well as you, one hundred and

twenty livres a year; that is to say, four acres at ten crowns an acre. The

ancient Romans had each but one. If your children are industrious, they can

each earn as much by their working for others.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-So that they may get money, without

others losing it.  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-Such is the law of all nations: there is no living

but on these terms.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-And must my wife and I give each of

us the half of our produce to the legislative and executive power, and the new

ministers of state rob us of the price of our hard labor, and of the substance of

our poor children, before they are able to get their livelihood? Pray, tell me,

how  much  money  will  these  new  ministers  of  ours  bring  into  the  king's

coffers, by this jure divino system?

  THE  GEOMETRICIAN.-You  pay  twenty  crowns  on  four  acres,  which

bring you in forty. A rich man, who possesses four hundred acres will, by the

new tariff, pay two thousand crowns; and the whole fourscore millions of

acres will yield to the king, twelve hundred millions of livres a year, or four

hundred millions of crowns.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-That appears to me impracticable and

impossible.

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-And very much you are in the right to think so:

and  this  impossibility  is  a  geometrical  demonstration  that  there  is  a

fundamental defect in the calculation of our new ministers.

  THE  MAN  OF  FORTY  CROWNS.-Is  not  there  also  demonstrably  a

prodigious injustice in taking from me the half of my corn, of my hemp, of

the wool of my sheep, etc., and, at the same time, to require no aid from those

who shall have gained ten, twenty, or thirty thousand livres a year, by my

hemp, of which they will have made linen,-by my wool, of which they will

have made cloth,-by my corn, which they will have sold at so much more

than it cost them?

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-The injustice of this administration is as evident

as  its  calculation  is  erroneous.  It  is  right  to  favor  industry;  but  opulent

industry  ought  to  contribute  to  support  the  state.  This  industry  will  have

certainly taken from you a part of your one hundred and twenty livres, and

appropriated that part to itself, in selling you your shirts and your coat twenty

times dearer than they would have cost you, if you had made them yourself.

The manufacturer who shall have enriched himself, at your expense, will, I

allow, have also paid wages to his workmen, who had nothing of themselves,

but he will, every year, have sunk, and put by a sum that will, at length, haveproduced to him thirty thousand livres a year. This fortune then he will have

acquired at your expense. Nor can you ever sell him the produce of your land

dear enough to reimburse you for what he will have got by you; for were you

to attempt such an advance of your price, he would procure what he wanted

cheaper from other countries. A proof of which is, that he remains constantly

possessor of his thirty thousand livres a year, and you of your one hundred

and twenty livres, that often diminish, instead of increasing.

  It is then necessary and equitable, that the refined industry of the trader

should pay more than the gross industry of the farmer. The same is to be said

of the collectors of the revenue. Your tax had previously been but twelve

livres,  before  our  great  ministers  were  pleased  to  take  from  you  twenty

crowns. On these twelve livres, the collector retained tenpence, or ten sols for

himself. If in your province there were five hundred thousand souls, he will

have gained two hundred and fifty thousand livres a year. Suppose he spends

fifty thousand, it is clear, that at the end of ten years he will be two millions

in  pocket.  It  is  then  but  just  that  he  should  contribute  his  proportion,

otherwise, every thing would be perverted, and go to ruin.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-I am very glad you have taxed the

officer of the revenue. It is some relief to my imagination. But since he has so

well  increased  his  superfluity,  what  shall  I  do  to  augment  my  small

modicum?

  THE  GEOMETRICIAN.-I  have  already  told  you,  by  marrying,  by

laboring,  by  trying  to  procure  from  your  land  some  sheaves  of  corn  in

addition to what it previously produced.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-Well! granted then that I shall have

been duly industrious; that all my countrymen will have been so too; and that

the legislative and executive power shall have received a good round tax;

how much will the nation have gained at the end of the year?

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-Nothing at all; unless it shall have carried on a

profitable foreign trade. But life will have been more agreeable in it. Every

one will, respectively, in proportion, have had more clothes, more linen, more

movables than he had before. There will have been in the nation a more

abundant  circulation.  The  wages  would  have  been,  in  process  of  time,

augmented, nearly in proportion to the number of the sheaves of corn, of thetods of wool, of the ox-hides, of the sheep and goats, that will have been

added, of the clusters of grapes that will have been squeezed in the wine-

press. More of the value of commodities will have been paid to the king in

money, and the king will have returned more value to those he will have

employed under his orders; but there will not be half a crown the more in the

kingdom.

  THE  MAN  OF  FORTY  CROWNS.What  will  then  remain  to  the

government at the end of the year?

  THE  GEOMETRICIAN.-Once  more,  nothing.  This  is  the  case  of

government in general. It never lays by anything. It will have got its living,

that is to say, its food, raiment, lodging, movables. The subject will have

done so too. Where a government amasses treasure, it will have squeezed

from the circulation so much money as it will have amassed. It will have

made so many wretched, as it will have put by forty crowns in its coffers.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-At this rate, then, Henry IV. was but a

mean-spirited wretch, a miser, a plunderer, for I have been told that he had

chested  up  in  the  Bastile,  above  fifty  millions  of  livres  according  to  our

present currency.

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-He was a man as good, and as prudent, as he

was brave. He was preparing to make a just war, and by amassing in his

coffers twenty-two millions of the currency of that time, besides which he

had twenty more to receive, which he left in circulation, he spared the people

above a hundred millions that it would have cost, if he had not taken those

useful measures. He made himself morally sure of success against an enemy

who had not taken the like precaution. The probabilities were prodigiously in

his favor. His twenty-two millions, in bank, proved that there was then in this

kingdom, twenty-two millions of surplusage of the territorial produce, so that

no one was a sufferer.

  THE  MAN  OF  FORTY  CROWNS.-My  father  then  told  me  the  truth,

when  he  said  that  the  subject  was  in  proportion  more  rich  under  the

administration of the Duke of Sully than under that of our new ministers, who

had laid on the single tax, the sole tax, and who, out of my forty crowns, have

taken away twenty. Pray, tell me, is there another nation in the world that

enjoys this precious advantage of the sole tax?  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-Not one opulent nation. The English, who are

not much giving to laughing, could not, however, help bursting out, when

they heard that men of intelligence, among us, had proposed this kind of

administration. The Chinese exact a tax from all the foreign trading ships that

resort to Canton. The Dutch pay, at Nangazaqui, when they are received in

Japan, under pretext that they are not Christians. The Laplanders, and the

Samoieds, are indeed subjected to a sole tax in sables or marten-skins. The

republic of St. Marino pays nothing more than tithes for the maintenance of

that state in its splendor.

  There is, in Europe, a nation celebrated for its equity and its valor, that

pays no tax. This is Switzerland. But thus it has happened. The people have

put themselves in the place of the Dukes of Austria and of Zeringue. The

small cantons are democratical, and very poor. Each inhabitant pays but a

trifling sum toward the support of this little republic. In the rich cantons, the

people are charged, for the state, with those duties which the Archdukes of

Austria and the lords of the land used to exact. The protestant cantons are, in

proportion,  twice  as  rich  as  the  catholic,  because  the  state,  in  the  first,

possesses the lands of the monks. Those who were formerly subjects to the

Archdukes of Austria, to the Duke of Zeringue, and to the monks, are now

the subjects of their own country. They pay to that country the same tithes,

the same fines of alienation, that they paid to their former masters; and as the

subjects, in general, have very little trade, their merchandise is liable to no

charges,  except  some  small  staple  duties.  The  men  make  a  trade  of  their

courage,  in  their  dealings  with  foreign  powers,  and  sell  themselves  for  a

certain term of years, which brings some money into their country at our

expense: and this example is as singular a one in the civilized world, as is the

sole tax now laid on by our new legislators.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-So, sir, the Swiss are not plundered,

jure  divino,  of  one-half  of  their  goods;  and  he  that  has  four  cows  in

Switzerland is not obliged to give two of them to the state?

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-Undoubtedly, not. In one canton, upon thirteen

tons of wine, they pay one, and drink the other twelve. In another canton,

they pay the twelfth, and drink the remaining eleven.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-Why am not I a Swiss? That cursedtax, that single and singularly iniquitous tax, that has reduced me to beggary!

But then again, three or four hundred taxes, of which it is impossible for me

to retain or pronounce the bare names, are they more just and more tolerable?

Was  there  ever  a  legislator,  who,  in  founding  a  state,  wished  to  create

counselors to the king, inspectors of coal-meters, gaugers of wine, measurers

of wood, searchers of hog-tongues, comptrollers of salt butter? or to maintain

an army of rascals, twice as numerous as that of Alexander, commanded by

sixty generals, who lay the country under contribution, who gain, every day,

signal victories, who take prisoners, and who sometimes sacrifice them in the

air, or on a boarded stage, as the ancient Scythians did, according to what my

vicar told me?

  Now, was such a legislation, against which so many outcries were raised,

and which caused the shedding of so many tears, much better than the newly

imposed one, which at one stroke, cleanly and quietly takes away half of my

subsistence? I am afraid, that on a fair liquidation, it will be found that under

the ancient system of the revenue, they used to take, at times and in detail,

three-quarters of it.

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-Iliacos intra muros peccatur et extra. Est modus

in retus. Caveas fine quidnimie.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-I have learned a little of history, and

something of geometry; but I do not understand a word of Latin.

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-The sense is, pretty nearly, as follows. There is

wrong on both sides. Keep to a medium in every thing. Nothing too much.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-I say, nothing too much; that is really

my situation; but the worst of it is, I have not enough.

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-I allow that you must perish of want, and I too,

and the state too, if the new administration should continue only two years

longer; but it is to be hoped heaven will have mercy on us.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS.-We pass our lives in hope, and die

hoping  to  the  last.  Adieu,  sir,  you  have  enlightened  me,  but  my  heart  is

grieved.

  THE GEOMETRICIAN.-This is, indeed, often the fruit of knowledge.

  Palace of the barefooted Carmelites.-"What would you please to have, myson?"-"A morsel of bread, my reverend father. The new edicts have stripped

me  of  everything."-"Son,  know  that  we  ourselves  beg  charity;  we  do  not

bestow it."


  IV.

  AN ADVENTURE WITH A CARMELITE.

  When I had thanked the academician of the Academy of Sciences, for

having set me right, I went away quite out of heart, praising providence, but

muttering between my teeth these doleful words: "What! to have no more

than forty crowns a year to live on, nor more than twenty-two years to live!

Alas! may our life be yet shorter, since it is to be so miserable!"

  As I was saying this, I found myself just opposite a very superb house.

Already was I feeling myself pressed by hunger. I had not so much as the

hundred  and  twentieth  part  of  the  sum  that  by  right  belongs  to  each

individual. But as soon as I was told that this was the palace of my reverend

fathers,  the  bare-footed  Carmelites,  I  conceived  great  hopes,  and  said  to

myself, since these saints are humble enough to go bare-footed, they will be

charitable enough to give me a dinner.

  I rang. A Carmelite came to the door.

  "What would you please to have, my son?"

  "A morsel of bread, my reverend father. The new edicts have stripped me

of every thing."

  Son, know that we ourselves beg charity; we do not bestow it."[1]

  "What! while your holy institute forbids you to wear shoes, you have the

house of a prince, and can you refuse to me a meal?"

  "My son, it is true, we go without stockings and shoes; that is an expense

the less; we feel no more cold in our feet than in our hands. As to our fine

house, we built it very easily, as we have a hundred thousand livres a year of

income from houses in the same street."

  "So, then! you suffer me to die of hunger, while you have an income of a

hundred thousand livres! I suppose you pay fifty thousand of these to the new

government?"  "Heaven preserve us from paying a single farthing! It is only the produce

of the land cultivated by laborious hands, callous with work, and moistened

with tears, that owes taxes to the legislative and executive power. The alms

which have been bestowed upon us, have enabled us to build those houses, by

the rent of which we get a hundred thousand livres a year. But these alms,

coming from the fruits of the earth, and having, consequently, already paid

the tax, ought not to pay twice. They have sanctified the faithful believers,

who  have  impoverished  themselves  to  enrich  us,  and  we  continue  to  beg

charity, and to lay under contribution the Fauxbourg of St. Germain, in order

to sanctify a still greater number of the faithful believers."[2]

  Having thus spoken, the Carmelite politely shut the door in my face.

  I then passed along and stopped before the Hôtel of the Mousquetaires

gris, and related to those gentlemen what had just happened to me. They gave

me a good dinner and half a crown, (un ecu). One of them proposed to go

directly and set fire to the convent; but a musqueteer, more discreet than he,

remonstrated with him, insisting that the time for action had not yet arrived,

and implored him to wait patiently a little longer.[3]


  [1] Victor Hugo in his poem, Christ at the Vatican, (translated by G.B.

Burleigh,) rebukes this inhuman spirit of monkish greed and avarice, which

always receives but neves gives in return. In the poem, Christ is represented

as saying:


  "I have said,

  'I will have mercy and not sacrifice;'-

  Have said, 'Give freely what, without a price,

  Was given to you.' To my redeemed, instead,

  You sell baptism upon their natal bed;

  Sell to the sinner void indulgences;

  To lovers sell the natural right to wed;

  Sell to the dying the privilege of decease,

  And sell your funeral masses to the dead!  Your prayers and masses and communions sell;

  Beads, benedictions, crosses; in your eyes

  Nothing is sacred,-all is merchandise."-E.


  [2] In a recent number of The Nineteenth Century, Mr. Alex. A. Knox, in

an able criticism on the writings of Voltaire, says very truly:


  "It should not be forgotten that in his day a very large portion of the soil of

France was in the hands of the clergy, free from all burdens, save in so far as

the  clergy  chose  to  execute  them  by  the  way  of  'gratuitous  gifts.'  The

condition of the French peasant was frightful. Arthur Young, Dr. Moore, and

others  have  described  it  at  a  somewhat  later  date,  but  it  was  even  so  in

Voltaire's time. Of course the 'clerical immunities' were far from being the

only cause of all this misery; but they were a frightful addition to it."

  [3] The degradation of labor, and the corruption and injustice of the papal

priesthood, were the inciting causes of the great revolution in France, which

at length overturned the monarchy, and convulsed, for so long a period, every

nation in Europe. In reading this romance of the hardships of the laborer, we

may learn to comprehend the true principles of Voltaire, and recognize his

great benevolence and sympathy with suffering and distress. We may also

listen  to  the  first  faint  mutterings  of  the  terrible  storm  of  blood  and

retribution, that was so soon to burst over unhappy France, and overwhelm in

its lurid course all ranks and conditions of mankind-the innocent and the

guilty, the oppressed and the oppressor, the peasant and the priest.-E.


  V.

  AUDIENCE OF THE COMPTROLLER GENERAL.

  I  went,  with  my  half-crown,  to  present  a  petition  to  the  comptroller

general, who was that day giving audience.

  His anti-chamber was filled with people of all kinds. There were there

especially some with more bluff faces, more prominent bellies, and more

arrogant looks than my man of eight millions. I durst not draw near to them; Isaw them, but they did not observe me.

  A monk, a great man for tithes, had begun a suit at law against certain

subjects of the state, whom he called his tenants. He had already a larger

income than the half of his parishioners put together, and was moreover lord

of the manor. His claim was, that whereas his vassals had, with infinite pains,

converted their heaths into vineyards, they owed him a tithe of the wine,

which, taking into the account the price of labor, of the vine-props, of the

casks and cellarage, would carry off above a quarter of the produce.

  "But," said he, "as the tithes are due, jure divino, I demand the quarter of

the substance of my tenants, in the name of God."

  The minister of the revenue said to him, "I see how charitable you are."

  A  farmer-general,  extremely  well-skilled  in  assessments,  interposed,

saying:

  "Sir, that village can afford nothing to this monk; as I have, but the last

year, made the parishioners pay thirty-two taxes on their wine, besides their

over-consumption of the allowance for their own drinking. They are entirely

ruined. I have seized and sold their cattle and movables, and yet they are still

my debtors. I protest, then, against the claim of the reverend father."

  "You are in the right," answered the minister of the revenue, "to be his

rival; you both equally love your neighbor, and you both edify me."

  A third, a monk and lord of the manor, whose tenants were in mortmain,

was waiting for a decree of the council that should put him in possession of

all the estate of a Paris cockney, who having, inadvertently, lived a year and a

day in a house subject to this servitude, and inclosed within the hands of this

priest, had died at the year's end. The monk was claiming all the estate of this

cockney, and claiming it jure divino.

  The minister found by this, that the heart of this monk was as just and as

tender as those of the others.

  A fourth, who was comptroller of the royal domains, presented a specious

memorial,  in  which  he  justified  himself  for  his  having  reduced  twenty

families to beggary. They had inherited from their uncles, their aunts, their

brothers, or cousins; and were liable to pay the duties. The officers of the

domain had generously proved to them, that they had not set the full value ontheir  inheritances,-that  they  were  much  richer  than  they  believed,  and,

consequently,  having  condemned  them  to  a  triple  fine,  ruined  them  in

charges, and threw the heads of the families into jail, he had bought their best

possessions without untying his purse-strings.

  The comptroller general said to him, in a tone indeed rather bitter:

  "Euge, controlleur bone et fidelis, quia supra pauca fuisti fidelis, fermier-

general te constituam."

  But to a master of the requests, who was standing at his side, he said in a

low voice:

  "We must make these blood-suckers, sacred and profane, disgorge. It is

time to give some relief to the people, who, without our care, and our equity,

would have nothing to live upon in this world at least, however they might

fare in the other."

  Some, of profound genius, presented projects to him. One of them had

imagined a scheme to lay a tax on wit. "All the world," said he, "will be eager

to pay, as no one cares to pass for a fool."

  The minister declared to him, "I exempt you from the tax."

  Another  proposed  to  lay  the  only  tax  upon  songs  and  laughing,  in

consideration that we were the merriest nation under the sun, and that a song

was a relief and comfort for every thing. But the minister observed, that of

late there were hardly any songs of pleasantry made; and he was afraid that,

to escape the tax, we would become too serious.

  The  next  that  presented  himself,  was  a  trusty  and  loyal  subject,  who

offered to raise for the king three times as much, by making the nation pay

three times less. The minister advised him to learn arithmetic.

  A fourth proved to the king in the way of friendship, that he could not

raise above seventy-five millions, but that he was going to procure him two

hundred and twenty-five. "You will oblige me in this," said the minister, "as

soon as we shall have paid the public debts."

  At length, who should appear but a deputy of the new author, who makes

the legislative power co-proprietor of all our lands, jure divino, and who was

giving the king twelve hundred millions of revenue. I knew the man againwho had flung me into prison for not having paid my twenty crowns, and

throwing myself at the feet of the comptroller general, I implored his justice;

upon which, he burst out a laughing, and telling me, it was a trick that had

been played me, he ordered the doers of this mischief in jest to pay me a

hundred crowns damages, and exempted me from the land-tax for the rest of

my life. I said to him, "God bless your honor!"


  VI.

  THE MAN OF FORTY CROWNS MARRIES, BECOMES A FATHER,

AND DESCANTS UPON THE MONKS.

  The Man of Forty Crowns having improved his understanding, and having

accumulated  a  moderate  fortune,  married  a  very  pretty  girl,  who  had  an

hundred crowns a year of her own. As soon as his son was born, he felt

himself a man of some consequence in the state. He was famous for making

the best baskets in the world, and his wife was an excellent seamstress. She

was born in the neighborhood of a rich abbey of a hundred thousand livres a

year. Her husband asked me one day, why those gentlemen, who were so few

in number, had swallowed so many of the forty crown lots? "Are they more

useful to their country than I am?" "No, dear neighbor." "Do they, like me,

contribute at least to the population of it?" "No." "Do they cultivate the land?

Do they defend the state when it is attacked?" "No, they pray to God for us."

"Well, then, I will pray to God for us." "Well, then, I will pray to God for

them, in return."

  QUESTION.-How many of these useful gentry, men and women, may the

convents in this kingdom contain?

    ANSWER.-By the lists of the superintendents, taken toward the end of the

last century, there were about ninety thousand.

    QUESTION.-According to our ancient account, they ought not, at forty

crowns a head, to possess above ten millions eight hundred thousand livres.

Pray, how much have they actually?

    ANSWER.-They  have  to  the  amount  of  fifty  millions,  including  the

masses, and alms to the mendicant monks, who really lay a considerable tax

on the people. A begging friar of a convent in Paris, publicly bragged that hiswallet was worth fourscore thousand livres a year.

    QUESTION.-Let  us  now  consider  how  much  the  repartition  of  fifty

millions among ninety thousand shaven crowns gives to each? Let us see, is it

not five hundred and fifty-five livres?

  ANSWER.-Yes, and a considerable sum it is in a numerous society, where

the expenses even diminish by the quantity of consumers; for ten persons

may live together much cheaper than if each had his separate lodging and

table.

  QUESTION.-So  that  the  ex-Jesuits,  to  whom  there  is  now  assigned  a

pension of four hundred livres, are then really losers by the bargain.

  ANSWER.-I do not think so; for they are almost all of them retired among

their friends, who assist them. Several of them say masses for money, which

they did not do before; others get to be preceptors; some are maintained by

female bigots; each has made a shift for himself: and, perhaps, at this time,

there are few of them, who have tasted of the world, and of liberty, that

would resume their former chains. The monkish life, whatever they may say,

is not at all to be envied. It is a maxim well known, that the monks are a kind

of  people  who  assemble  without  knowing,  live  without  loving,  and  die

without regretting each other.

    QUESTION.-You think, then, that it would be doing them a great service,

to strip them of all their monks' habits?

    ANSWER.-They would undoubtedly gain much by it, and the state still

more. It would restore to the country a number of subjects, men and women,

who have rashly sacrificed their liberty, at an age to which the laws do not

allow a capacity of disposing of tenpence a year income. It would be taking

these corpses out of their tombs, and afford a true resurrection. Their houses

might  become  hospitals,  or  be  turned  into  places  for  manufactures.

Population would be increased. All the arts would be better cultivated. One

might at least diminish the number of these voluntary victims by fixing the

number of novices. The country would have subjects more useful, and less

unhappy. Such is the opinion of all the magistrates, such the unanimous wish

of the public, since its understanding is enlightened. The example of England,

and other states, is an evident proof of the necessity of this reformation. What

would England do at this time, if, instead of forty thousand seamen, it hadforty thousand monks? The more they are multiplied, the greater need there is

of  a  number  of  industrious  subjects.  There  are  undoubtedly  buried  in  the

cloisters  many  talents,  which  are  lost  to  the  state.  To  make  a  kingdom

nourish, there should be the fewest priests and the most artisans possible. So

far ought the ignorance and barbarism of our forefathers to be from being any

rule for us, that they ought rather to be an admonition to us, to do what they

would do, if they were in our place, with our improvements in knowledge.

  QUESTION.-It is not then out of hatred to monks that you wish to abolish

them, but out of love to your country? I think as you do. I would not have my

son a monk. And if I thought I was to rear children for nothing better than a

cloister, I would not wish to become a father.

    ANSWER.-Where in fact, is that good father of a family that would not

groan to see his son and daughter lost to society? This is seeking the safety of

the soul. It may be so, but a soldier that seeks the safety of his body, when his

duty is to fight, is punished. We are all soldiers of the state; we are in the pay

of society; we become deserters when we quit it.

  Why,  then,  has  monkishness  prevailed?  Because,  since  the  days  of

Constantine,  the  government  has  been  everywhere  absurd  and  detestable;

because the Roman empire came to have more monks than soldiers; because

there were a hundred thousand of them in Egypt alone; because they were

exempt from labor and taxes; because the chiefs of those barbarous nations

which  destroyed  the  empire,  having  turned  Christians,  in  order  to  govern

Christians, exercised the most horrid tyranny; because, to avoid the fury of

these tyrants, people threw themselves in crowds into cloisters, and so, to

escape  one  servitude,  put  themselves  into  another;  because  the  popes,  by

instituting so many different orders of sacred drones, contrived to have so

many subjects to themselves in other states; because a peasant likes better to

be  called  reverend  father,  and  to  give  his  benedictions,  than  to  follow  a

plough's  tail;  because  he  does  not  know  that  the  plough  is  nobler  than  a

monk's habit; because he had rather live at the expense of fools than by a

laborious occupation; in short, because he does not know that, in making a

monk of himself, he is preparing for himself unhappy days, of which the sad

groundwork will be nothing but a tedium vitæ and repentance.

    QUESTION.-I am satisfied. Let us have no monks, for the sake of theirown happiness, as well as ours. But I am sorry to hear it said by the landlord

of our village, who is father to four boys and three girls, that he does not

know how to dispose of his daughters, unless he makes nuns of them.

  ANSWER.-This too often repeated plea is at once inhuman, detrimental to

the country, and destructive to society. Every time that it can be said of any

condition of life whatever, that if all the world were to embrace it mankind

would perish, it is proved that that condition is a worthless one, and that

whoever embraces it does all the mischief to mankind that in him lies.

  Now, it being a clear consequence that if all the youth of both sexes were

to shut themselves up in cloisters the world would perish, monkery is, if it

were but in that light alone, the enemy to human nature, independently of the

horrid evils it has formerly caused.

    QUESTION.-Might not as much be said of soldiers?

  Entering the convent.-"There is a necessity for houses of retreat for old

age, for infirmity, for deformity. But by the most detestable of all abuses,

these  foundations  are  for  well-made  persons.  Let  a  hump-backed  woman

present herself to enter into a cloister, and she will be rejected with contempt,

unless she will give an immense portion to the house."


  ANSWER. Certainly not; for if every subject carried arms in his turn, as

formerly was the practice in all republics, and especially in that of Rome, the

soldier is but the better farmer for it. The soldier, as a good subject ought to

do, marries, and fights for his wife and children. Would it were the will of

heaven that every laborer was a soldier and a married man! They would make

excellent subjects. But a monk, merely in his quality of a monk, is good for

nothing but to devour the substance of his countryman. There is no truth

more generally acknowledged.

    QUESTION.-But,  sir,  the  daughters  of  poor  gentlemen,  who  cannot

portion them off in marriage, what are they to do?

  ANSWER.Do! They should do, as has a thousand times been said, like the

daughters  in  England,  in  Scotland,  Ireland,  Switzerland,  Holland,  half

Germany, Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Tartary, Turkey, Africa, and in almost

all the rest of the globe. They will prove much better wives, much bettermothers, when it shall have been the custom, as in Germany, to marry women

without fortune. A woman, industrious and a good economist, will do more

good in a house, than a daughter of a farmer of the revenue, who spends more

in superfluities than she will have brought of income to her husband.

  There is a necessity for houses of retreat for old age, for infirmity, for

deformity. But by the most detestable of all abuses, these foundations are for

well-made persons. Let a hump-backed old woman present herself to enter

into a cloister, and she will be rejected with contempt, unless she will give an

immense portion to the house. But what do I say? Every nun must bring her

dower with her; she is else the refuse of the convent. Never was there a more

intolerable abuse.

    QUESTION.-Thank you, sir. I swear to you that no daughter of mine shall

be a nun. They shall learn to spin, to sew, to make lace, to embroider, to

render themselves useful. I look on the vows of convents to be crimes against

one's country and one's self. Now, sir, I beg you will explain to me, how

comes it that a certain writer, in contradiction to human kind, pretends that

monks are useful to the population of a state, because their buildings are kept

in better repair than those of the nobility, and their lands better cultivated?

  ANSWER.He has a mind to divert himself; he knows but too well, that ten

families who have each five thousand livres a year in land, are a hundred,

nay, a thousand times more useful than a convent that enjoys fifty thousand

livres  a  year,  and  which  has  always  a  secret  hoard.  He  cries  up  the  fine

houses built by the monks, and it is precisely those fine houses that provoke

the rest of the subjects; it is the very cause of complaint to all Europe. The

vow  of  poverty  condemns  those  palaces,  as  the  vow  of  humility  protests

against pride, and as the vow of extinguishing one's race is in opposition to

nature.

    QUESTION.-Bless  me!  Who  can  this  be  that  advances  so  strange  a

proposition?

  ANSWER. It is the friend of mankind, [Monsieur le M. de Mirabeau, in

his book entitled L'Ami des Hommes. It is against this marquis that the jest

on the only tax is leveled; a tax proposed by him], or rather the friend of the

monks.

    QUESTION.-I begin to think it advisable to be very distrustful of books.    ANSWER.-The best way is to make use, with regard to them, of the same

caution, as with men. Choose the most reasonable, examine them, and never

yield unless to evidence.


  VII.

  ON TAXES PAID TO A FOREIGN POWER.

  About a month ago, the Man of Forty Crowns came to me, holding both

his sides, which seemed ready to burst with laughing. In short, he laughed so

heartily that I could not help laughing also, without knowing at what. So true

it is, that man is born an imitative animal, that instinct rules us, and that the

great emotions of the soul are catching. Ut ridentibus arrident, ita flentibus

adflent, Humani vultus.

  When he had had his laugh out, he told me that he had just come from

meeting with a man who called himself the prothonotary of the Holy See, and

that this personage was sending away a great sum of money to an Italian,

three hundred leagues off, in the name and behalf of a Frenchman, on whom

the king had bestowed a small fief or fee; because the said Frenchman could

never enjoy this benefit of the king's conferring, if he did not give to this

Italian the first year's income.

  "The thing," said I, "is very true; but it is not quite such a laughing matter

either. It costs France about four hundred thousand livres a year, in petty

duties of this kind; and in the course of two centuries and a half, that this

custom has lasted, we have already sent to Italy fourscore millions."

  "Heavenly Father!" he exclaimed, "how many forty crowns would that

make? Some Italian, then, subdued us, I suppose, two centuries and a half

ago, and laid that tribute upon us!"

  "In good faith," answered I, "he used to impose on us in former times, in a

much more burthensome way. That is but a trifle in comparison to what, for a

long time, he levied on our poor nations of Europe."

  Then I related to him how those holy usurpations had taken place, and

came to be established. He knows a little of history, and does not want for

sense. He easily conceived that we had been slaves, and that we were still

dragging a little bit of our chain that we could not get rid of. He spoke muchand with energy, against this abuse; but with what respect for religion in

general. With what reverence did he express himself for the bishops! How

heartily did he wish them many forty crowns a year, that they might spend

them in their dioceses in good works.

  He also wished that all the country vicars might have a number of forty

crowns, that they might live with decency.

  "It is a sad thing," said he, "that a vicar should be obliged to dispute with

his flock for two or three sheaves of corn, and that he should not be amply

paid by the country. These eternal contests for imaginary rights, for the tithes,

destroy the respect that is owing to them. The unhappy cultivator who shall

have already paid to the collectors his tenth penny, and the twopence a livre,

and  the  tax,  and  the  capitation,  and  the  purchase  of  his  exemption  from

lodging soldiers,-after he shall have lodged soldiers,-for this unfortunate man,

I say, to see the vicar take away in addition the tithe of his produce, he can no

longer look on him as his pastor, but as one that flays him alive,-that tears

from him the little skin that is left him. He feels but too sensible, that while

they are, jure divino, robbing him of his tenth sheaf, they have the diabolical

cruelty not to give him credit for all that it will have cost him to make that

sheaf grow. What then remains to him for himself and family? Tears, want,

discouragement, despair, and thus he dies of fatigue and misery. If the vicar

were paid by the country, he would be a comfort to his parishioners, instead

of being looked on by them as their enemy."

  The worthy man melted as he uttered these words; he loved his country,

and the public good was his idol. He would sometimes emphatically say,

"What a nation would the French be if it pleased!" We went to see his son,

whom the mother, a very neat and clean woman, was nursing. "Alas!" said

the  father,  "here  thou  art,  poor  child,  and  hast  nothing  to  pretend  to  but

twenty-three years of life, and forty crowns a year."


  VIII.

  ON PROPORTIONS.

  The produce of the extremes is equal to the produce of the means: but two

sacks of corn stolen, are not, to those who stole them, as the loss of their lives

is to the interest of the person from whom they were stolen.  The prior of , from whom two of his domestic servants in the country had

stolen two measures of corn, has just had the two delinquents hanged. This

execution has cost him more than all his harvest has been worth to him; and

since that time he has not been able to get a servant.

  If the laws had ordained that such as stole their master's corn should work

in his grounds, during their lives in fetters, and with a bell at their neck fixed

to a collar, the prior would have been a considerable gainer by it.

  "Terror should be preventively employed against crimes;" very true: but

work, on compulsion, and lasting shame, strike more terror than the gallows.

  The rack.-"I was summoned to give evidence against a miller, who has

been put to the torture, ordinary and extraordinary, and who has been found

innocent. I saw him faint away under redoubled tortures. I heard the crash of

his bones. His outcries and screams of agony are not yet out of my ears; they

haunt me. I shed tears for pity, and shudder with horror."


  There  was,  some  months  ago  at  London,  a  malefactor  who  had  been

condemned to be transported to America to work there at the sugar works

with the negroes. In England, any criminal, as in many other countries, may

get  a  petition  presented  to  the  king,  either  to  obtain  a  free  pardon,  or  a

mitigation  of  the  sentence.  This  one  presented  a  petition  to  be  hanged,

alleging that he mortally hated work, and that he had rather suffer strangling

for a minute, than to make sugar all his lifetime.

  Others may think otherwise, every one to his taste. But it has been already

said, and cannot be too often repeated, that a man hanged is good for nothing,

and that punishments ought to be useful.

  Some  years  ago,  in  Turkey,  two  young  men  were  condemned  to  be

impaled,  for  having,  (without  taking  off  their  caps,)  stood  to  see  the

procession of the Lama pass by. The Emperor of China, who is a man of very

good sense, said, that for his part, he should have condemned them to walk

bareheaded, in every public procession, for three months afterwards.

  "Proportion punishments to crimes," says the Marquis Beccaria; but those

who made the laws were not geometricians.

  I  hate  the  laws  of  Draco,  which  punish  equally  crimes  and  faults,wickedness and folly. Let us,-especially in all litigations,-in all dissensions,

in  all  quarrels,-distinguish  the  aggressor  from  the  party  offended,  the

oppressor from the oppressed. An offensive war is the procedure of a tyrant;

he who defends himself is in the character of a just man.

  As I was absorbed in these reflections, the Man of Forty Crowns came to

me all in tears. I asked, with emotion, if his son, who was by right to live

twenty-three years, was dead?

  "No," said he, "the little one is very well, and so is my wife; but I was

summoned to give evidence against a miller, who has been put to the torture,

ordinary and extraordinary, and who has been found innocent. I saw him faint

away under redoubled tortures. I heard the crash of his bones. His outcries

and screams of agony are not yet out of my ears; they haunt me. I shed tears

for pity, and shudder with horror."

  His tears drew mine. I trembled, too, like him; for I have naturally an

extreme sensibility.

  My memory then represented to me the dreadful fate of the Calas family!

A virtuous mother in irons,-her children in tears, and forced to fly, her house

given  up  to  pillage,-a  respectable  father  of  a  family  broken  with  torture,

agonizing on a wheel, and expiring in the flames; a son loaded with chains,

and dragged before the judges, one of whom said to him:

  "We have just now broken your father on the wheel; we will break you

alive too."

  I  remembered  the  family  of  Sirven,  who  one  of  my  friends  met  with

among  the  mountains  covered  with  ice,  as  they  were  flying  from  the

persecution of a judge as ignorant as he was unjust. This judge (he told me)

had condemned an innocent family to death on a supposition, without the

least shadow of proof, that the father and mother, assisted by two of their

daughters, had cut the throat of the third, and drowned her besides, for going

to mass. I saw in judgments of this kind, at once an excess of stupidity, of

injustice, and of barbarity.

  The Man of Forty Crowns joined with me in pitying human nature. I had

in my pocket the discourse of an attorney-general of Dauphiny, which turned

upon very important matters. I read to him the following passages:  "Certainly those must have been truly great men, who, at first, dared to

take upon themselves the office of governing their fellow creatures, and to set

their shoulders to the burthen of the public welfare; who, for the sake of the

good they meant to do to men, exposed themselves to their ingratitude, and

for the public repose renounced their own; who made themselves, as one may

say, middle-men between their fellow-creatures and Providence, to compose

for them, by artifice, a happiness which Providence seems otherwise to have

refused to them by any other means.

  "What magistrate, was ever so careless of his responsibilities and duties to

humanity as to entertain such ideas? Could he, in the solitude of his closet,

without shuddering with horror and pity, cast his eyes on those papers, the

unfortunate monuments of gilt or of innocence? Should he not think he hears

a plaintive voice and groans issue from those fatal writings, and press him to

decide  the  destiny  of  a  subject,  of  a  husband,  of  a  father,  or  of  a  whole

family? What judge can be so unmerciful (if he is charged with but one single

process) as to pass in cold blood before the door of a prison? Is it I (must he

say  to  himself)  who  detain  in  that  execrable  place  my  fellow-creature,

perhaps my countryman, one of humankind, in short? Is it I that confine him

every day,-that shut those execrable doors upon him? Perhaps despair will

have seized him. He sends up to heaven my name loaded with his curses; and

doubtless  calls  to  witness  against  me  that  great  Judge  of  the  world,  who

observes us, and will judge us both."

  "Here a dreadful sight presents itself on a sudden to my eyes: The judge,

tired with interrogating bywords, has recourse to interrogation by tortures.

Impatient  in  his  inquiries  and  researches,  and  perhaps  irritated  at  their

inutility,  he  has  brought  to  him  torches,  chains,  levers,  and  all  those

instruments invented for producing pain. An executioner comes to interpose

in  the  functions  of  the  magistracy,  and  terminates  by  violence  a  judicial

interrogation.

  "Gentle philosophy! Thou who never seekest truth but with attention and

patience,  couldst  thou  expect,  in  an  age  that  takes  thy  name,  that  such

instruments would be employed to discover that truth?

  "Can it be really true, that our laws approve this inconceivable method,

and that custom consecrates it?  "Their laws imitate their prejudices; their public punishments are as cruel

as  their  private  vengeance;  and  the  acts  of  their  reason  are  scarce  less

unmerciful than those of their passions. What can be the cause of this strange

contrariety? It is because our prejudices are ancient, and our morality new; it

is because we are as penetrated with our opinions as we are inattentive to our

ideas; it is because our passion for pleasures hinders us from reflecting on our

wants, and that we are more eager to live than to direct ourselves right; it is,

in a word, because our morals are gentle without being good; it is because we

are polite, and are not so much as humane."

  These  fragments,  which  eloquence  had  dictated  to  humanity,  filled  the

heart of my friend with a sweet consolation. He admired with tenderness.

  "What!" said he, "are such masterpieces as these produced in a province? I

had been told that Paris was all the world, or the only place in it."

  "It is," said I, "the only place for producing comic operas; but there are at

this time, in the provinces, magistrates who think, with the same virtue and

express themselves with the same force. Formerly, the oracles of justice, like

those  of  morality,  were  nothing  but  matter  of  mere  ridicule.  Dr.  Balordo

declaimed at the bar, and Harlequin in the pulpit. Philosophy has at length

come, and has said, 'Do not speak in public, unless to set forth new and useful

truths, with the eloquence of sentiment and of reason.'"

  But, say the praters, if we have nothing new to say, what then? Why, hold

your tongues, replies philosophy. All those vain discourses for parade, that

contain nothing but phrases, are like the fire on the eve of St. John's, kindled

on that day of the year in which there is the least want of it to heat one's self-

it causes no pleasure, and not so much as the ashes of it remain.

  Let all France read good books. But notwithstanding all the progress of the

human  understanding,  there  are  few  that  read;  and  among  those  who

sometimes seek instruction, the reading for the most part is very ill chosen.

My neighbors, men and women, pass their time, after dinner, at playing an

English game, which I have much difficulty to pronounce, since they call it

whist. Many good citizens, many thick heads, who take themselves for good

heads, tell you, with an air of importance, that books are good for nothing.

But, Messieurs, the critics, do not you know that you are governed only by

books? Do not you know that the statutes, the military code, and the gospel,are books on which you continually depend? Read; improve yourselves. It is

reading alone that invigorates the understanding; conversation dissipates it;

play contracts it.

  Thus it was that the Man of Forty Crowns proceeded to form, as one may

say, his head and his heart. He not only succeeded to the inheritance of his

two fair cousins, but he came also to a fortune left by a very distant relation,

who had been a sub-farmer of the military hospitals, where he had fattened

himself on the strict abstinence to which he had put the wounded soldiers.

This man never would marry, he never would own any of his relations. He

lived in the height of debauchery, and died at Paris of a surfeit. He was, as

any one may see, a very useful member of the state.

  Our new philosopher was obliged to go to Paris to get possession of the

inheritance of this relative. At first, the farmers of the domain disputed it with

him. He had the good luck, however, to gain his cause, and the generosity to

give to the poor of his neighborhood, who had not their contingent of forty

crowns a year, a part of the spoils of the deceased son of fortune. After which

he set himself about satisfying his passion for having a library.

  He read every morning and made extracts. In the evening, he consulted the

learned to know in what language the serpent had talked to our good mother;

whether the soul is in the callous body, or in the pineal gland; whether St.

Peter lived five and twenty years at Rome; what specific difference there is

between a throne and a dominion; and why the negroes have a flat nose. He

proposed  to  himself,  besides,  never  to  govern  the  state,  nor  to  write  any

pamphlets against new dramatic pieces. He was called Mr. Andrew, which

was  his  Christian  name.  Those  who  have  known  him,  do  justice  to  his

modesty and to his qualities, both natural and acquired.


  IX.

  A GREAT QUARREL.

  During the stay of Mr. Andrew at Paris, there happened a very important

quarrel. The point was, to decide whether Marcus Antoninus was an honest

man, and whether he was in hell, or in purgatory, or in limbo, waiting till the

day of resurrection. All the men of sense took the part of Marcus Antoninus.

They said: Antoninus has been always just, temperate, chaste, and beneficent.It  is  true,  he  has  not  so  good  a  place  in  paradise  as  St.  Anthony;  for

proportions  ought  to  be  observed,  as  has  been  before  recommended.  But

certainly the soul of Antoninus is not roasting on a spit in hell. If he is in

purgatory, he ought to be delivered out of it; there need only be masses said

for  him.  Let  the  Jesuits,  who  have  no  longer  anything  to  do,  say  three

thousand masses for the repose of the soul of Marcus Antoninus. Putting each

mass at fifteen pence, they will get two thousand two hundred and fifty livres

by it. Besides, some respect is owing to a crowned head. He should not be

lightly damned.

  The party opposed to these good people pretended, on the contrary, that no

compounding for salvation ought to be allowed to Marcus Antoninus; that he

was a heretic; that the Carpocratians and the Alcgi were not so bad as he; that

he had died without confession; that it was necessary to make an example;

that it was right to damn him, if but to teach better manners to the emperors

of China and Japan,-to those of Persia, Turkey, and Morocco,-to the kings of

England, Sweden, Denmark, and Prussia, to the stadtholder of Holland,-to the

avoyers of the Canton of Berne, who no more go to confession than did the

Emperor Marcus Antoninus; that, in short, there is an unspeakable pleasure in

passing sentence against a dead sovereign, which one could not fulminate

against him in his lifetime, for fear of losing one's ears.

  This quarrel became as furious as was formerly that of the Ursulines and

the Annonciades. In short, it was feared that it would come to a schism, as in

the time of the hundred and one Mother Goose's tales, and of certain bills

payable to the bearer in the other world. To be sure, a schism is something

very terrible. The meaning of the word is a division in opinion, and till this

fatal moment all men had been agreed to think the same thing.

  Mr. Andrew, who was an excellent member of society, invited the chiefs

of the two parties to sup with him. He is one of the best companions that we

have. His humor is gentle and lively; his gaiety is not noisy; he is open, frank,

and easy. He has not that sort of wit which seems to aim at stifling that of

others. The authority which he conciliates to himself is due to nothing but his

graceful manner, to his moderation, and to a round good-natured face, which

is  quite  persuasive.  He  could  have  brought  to  sup  cheerfully  together  a

Corsican and a Genoese,-a representative of Geneva and a negative man, the

mufti and an archbishop. He managed so dextrously, as to make the firststroke  that  the  disputants  of  both  parties  aimed  at  each  other  fall  to  the

ground, by turning off the discourse, and by telling a very diverting tale,

which pleased equally the damning and the damned. In short, when they had

got a little good-humored and elevated with wine, he made them sign an

agreement, that the soul of Marcus Antoninus should remain in status quo-

that is to say, nobody knows where,-till the day of final judgment.

  The souls of the doctors of divinity returned quietly to their limbos after

supper, and all was calm. This adjustment of the quarrel did great honor to

the  Man  of  Forty  Crowns;  and,  since  then,  whenever  any  very  peevish

virulent dispute arose among men of letters, or among men not of letters, the

advice given was, "Gentlemen, go and sup at Master Andrew's!"


  X.

  A RASCAL REPULSED.

  The reputation which Mr. Andrew had acquired for pacifying quarrels,-by

giving  good  suppers,-drew  upon  him  last  week  a  singular  visit.  A  dark

complexioned man, shabbily enough dressed, rather crook-backed, with his

head leaning toward one shoulder, a haggard eye, and dirty hands, asked to

be invited to a supper with his enemies.

  "Who are your enemies?" said Mr. Andrew, "and who are you?"

  "Alas, sir," said he, "I am forced to confess that I am taken for one of

those wretches that compose libels to get bread, and who are forever crying

  out,-'Religion,-Religion,-Religion,' in order to come at some little benefice. I

am accused of having caluminated some of the most truly religious subjects,

the most sincere adorers of divinity, and the most honest men of the kingdom.

It is true, sir, that in the heat of composition, there often fall from the pen of

those of my trade, certain little inadvertencies or slips, which are taken for

gross  errors;  and  some  liberties  taken  with  the  truth,  which  are  termed

impudent lies. Our zeal is looked upon in the light of a horrid mixture of

villainy and fanaticism. It has been alleged, that while we are insnaring the

easy faith of some silly old women, we are the scorn and execration of all the

men of worth who can read.

  "My enemies are the principal members of the most illustrious academiesof Europe, writers much esteemed, and beneficent members of society. I have

but just published a book under the title of Anti-philosophical. I had nothing

but the best intentions, and yet no one would buy my book. Those to whom I

made presents of it, threw it into the fire, telling me it was not only anti-

reasonable, but anti-christian, and extremely anti-decent."

  "Well, then!" said Mr. Andrew to him, "follow the example of those to

whom you presented your libel, throw it into the fire, and let no more be said

of it. It is unnecessary to ask you to sup with men of wit, who can never be

your enemies, since they will never read you."

  "Could not you, sir, at least," said the hypocrite to him, "reconcile me with

the relations of the deceased Monsieur de Montesquieu, to whose memory I

offered an indignity, that I might give honor and glory to the reverend father

Rout."

  "Zounds!" said Mr. Andrew, "the reverend father Rout has been dead this

long time; go and sup with him."


  XI.

  THE GOOD SENSE OF MR. ANDREW.

  But how greatly did the sense of Mr. Andrew improve in vigor from the

time he procured a library! He lives with books as with men, and is careful in

his choice of them. What a pleasure it is to gain instruction, to enlarge one's

mind by studying the best works of the greatest authors.

  He congratulates himself on being born at a time when human reason is

tending toward perfection. "How unhappy should I have been," he used to

say, "if the age I live in had been that in which they used to condemn to the

galleys those who wrote against the categories of Aristotle."

  Distress had weakened the springs of Mr. Andrew's soul; but good fortune

restored  their  elasticity.  There  are  many  Andrews  in  the  world  to  whom

nothing is wanting but a turn of the wheel of fortune to make of them men of

true merit. He is now well acquainted with all the affairs of Europe, and

especially with the progress of the human understanding.

  He recently remarked to me, that Reason travels by slow journeys from

north to south, in company with her two intimate friends, Experience andToleration. Agriculture and Commerce attend them. When Reason presented

herself in Italy, the congregation of the Index sternly repulsed her. All she

could  do,  was  to  secretly  send  some  of  her  agents,  who,  in  spite  of  her

enemies, do some good. Let but some years more pass, and it is to be hoped

that the country of the Scipios will no longer be that of harlequins in monks'

habits.

  She has sometimes met with cruel foes in France; but she has now so

many friends in that kingdom, that she stands a good chance of at length

becoming first minister there.

  When she presented herself in Bavaria and Austria, she found two or three

great wig-blocks that stared at her with stupid and astonished eyes. Their

greeting was: "Madam, we never heard of you; we do not know you." Her

answer to which was: "Gentlemen, in time you will come to know me, and to

love me. I have been well received at Berlin, at Moscow, at Copenhagen, at

Stockholm. It is long ago that I have been naturalized by Act of Parliament in

England, through the labors of Locke, Gordon, Trenchard, Lord Shaftsbury,

and a number of others of the same nation. You will, some day or other,

confer on me the like grant. I am the daughter of Time. I expect every thing

from my father."

  When she passed over the frontiers of Spain and Portugal, she blessed God

on observing that the fires of the Inquisition were less frequently kindled. She

rejoiced on seeing the Jesuits expelled; but was afraid that, while the country

had  been  cleared  of  the  foxes,  it  was  still  left  exposed  to  the  ravages  of

wolves.

  If she makes any fresh attempts to gain entrance into Italy it is thought she

will begin by establishing herself at Venice; and that she will take up her

abode in the kingdom of Naples, in spite of the liquefaction of the saint's

blood in that country, which awakens in her mind mournful reflections on

human credulity. It is pretended, that she has an infallible secret for untying

the strings of a crown, which are entangled, nobody knows how, in those of a

mitre.


  XII.

  The GOOD SUPPER AT MR. ANDREW'S.  We supped at Mr. Andrew's yesterday, together with a Doctor Sorbonne,

with Monsieur Pinto, the celebrated Jew, with the Chaplain of the Protestant

chapel of the Dutch Embassador, the secretary of the Prince Galitzin of the

Greek church, a Calvinist Swiss Captain, two philosophers, and three Ladies

of great wit.

  The supper was a very long one; and yet, so polite it must be owned we

are grown-so much is one afraid at supper to give any cause of offence to

one's brethren, that there was no more disputing upon religion than as if not

one of those at table had ever had any. It is not so with the Regent Coge, and

the ex-Jesuit Patouillet, and with all the animals of that kind. Those pitiful

creatures will say more stupidly abusive things in one pamphlet of two pages,

than the best company in Paris can say agreeable and instructive ones in a

supper of four hours. And what is stranger yet, they dare not tell a man to his

face, what they have the impudence to print.

  The conversation turned at first on a piece of pleasantry in the Persian

Letters, in which it is repeated, after a number of grave personages, that the

world is not only growing worse, but that it is becoming depopulated, so that

if the proverb should have any truth in it, that "the more fools there are," "the

more laughter," laughing is likely to be soon banished from the face of the

earth.

  The Doctor of Sorbonne assured us that, in fact, the world was almost

reduced to nothing. He quoted the Father Petavius, who demonstrates that in

less than three hundred years, the descendants of one of the sons of Noah (I

forget whether it was Shem or Japhet), amounted to six hundred and twelve

millions  three  hundred  and  fifty-eight  thousand  true  believers  within  two

hundred and eighty-five years after the universal deluge.

  Mr. Andrew asked, why in the time of Philip de Bel, that is to say, about

three hundred years after Hugh Capet, there were not six hundred and twenty-

three thousand millions of princes of the royal family?

  "It is," said the Doctor of Sorbonne, "because the stock of faith has greatly

decreased."

  A great deal was said about Thebes and its hundred gates, and of the

million of soldiers that issued out of those gates with the twenty thousandchariots of war.

  "Shut the book there," said Mr. Andrew. "Since I have taken to reading, I

beg to suspect that the same genius that wrote Garagantua, used of yore to

write all the histories."

  "But, in short," said one of the company, "Thebes, Memphis, Babylon,

Nineveh, Troy, Seleucia, were great cities once, and now no longer exist."

  "Granted," answered the secretary of the Prince Galitzin; "but Moscow,

Constantinople, London, Paris, Amsterdam, Lyons, (which is better than ever

Troy was,) and all the towns of France, Germany, Spain, and the North, were

then deserts."

  The Swiss captain, a gentleman of great knowledge, owned to us, that

when his ancestors took it into their heads to quit their mountains and their

precipices, to go and take forcible possession, as was but reasonable, of a

finer country, Cæsar, who saw with his own eyes the list of those emigrants,

found that their number amounted to three hundred and sixty-eight thousand,

inclusive of the old, the children, and the women. At this time, the single

canton of Berne possesses as many inhabitants, which is not quite the half of

Switzerland, and I can assure you, that the thirteen cantons have above seven

hundred and twenty thousand souls, including the natives who are serving or

carrying  on  business  in  other  countries.  From  such  data,  gentlemen  of

learning make absurd calculations, and they base fallacious systems on no

better footing.

  The question next agitated was, whether the citizens of Rome, in the time

of the Cæsars, were richer than the citizens of Paris, in the time of Monsieur

Silhouette?

  "Oh," says Mr. Andrew, "this is a point on which I have some call to

speak. I was a long time the Man of Forty Crowns; but I conceive that the

citizens of Rome had more. Those illustrious robbers on the highway pillaged

the finest countries of Asia, of Africa, and of Europe. They lived splendidly

on the produce of their rapines; but yet there were doubtless some beggars at

Rome. I am persuaded that, among those conquerors of the world, there were

some reduced to an income of forty Crowns a year, as I formerly was."

  "Do you know," said a learned member of the Academy of Inscriptionsand Belles Lettres, "that it cost Lucullus for every supper he gave in the

saloon of Apollo, thirty-nine thousand three hundred and twelve livres of our

money; but that the celebrated epicurean Atticus did not expend above two

hundred and thirty livres a month for his table."

  "If that be true," said I, "he deserved to be president of the Miser-society,

lately  established  in  Italy.  I  have  read,  as  you  have  done,  in  Florus,  that

incredible anecdote; but, perhaps Florus had never supped with Atticus, or

else his text, like so many others, has been corrupted by copyists. No Florus

shall ever make me believe that the friend of Cæsar and of Pompey, of Cicero

and of Antony, all of whom were often entertained at his house, got off for

something less than ten Louis d'ors a month. But thus exactly 'tis that history

is written."

  Madam Andrew, for her part, told the learned member of the Academy,

that if he would keep her table for ten times as much, she would be greatly

obliged to him.

  I am persuaded, that this evening at Mr. Andrew's cost him as much as the

monthly  expense  of  Atticus.  As  for  the  ladies,  they  expressed  a  doubt

whether the suppers of Rome were more agreeable than those of Paris. The

conversation was very gay, though leaning a little to the learned. There was

no talk of new fashions, nor of the ridiculous part of any one's character or

conduct, nor of the scandalous history of the day.

  The question upon luxury was discussed and searched to the bottom. It

was mooted whether or not luxury had been the ruin of the Roman empire;

and  it  was  proved  that  the  two  empires  of  the  east  and  west  owed  their

destruction to nothing but to religious controversies, and to the monks; and,

in  fact,  when  Alaric  took  Rome,  its  whole  attention  was  engrossed  by

theological  disputes;  when  Mahomet  took  Constantinople,  the  monks

defended much better the eternity of the light of Mount Thabor, which they

saw on their navel,[1] than they defended the town against the Turks.

  One of our men of learning made a very significant remark. It was that

those  two  great  empires  were  annihilated,  but  that  the  works  of  Virgil,

Horace, and Ovid still exist.

  From the age of Augustus, they made but one skip to the age of Louis the

XIVth. A lady put the question, why it was that with a great deal of wit therewas no longer produced scarcely any work of genius?

  Mr. Andrew answered, that it was because such works had been produced

in  the  last  age.  This  idea  was  fine  spun,  and  yet  solidly  true.  It  bore  a

thorough  handling.  After  that,  they  fell  with  some  harshness  upon  a

Scotchman,  who  had  taken  it  into  his  head  to  give  rules  to  taste,  and  to

criticise  the  most  admirable  passages  of  Racine,  without  understanding

French. But there was one Denina still more severely treated. He had abused

Montesquieu's  Spirit  of  Laws,  without  comprehending  him,  and  had

especially censured what is the most liked and approved in that work.

  This  recalled  to  my  mind  Boileau's  making  a  parade  of  his  affected

contempt of Tasso. One of the company advanced that Tasso, with all his

faults,  was  as  superior  to  Homer,  as  Montesquieu,  with  his  still  greater

imperfections, was above the farrago of Grotius. But there was presently a

strong opposition made to these false criticisms, dictated by national hatred

and  prejudice.  The  Seignior  Denina  was  treated  as  he  deserved,  and  as

pedants ought to be by men of wit.

  It was especially remarked, with much sagacity, that the greatest part of

the literary works of this age, as well as of the conversations, turned on the

examination of the masterpieces of the last century; in which we are like

disinherited children, who are taking an estimate of their father's estate. It

was confessed that philosophy had made great progress, but that the language

and style was somewhat corrupted.

  It is the nature of all these conversations, to make transitions from one

subject to another. All these objects of curiosity, of science, and of taste, soon

vanished, to give way to the great scene which the Empress of Russia, and

the King of Poland, were giving to the world. They had been just raising up

and restoring the rights of oppressed humanity, and establishing liberty of

conscience in a part of the globe of a much greater extent than the old Roman

Empire. This service done to human kind, this example given to so many

courts, was mentioned with the applause it deserved. Healths were drank to

the philosophical empress, to the royal philosopher, and to the philosophical

primate, with the wish of their having many imitators. Even the doctors of

Sorbonne admired them; for there are some persons of good sense in that

body, as there were formerly some men of wit among the Bœotians.  The  Russian  secretary  astonished  us  with  a  recital  of  the  great

establishments they were forming in Russia. It was asked, why people were

in general more fond of reading the history of Charles the XIIth, who passed

his  life  in  destroying,  than  that  of  Peter  the  Great,  who  consumed  his  in

creating? On this we concluded, that weakness and a frivolous turn of mind

are the causes of this preference; that Charles the XIIth was the Don Quixote,

and Peter the Solon of the North; that superficial understandings prefer a wild

extravagant heroism, to the great views of a legislator: that the particulars of

the foundation of a town are less pleasing to them, than the rashness of a

man, who, at the head of only his domestics, braves an army of ten thousand

Turks;  and  that,  in  short,  most  readers  love  amusement  better  than

instruction. Thence it is, that a hundred women read The Thousand and One

Arabian Nights, for one that reads two chapters of Locke.

  What was not talked of at this supper? of which I shall long retain the

remembrance. It was also in course to say a word of the actors and actresses,

that eternal subject of the table-talk of Versailles and of Paris. It was agreed,

that a good declaimer was as rare as a good poet. For my part, I must own

that  Plato's  banquet  could  not  have  given  me  more  pleasure  than  that  of

Monsieur and Madame Andrew.

  Our very pretty gentlemen, and our very fine ladies, would, doubtless,

have found it dull, and been tired with it. They pretend to be the only good

company: but neither Mr. Andrew nor I ever willingly sup with that kind of

good company.

  [1] See Gibbon's History of Christianity, page 777, for an account of the

monks of Mount Athos, who adored the divine light, as above stated.-E.


  The Priory entrance.

  THE HURON; OR, PUPIL OF NATURE.[1]

  I.

  THE HURON ARRIVES IN FRANCE.

  One day, Saint Dunstan, an Irishman by nation, and a saint by trade, left

Ireland on a small mountain, which took its route toward the coast of France,

and set his saintship down in the bay of St. Malo. When he had dismounted,he gave his blessing to the mountain, which, after some profound bows, took

its leave, and returned to its former place.

  Here St. Dunstan laid the foundation of a small priory, and gave it the

name of the Priory Mountain, which it still keeps, as every body knows.

  In  the  year  1689,  the  fifteenth  day  of  July,  in  the  evening,  the  abbot

Kerkabon, prior of our Lady of the Mountain, happened to take the air along

the shore with Miss Kerkabon, his sister. The prior, who was becoming aged,

was a very good clergyman, beloved by his neighbors. What added most to

the respect that was paid him, was, that among all his clerical neighbors, he

was the only one that could walk to his bed after supper. He was tolerably

read in theology; and when he was tired of reading St. Augustin, he refreshed

himself with Rabelais. All the world spoke well of him.

  Miss Kerkabon, who had never been married, notwithstanding her hearty

wishes so to be, had preserved a freshness of complexion in her forty-fifth

year. Her character was that of a good and sensible woman. She was fond of

pleasure, and was a devotee.

  As they were walking, the prior, looking on the sea, said to his sister:

  "It was here, alas! that our poor brother embarked with our dear sister-in-

law, Madam Kerkabon, his wife, on board the frigate 'Swallow,' in 1669, to

serve the king in Canada. Had he not been killed, probably he would have

written to us."

  "Do you believe," says Miss Kerkabon, "that our sister-in-law has been

eaten by the Cherokees, as we have been told?"

  "Certain it is, had she not been killed, she would have come back. I shall

weep for her all my lifetime. She was a charming woman; and our brother,

who had a great deal of wit, would no doubt have made a fortune."

  Thus  were  they  going  on  with  mutual  tenderness,  when  they  beheld  a

small vessel enter the bay of Rence with the tide. It was from England, and

came to sell provisions. The crew leaped on shore without looking at the

prior or Miss, his sister, who were shocked at the little attention shown them.

  That was not the behavior of a well-made youth, who, darting himself over

the heads of his companions, stood on a sudden before Miss Kerkabon. Being

unaccustomed to bowing, he made her a sign with his head. His figure andhis dress attracted the notice of brother and sister. His head was uncovered,

and his legs bare. Instead of shoes, he wore a kind of sandals. From his head

his long hair flowed in tresses, A small close doublet displayed the beauty of

his shape. He had a sweet and martial air.[2] In one hand he held a small

bottle of Barbadoes water, and in the other a bag, in which he had a goblet,

and some sea biscuit. He spoke French very intelligibly. He offered some of

his Barbadoes to Miss Kerkabon and her brother. He drank with them, he

made  them  drink  a  second  time,  and  all  this  with  an  air  of  such  native

simplicity,  that  quite  charmed  brother  and  sister.  They  offered  him  their

service, and asked him who he was, and whither going? The young man

answered: That he knew not where he should go; that he had some curiosity;

that he had a desire to see the coast of France; that he had seen it, and should

return.

  The prior, judging by his accent that he was not an Englishman, took the

liberty of asking of what country he was.

  "I am a Huron," answered the youth.

  Miss Kerkabon, amazed and enchanted to see a Huron who had behaved

so politely to her, begged the young man's company to supper. He complied

immediately, and all three went together to the priory of our Lady of the

Mountain. This short and round Miss devoured him with her little eyes, and

said from time to time to her brother:

  "This tall lad has a complexion of lilies and roses. What a fine skin he has

for a Huron!"

  "Very true, sister," says the prior.

  She put a hundred questions, one after another, and the traveler answered

always pertinently.

  The report was soon spread that there was a Huron at the priory. All the

genteel company of the country came to supper. The abbot of St. Yves came

with Miss, his sister, a fine, handsome, well-educated girl. The bailiff, the

tax-gatherer, and their wives, came all together. The foreigner was seated

between Miss Kerkabon and Miss St. Yves. The company eyed him with

admiration.  They  all  questioned  him  together.  This  did  not  confound  the

Huron. He seemed to have taken Lord Bolingbroke's motto, Nil admirari. Butat last, tired out with so much noise, he told them in a sweet, but serious tone:

  "Gentlemen, in my country one talks after another. How can I answer you,

if you will not allow me to hear you?"

  Reasoning always brings people to a momentary reflection. They were all

silent.

  Mr. Bailiff, who always made a property of a foreigner wherever he found

him, and who was the first man for asking questions in the province, opening

a mouth of large size, began:

  "Sir, what is your name?"

  "I have always been called the Ingenu," answered the Huron; "and the

English have confirmed that name, because I always speak as I think, and act

as I like."

  "But, being born a Huron, how could you come to England?"

  "I have been carried thither. I was made prisoner by the English after some

resistance, and the English, who love brave people, because they are as brave

and honest as we, proposed to me, either to return to my family, or go with

them to England. I accepted the latter, having naturally a relish for traveling."

  "But, sir," says the bailiff, with his usual gravity, "how could you think of

abandoning father and mother?"

  "Because I never knew either father or mother," says the foreigner.

  This moved the company; they all repeated:

  "Neither father nor mother!"

  "We will be in their stead," says the mistress of the house, to her brother,

the prior: "How interesting this Huron gentleman is!"

  The Ingenu thanked her with a noble and proud cordiality, and gave her to

understand, that he wanted the assistance of nobody.

  "I perceive, Mr. Huron," said the huge bailiff, "that you talk better French

than can be expected from an Indian."

  "A Frenchman," answered he, "whom they had made prisoner when I was

a boy, and with whom I contracted a great friendship, taught it me. I rapidly

learn what I like to learn. When I came to Plymouth, I met with one of yourFrench refugees, whom you, I know not why, call Huguenots. He improved

my  knowledge  of  your  language;  and  as  soon  as  I  could  express  myself

intelligibly,  I  came  to  see  your  country,  because  I  like  the  French  well

enough, if they do not put too many questions."

    Notwithstanding  this  candid  remark,  the  abbé  of  St.  Yves  asked  him,

which  of  the  three  languages  pleased  him  best,  the  Huron,  English,  or

French?

  "The Huron, to be sure," answered the Ingenu.

  "Is it possible?" cried Miss Kerkabon. "I always thought the French was

the first of all languages, after that of Low Britany."

  Then all were eager to know how, in Huron, they asked for snuff? He

replied:

  "Taya."

  "What signifies to eat?"

  "Essenten."

  Miss Kerkabon was impatient to know how they called, to make love?

  He informed her, Trovander; and insisted on it, not without reason, that

these  words  were  well  worth  their  synonyms  in  French  and  English.

Trovander, especially, seemed very pretty to all the company. The prior, who

had in his library a Huron grammar, which had been given him by the Rev.

Father Sagar Theodat, a Recollet and famous missionary, rose from the table

to  consult  it.  He  returned  quite  panting  with  tenderness  and  joy.  He

acknowledged the foreigner for a true Huron. The company speculated a little

on the multiplicity of languages; and all agreed, that had it not been for the

unfortunate affair of the Tower of Babel, all the world would have spoken

French.

  The inquisitive bailiff, who till then had some suspicions of the foreigner,

conceived the deepest respect for him. He spoke to him with more civility

than before, and the Huron took no notice of it.

  Miss St. Yves was very curious to know how people made love among the

Hurons.

  "In  performing  great  actions  to  please  such  as  resemble  you."  All  thecompany admired and applauded. Miss St. Yves blushed, and was extremely

well pleased. Miss Kerkabon blushed likewise, but was not so well pleased.

She was a little piqued that this gallantry was not addressed to her; but she

was so good-natured, that her affection for the Huron was not diminished at

all. She asked him, with great complacency, how many mistresses he had at

home.

  "Only one," answered the foreigner; "Miss Abacaba, the good friend of

my  dear  nurse.  The  reed  is  not  straighter,  nor  is  ermine  whiter,-no  lamb

meeker, no eagle fiercer, nor a stag swifter, than was my Abacaba. One day

she  pursued  a  hare  not  above  fifty  leagues  from  my  habitation:  a  base

Algonquin, who dwells an hundred leagues further, took her hare from her. I

was told of it; I ran thither, and with one stroke of my club leveled him with

the ground. I brought him to the feet of my mistress, bound hand and foot.

Abacaba's parents were for burning him, but I always had a disrelish for such

scenes. I set him at liberty. I made him my friend. Abacaba was so pleased

with my conduct, that she preferred me to all her lovers. And she would have

continued to love me, had she not been devoured by a bear! I slew the bear,

and wore his skin a long while; but that has not comforted me."

  Miss St. Yves felt a secret pleasure at hearing that Abacaba had been his

only mistress, and that she was no more; yet she understood not the cause of

her own pleasure. All eyes were riveted on the Huron, and he was much

applauded for delivering an Algonquin from the cruelty of his countrymen.

  The merciless bailiff had now grown so furious, that he even asked the

Huron  what  religion  he  was  of;  whether  he  had  chosen  the  English,  the

French, or that of the Huguenots?

  "I am of my own religion," said he, "just as you are of yours."

  "Lord!" cried Miss Kerkabon, "I see already that those wretched English

have not once thought of baptizing him!"

  "Good  heavens,"  said  Miss  St.  Yves,  "how  is  it  possible?  How  is  it

possible the Hurons should not be Roman Catholics? Have not those reverend

fathers, the Jesuits, converted all the world?"

  The  Huron  assured  her,  that  no  true  American  had  ever  changed  his

opinion,  and  that  there  was  not  in  their  language  a  word  to  expressinconstancy.

  These last words extremely pleased Miss St. Yves.

  "Oh! we'll baptize him, we'll baptize him," said Miss Kerkabon to the

prior. "You shall have that honor, my dear brother, and I will be his god-

mother. The Abbot St. Yves shall present him to the font. It will make a fine

appearance:  it  will  be  talked  of  all  over  Britany,  and  do  us  the  greatest

honor."

  The company were all of the same mind with the mistress of the house;

they all cried:

  "We'll baptize him."

  The Huron interrupted them by saying, that in England every one was

allowed  to  live  as  he  pleased.  He  rather  showed  some  aversion  to  the

proposal which was made, and could not help telling them, that the laws of

the Hurons were to the full as good as those of Low Britany. He finished with

saying, that he should return the next day. The bottles grew empty, and the

company went to bed.

  After the Huron had been conducted to his room, they saw that he spread

the blankets on the floor, and laid himself down upon them in the finest

attitude in the world.

  [1] Le Huron was dramatized, under the name of Civilization, by Mr. John

H. Wilkins, and successfully produced at the City of London Theatre, on

Wednesday, November 10, 1852. Mr. James Anderson enacted the part of

Hercule, the Huron, and added to his well-earned reputation by his correct

conception and representation of the Indian character.


  Mr.  James  Wallack,  Jr.,  afterward  introduced  the  play  to  a  New  York

audience at Burton's old Chambers Street Theatre, where it was also received

with great favor. Unfortunately for dramatic literature, the promising young

author of Civilisation did not long survive his success, but soon filled an

early grave.-E.

  [2]  In  Mr.  Wilkins's  dramatic  version  of  this  romance,  the  Huron  is

described as  "A modell'd Hercules! Mien, stature, glance,

  That are the blazons of the inner man,

  And voice it to the stars! A hero born,

  Whose air commands respect above a king's;

  Bearing the stamp from the great mint of heaven,

  And current to the world!"-E.


  II.

  THE HURON, CALLED THE INGENU, ACKNOWLEDGED BY HIS

RELATIONS.

  The Ingenu, according to custom, awoke with the sun, at the crowing of

the cock, which is called in England and Huronia, "the trumpet of the day."

He did not imitate what is styled good company, who languish in the bed of

indolence till the sun has performed half its daily journey, unable to sleep, but

not disposed to rise, and lose so many precious hours in that doubtful state

between life and death, and who nevertheless complain that life is too short.

  He had already traversed two or three leagues, and killed fifteen brace of

game with his rifle, when, upon his return, he found the prior of the Lady of

the Mountain, with his discreet sister, walking in their nightcaps in their little

garden. He presented them with the spoils of his morning labor, and taking

from his bosom a kind of little talisman, which he constantly wore about his

neck, he entreated them to accept of it as an acknowledgment for the kind

reception they had given him.

  "It is," said he, "the most valuable thing I am possessed of. I have been

assured that I shall always be happy whilst I carry this little toy about me; and

I give it you that you may be always happy."

  The prior and Miss smiled with pity at the frankness of the Ingenu. This

present consisted of two little portraits, poorly executed, and tied together

with a greasy string.

  Miss Kerkabon asked him, if there were any painters in Huronia?

  "No," replied the Ingenu, "I had this curiosity from my nurse. Her husbandhad obtained it by conquest, in stripping some of the French of Canada, who

had made war upon us. This is all I know of the matter."

  The prior looked attentively upon these pictures, whilst he changed color;

his hands trembled, and he seemed much affected.

  "By our Lady of the Mountain," he cried out, "I believe these to be the

faces of my brother, the captain, and his lady."

  Miss, after having consulted them with the like emotion, thought the same.

They were both struck with astonishment and joy blended with grief. They

both melted, they both wept, their hearts throbbed, and during their disorder,

the  pictures  were  interchanged  between  them  at  least  twenty  times  in  a

second. They seemed to devour the Huron's pictures with their eyes. They

asked one after another, and even both at once, at what time, in what place,

and how these miniatures fell into the hands of the nurse? They reckoned and

computed  the  time  from  the  captain's  departure;  they  recollected  having

received notice that he had penetrated as far as the country of the Hurons; and

from that time they had never heard anything more of him.

  The Huron had told them, that he had never known either father or mother.

The prior, who was a man of sense, observed that he had a little beard, and he

knew very well that the Hurons never had any. His chin was somewhat hairy;

he was therefore the son of an European. My brother and sister-in-law were

never seen after the expedition against the Hurons, in 1669. My nephew must

then have been nursing at the breast. The Huron nurse has preserved his life,

and been a mother to him. At length, after an hundred questions and answers,

the prior and his sister concluded that the Huron was their own nephew. They

embraced him, whilst tears streamed from their eyes: and the Huron laughed

to think that an Indian should be nephew to a prior of Lower Britany.

  The Huron identified.-"By our Lady of the Mountain," he cried out, "I

believe these to be the faces of my brother, the captain, and his lady."


  All the company went down stairs. Mr. de St. Yves, who was a great

physiognomist,  compared  the  two  pictures  with  the  Huron's  countenance.

They observed, very skillfully, that he had the mother's eyes, the forehead

and nose of the late Captain Kerkabon, and the cheeks common to both.  Miss  St.  Yves,  who  had  never  seen  either  father  or  mother,  was

strenuously  of  opinion,  that  the  young  man  had  a  perfect  resemblance  of

them. They all admired Providence, and wondered at the strange events of

this world. In a word, they were so persuaded, so convinced of the birth of

the Huron, that he himself consented to be the prior's nephew, saying, that he

would as soon have him for his uncle as another.

  The prior went to return thanks in the church of our Lady of the Mountain;

whilst the Huron, with an air of indifference, amused himself with drinking in

the house.

  The English who had brought him over, and who were ready to set sail,

came to tell him that it was time to depart.

  "Probably," said he to them, "you have not met with any of your uncles

and aunts. I shall stay here. Go you back to Plymouth. I give you all my

clothes, as I have no longer occasion for anything in this world, since I am

the nephew of a prior."

  The English set sail, without being at all concerned whether the Huron had

any relations or not in Lower Britany.

  After the uncle, the aunt, and the company had sung Te Deum; after the

bailiff had once more overwhelmed the Huron with questions, after they had

exhausted  all  their  astonishment,  joy,  and  tenderness,  the  prior  of  the

Mountain  and  the  Abbé  of  St.  Yves  concluded  that  the  Huron  should  be

baptized with all possible expedition. But the case was very different with a

tall robust Indian of twenty-two, and an infant who is regenerated without his

knowing anything of the matter. It was necessary to instruct him, and this

appeared difficult; for the Abbé of St. Yves supposed that a man who was not

born in France, could not be endowed with common sense.

  The  prior,  indeed,  observed  to  the  company,  that  though,  in  fact,  the

ingenious gentleman, his nephew, was not so fortunate as to be born in Lower

Britany, he was not, upon that account, any way deficient in sense; which

might  be  concluded  from  all  his  answers;  and  that,  doubtless,  nature  had

greatly favored him, as well on his father's as on his mother's side?

  He then was asked if he had ever read any books? He said, he had read

Rabelais translated into English, and some passages in Shakespeare, which heknew by heart; that these books belonged to the captain, on board of whose

ship he came from America to Plymouth; and that he was very well pleased

with them. The bailiff failed not to put many questions to him concerning

these books.

  "I acknowledge," said the Huron, "I thought, in reading them, I understood

some things, but not the whole."

  The Abbé of St. Yves reflected upon this discourse, that it was in this

manner he had always read, and that most men read no other way.

  "You have," said he, to the Huron, "doubtless read the bible?"

  "Never, Mr. Abbé: it was not among the captain's books. I never heard it

mentioned."

  "This is the way with those cursed English," said Miss Kerkabon; "they

think more of a play of Shakespeare's, a plum pudding, or a bottle of rum,

than they do of the Pentateuch. For this reason they have never converted any

Indians in America. They are certainly cursed by God; and we shall conquer

Jamaica and Virginia from them in a very short time."

  Be this as it may, the most skillful tailor in all St. Malo was sent for to

dress the Huron from head to foot. The company separated, and the bailiff

went  elsewhere  to  display  his  inquisitiveness.  Miss  St.  Yves,  in  parting,

returned several times to observe the young stranger, and made him lower

courtesies than ever she did any one in her life.

  The bailiff, before he took his leave, presented to Miss St. Yves a stupid

dolt of a son, just come from college; but she scarce looked at him, so much

was she taken up with the politeness of the Huron.


  III.

  THE HURON CONVERTED.

  The prior finding that he was somewhat advanced in years, and that God

had sent him a nephew for his consolation, took it into his head that he would

resign  his  benefice  in  his  favor,  if  he  succeeded  in  baptizing  him  and  of

making him enter into orders.

  The Huron had an excellent memory. A good constitution, inherited fromhis ancestors of Lower Britany, strengthened by the climate of Canada, had

made his head so vigorous that when he was struck upon it he scarce felt it;

and when any thing was graven in it, nothing could efface it. Nothing had

ever  escaped  his  memory.  His  conception  was  the  more  sure  and  lively,

because  his  infancy  had  not  been  loaded  with  useless  fooleries,  which

overwhelm ours. Things entered into his head without being clouded. The

prior at length resolved to make him read the New Testament. The Huron

devoured it with great pleasure; but not knowing at what time, or in what

country all the adventures related in this book had happened, he did not in the

least doubt that the scene of action had been in Lower Britany; and he swore,

that he would cut off Caiphas and Pontius Pilate's ears, if ever he met those

scoundrels.

  His uncle, charmed with this good disposition, soon brought him to the

point. He applauded his zeal, but at the same time acquainted him that it was

needless, as these people had been dead upwards of 1690 years. The Huron

soon got the whole book by heart. He sometimes proposed difficulties that

greatly embarrassed the prior. He was often obliged to consult the Abbé St.

Yves, who, not knowing what to answer, brought a Jesuit of Lower Britany to

perfect the conversion of the Huron.

  Grace, at length, operated; and the Huron promised to become a Christian.

He did not doubt but that the first step toward it was circumcision.

  "For," said he, "I do not find in the book that was put into my hands a

single person who was not circumcised. It is therefore evident, that I must

make a sacrifice to the Hebrew custom, and the sooner the better."

  He sent for the surgeon of the village, and desired him to perform the

operation.  The  surgeon,  who  had  never  performed  such  an  operation,

acquainted the family, who screamed out. The good Miss Kerkabon trembled

lest  her  nephew,  whom  she  knew  to  be  resolute  and  expeditious,  should

perform the operation unskillfully himself; and that fatal consequences might

ensue.

  The  prior  rectified  the  Huron's  mistake,  representing  to  him,  that

circumcision was no longer in fashion; that baptism was much more gentle

and salutary; that the law of grace was not like the law of rigor. The Huron,

who  had  much  good  sense,  and  was  well  disposed,  disputed,  but  soonacknowledged his error, which seldom happens in Europe among disputants.

In a word, he promised to let himself be baptized whenever they pleased.

  But before baptism it was necessary that he should go to confession, and

this was the greatest difficulty to surmount. The Huron had still in his pocket

the book his uncle gave him. He did not there find that a single apostle had

ever been confessed, and this made him very restive. The prior silenced him,

by showing him, in the epistle of St. James the Minor, these words: "Confess

your sins to one another." The Huron was mute, and confessed his sins to a

Recollet. When he had done, he dragged the Recollet from the confessional

chair,  and  seizing  him  with  a  vigorous  arm,  placed  himself  in  his  seat,

making the Recollet kneel before him:

  "Come, my friend, it is said, 'we must confess our sins to one another;' I

have related to you my sins, and you shall not stir till you recount yours."

  Whilst he said this, he fixed his great knee against his adversary's stomach.

The Recollet roared and groaned, till he made the church re-echo. The noise

brought people to his assistance, who found the catechumen cuffing the monk

in the name of St. James the Minor. The joy diffused at the baptizing at once

a  Low-Breton,  a  Huron,  and  an  Englishman,  surmounted  all  these

singularities. There were even some theologians of opinion that confession

was not necessary, as baptism supplied the place of every thing.

  The Bishop of St. Malo was chosen for the ceremony, who flattered, as

may  be  believed,  at  baptizing  a  Huron,  arrived  in  a  pompous  equipage,

followed by his clergy. Miss St. Yves put on her best gown to bless God, and

sent  for  a  hair  dresser  from  St.  Malo's,  to  shine  at  the  ceremony.  The

inquisitive  bailiff  brought  the  whole  country  with  him.  The  church  was

magnificently ornamented. But when the Huron was summoned to attend the

baptismal font, he was not to be found.

  His uncle and aunt sought for him every where. It was imagined that he

had gone a hunting, according to his usual custom. Every one present at the

festival, searched the neighboring woods and villages; but no intelligence

could  be  obtained  of  the  Huron.  They  began  to  fear  he  had  returned  to

England.  Some  remembered  that  he  had  said  he  was  very  fond  of  that

country. The prior and his sister were persuaded that nobody was baptized

there, and were troubled for their nephew's soul. The bishop was confounded,and ready to return home. The prior and the Abbé St. Yves were in despair.

The bailiff interrogated all passengers with his usual gravity. Miss Kerkabon

melted into tears. Miss St. Yves did not weep, but she vented such deep

sighs, as seemed to testify her sacramental disposition. They were walking in

this melancholy mood, among the willows and reeds upon the banks of the

little river Rence, when they perceived, in the middle of the stream, a large

figure, tolerably white, with its two arms across its breast. They screamed

out, and ran away. But, curiosity being stronger than any other consideration,

they advanced softly amongst the reeds; and when they were pretty certain

they could not be seen, they were willing to descry what it was.


  IV.

  THE HURON BAPTIZED.

  The prior and the abbé having run to the river side, they asked the Huron

what he was doing?

  "In faith," said he, "gentlemen, I am waiting to be baptized. I have been an

hour in the water, up to my neck, and I do not think it is civil to let me be

quite exhausted."

  "My dear nephew," said the prior to him, tenderly, "this is not the way of

being baptized in Lower Britany. Put on your clothes, and come with us."

  Miss  St.  Yves,  listening  to  the  discourse,  said  in  a  whisper  to  her

companion:

  "Miss, do you think he will put his clothes on in such a hurry?"

  The Huron, however, replied to the prior:

  "You will not make me believe now as you did before. I have studied very

well  since,  and  I  am  very  certain  there  is  no  other  kind  of  baptism.  The

eunuch of Queen Candace was baptized in a rivulet. I defy you to show me,

in the book you gave me, that people were ever baptized in any other way. I

either will not be baptized at all, or the ceremony shall be performed in the

river."

  It was in vain to remonstrate to him that customs were altered. He always

recurred to the eunuch of Queen Candace. And though Miss and his aunt,who had observed him through the willows, were authorized to tell him, that

he had no right to quote such a man, they, nevertheless, said nothing;-so great

was their discretion. The bishop came himself to speak to him, which was a

great thing; but he could not prevail. The Huron disputed with the bishop.

  "Show me," said he, "in the book my uncle gave me, one single man that

was not baptized in a river, and I will do whatever you please."

  His aunt, in despair, had observed, that the first time her nephew bowed,

he  made  a  much  lower  bow  to  Miss  St.  Yves,  than  to  any  one  in  the

company-that  he  had  not  even  saluted  the  bishop  with  so  much  respect,

blended with cordiality, as he did that agreeable young lady. She thought it

advisable to apply to her in this great embarrassment. She earnestly entreated

her to use her influence to engage the Huron to be baptized according to the

custom of Britany, thinking that her nephew could never be a Christian if he

persisted in being christened in the stream.

  The Huron baptized.-"I have been an hour in the water, up to my neck, and

I do not think it is civil to let me be quite exhausted."


  Miss St. Yves blushed at the secret joy she felt in being appointed to

execute so important a commission. She modestly approached the Huron, and

squeezing his hand in quite a noble manner, she said to him.

  "What, will you do nothing to please me?"

  And in uttering these words, she raised her eyes from a downcast look,

into a graceful tenderness.

  "Oh! yes, Miss, every thing you require, all that you command, whether it

is to be baptized in water, fire, or blood;-there is nothing I can refuse you."

  Miss St. Yves had the glory of effecting, in two words, what neither the

importunities of the prior, the repeated interrogations of the bailiff, nor the

reasoning of the bishop, could effect. She was sensible of her triumph; but

she was not yet sensible of its utmost latitude.

  Baptism  was  administered,  and  received  with  all  the  decency,

magnificence, and propriety possible. His uncle and aunt yielded to the Abbé

St. Yves and his sister the favor of supporting the Huron upon the font. Miss

St. Yves's eyes sparkled with joy at being a god-mother. She was ignoranthow much this high title compromised her. She accepted the honor, without

being acquainted with its fatal consequences.

  As there never was any ceremony that was not followed by a good dinner,

the company took their seats at table after the christening. The humorists of

Lower Britany said, "they did not choose to have their wine baptized." The

prior said, "that wine, according to Solomon, cherished the heart of man."

The bishop added, "that the Patriarch Judah ought to have tied his ass-colt to

the vine, and steeped his cloak in the blood of the grape; and that he was

sorry the same could not be done in Lower Britany, to which God had not

allotted vines." Every one endeavored to say a good thing upon the Huron's

christening,  and  strokes  of  gallantry  to  the  god-mother.  The  bailiff,  ever

interrogating, asked the Huron, "if he was faithful in keeping his promises?"

  "How," said he, "can I fail keeping them, since I have deposited them in

the hands of Miss St. Yves?"

  The Huron grew warm; he had drank repeatedly his god-mother's health.

  "If," said he, "I had been baptized with your hand, I feel that the water

which was poured on the nape of my neck would have burnt me."

  The bailiff thought that this was too poetical, being ignorant that allegory

is a familiar figure in Canada. But his god-mother was very well pleased.

  The Huron had, at his baptism, received the name of Hercules. The bishop

of St. Malo frequently enquired, who was this tutelar saint, whom he had

never heard mentioned before? The Jesuit, who was very learned, told him,

"that  he  was  a  saint  who  had  wrought  twelve  miracles."  There  was  a

thirteenth, which was well worth the other twelve, but it was not proper for a

Jesuit  to  mention  it.  This  was  the  marriage  of  fifty  girls  at  one  time-the

daughters of king Thespius. A wag, who was present, related this miracle

very feelingly. And all judged, from the appearance of the Huron, that he was

a worthy representative of the saint whose name he bore.


  V.

  THE HURON IN LOVE.

  It must be acknowledged, that from the time of this christening and this

dinner, Miss St. Yves passionately wished that the bishop would again makeher an assistant with Mr. Hercules in some other fine ceremony-that is, the

marriage ceremony. However, as she was well brought up, and very modest,-

she did not entirely agree with herself in regard to these tender sentiments;

but if a look, a word, a gesture, a thought, escaped from her, she concealed it

admirably under the veil of modesty. She was tender, lively, and sagacious.

  As  soon  as  the  bishop  was  gone,  the  Huron  and  Miss  St.  Yves  met

together, without thinking they were in search of one another. They spoke

together,  without  premeditating  what  they  said.  The  sincere  youth

immediately  declared,  "that  he  loved  her  with  all  his  heart;  and  that  the

beauteous Abacaba, with whom he had been desperately in love in his own

country, was far inferior to her." Miss replied, with her usual modesty, "that

the prior, her uncle, and the lady, her aunt, should be spoken to immediately;

and that, on her side, she would say a few words to her dear brother, the Abbé

of St. Yves, and that she flattered herself it would meet with no opposition."

  The youth replied: "that the consent of any one was entirely superfluous;

that it appeared to him extremely ridiculous to go and ask others what they

were to do; that when two parties were agreed, there was no occasion for a

third, to accomplish their union."

  "I never consult any one," said he, "when I have a mind to breakfast, to

hunt, or to sleep. I am sensible, that in love it is not amiss to have the consent

of the person whom we wish for; but as I am neither in love with my uncle

nor my aunt, I have no occasion to address myself to them in this affair; and

if you will believe me, you may equally dispense with the advice of the Abbé

of St. Yves."

  It may be supposed that the young lady exerted all the delicacy of her wit,

to bring her Huron to the terms of good breeding. She was very angry, but

soon softened. In a word, it cannot be said how this conversation would have

ended, if the declining day had not brought the Abbé to conduct his sister

home.  The  Huron  left  his  uncle  and  aunt  to  rest,  they  being  somewhat

fatigued with the ceremony, and long dinner. He passed part of the night in

writing verses in the Huron language, upon his well-beloved; for it should be

known, that there is no country where love has not rendered lovers poets.[1]

  The  next  day  his  uncle  spoke  to  him  in  the  following  manner.  "I  am

somewhat advanced in years. My brother has left only a little bit of ground,which is a very small matter. I have a good priory. If you will only make

yourself a sub-deacon, as I hope you will, I will resign my priory in your

favor; and you will live quite at your ease, after having been the consolation

of my old age."

  The Huron replied:

  "Uncle, much good may it do you; live as long as you can. I do not know

what it is to be a sub-deacon, or what it is to resign, but every thing will be

agreeable to me, provided I have Miss St. Yves at my disposal."

  "Good heavens, nephew! what is it you say? Do you love that beautiful

young lady so earnestly?"

  "Yes, uncle."

  "Alas! nephew, it is impossible you should ever marry her."

  "It is very possible, uncle; for she did not only squeeze my hand when she

left me, but she promised she would ask me in marriage. I certainly shall wed

her."

  "It is impossible, I tell you, she is your god-mother. It is a dreadful sin for

a  god-mother  to  give  her  hand  to  her  god-son.  It  is  contrary  to  all  laws,

human and divine."

  "Why the deuce, uncle, should it be forbidden to marry one's god-mother,

when she is young and handsome? I did not find, in the book you gave me,

that  it  was  wrong  to  marry  young  women  who  assisted  at  christenings.  I

perceive, every day, that an infinite number of things are done here which are

not in your book, and nothing is done that is said in it. I must acknowledge to

you, that this astonishes and displeases me. If I am deprived of the charming

Miss St. Yves on account of my baptism, I give you notice, that I will run

away with her and unbaptize myself."

  The prior was confounded; his sister wept.

  "My dear brother," said she, "our nephew must not damn himself; our holy

father the pope can give him a dispensation, and then he may be happy, in a

christian-like manner, with the person he likes."

  The ingenuous Hercules embraced his aunt:

  "For  goodness  sake,"  said  he,  "who  is  this  charming  man,  who  is  sogracious as to promote the amours of girls and boys? I will go and speak to

him this instant."

  The dignity and character of the pope was explained to him, and the Huron

was still more astonished than before.

  "My dear uncle," said he, "there is not a word of all this in your book; I

have traveled, and am acquainted with the sea; we are now upon the coast of

the ocean, and I must leave Miss St. Yves, to go and ask leave to marry her of

a man who lives toward the Mediterranean, four hundred leagues from hence,

and  whose  language  I  do  not  understand!  This  is  most  incomprehensibly

ridiculous! But I will go first to the Abbé St. Yves, who lives only a league

from hence; and I promise you I will wed my mistress before night."

  Whilst he was yet speaking, the bailiff entered, and, according to his usual

custom, asked him where he was going?

  "I  am  going  to  get  married,"  replied  the  ingenuous  Hercules,  running

along; and in less than a quarter of an hour he was with his charming dear

mistress, who was still asleep.

  "Ah! my dear brother," said Miss Kerkabon to the prior, "you will never

make a sub-deacon of our nephew."

  The bailiff was very much displeased at this journey; for he laid claim to

Miss  St.  Yves  in  favor  of  his  son,  who  was  a  still  greater  and  more

insupportable fool than his father.

  [1]  "Love,"  says  Robert  G.  Ingersoll,  "writes  every  poem,  sings  every

song, paints every picture, chisels every statue-makes kings and queens of

common clay, and is the perfume of that wondrous flower, the human heart."-

E.


  VI.

  THE  HURON  FLIES  TO  HIS  MISTRESS,  AND  BECOMES  QUITE

FURIOUS.

  No sooner had the ingenuous Hercules reached the house, than having

asked the old servant, which was his mistress's apartment, he forced open the

door, which was badly fastened, and flew toward the bed. Miss St. Yves,startled out of her sleep, cried.

  "Ah! what, is it you! Stop, what are you about?" He answered:

  "I am going to marry."

  She opposed him with all the decency of a young lady so well educated;

but the Huron did not understand raillery, and found all evasions extremely

disagreeable.

  "Miss  Abacaba,  my  first  mistress,"  said  he,  "did  not  behave  in  this

manner; you have no honesty; you promised me marriage, and you will not

marry; this is being deficient in the first laws of honor."

  The outcries of the lady, brought the sagacious Abbé de St. Yves with his

housekeeper, an old devotee servant, and the parish priest. The sight of these

moderated the courage of the assailant.

  "Good heavens!" cried the Abbé, "my dear neighbor, what are you about?"

  "My duty," replied the young man, "I am fulfilling my promises, which

are sacred."

  Miss  St.  Yves  adjusted  herself,  not  without  blushing.  The  lover  was

conducted  into  another  apartment.  The  Abbé  remonstrated  to  him  on  the

enormity of his conduct. The Huron defended himself upon the privileges of

the law of nature, which he understood perfectly well. The Abbé maintained,

that the law positive should be allowed all its advantages; and that without

conventions  agreed  on  between  men,  the  law  of  nature  must  almost

constantly be nothing more than natural felony. Notaries, priests, witnesses,

contracts, and dispensations, were absolutely necessary.

  The  ingenuous  Hercules  made  answer  with  the  observation  constantly

adopted by savages:

  "You  are  then  very  great  rogues,  since  so  many  precautions  are

necessary."

  This remark somewhat disconcerted the Abbé.

  "There  are,  I  acknowledge,  libertines  and  cheats  among  us,  and  there

would be as many among the Hurons, if they were united in a great city: but,

at the same time, we have direct, honest, enlightened people; and these are

the  men  who  have  framed  the  laws.  The  more  upright  we  are,  the  morereadily  we  should  submit  to  them,  as  we  thereby  set  an  example  to  the

vicious, who respect those bounds which virtue has given herself."

  This answer struck the Huron. It has already been observed, that his mind

was well disposed. He was softened by flattering speeches, which promised

him hopes; all the world is caught in these snares; and Miss St. Yves herself

appeared, after having been at her toilet. Every thing was now conducted

with the utmost good breeding.

  The separation.

  It was with much difficulty that Hercules was sent back to his relations. It

was again necessary for the charming Miss St. Yves to interfere; the more she

perceived the influence she had upon him, the more she loved him. She made

him depart, and was much affected at it. At length, when he was gone, the

Abbé, who was not only Miss St. Yves's elder brother by many years, but was

also her guardian, endeavored to wean his ward from the importunities of this

dreadful lover. He went to consult the bailiff, who had always intended his

son for the Abbé's sister, and who advised him to place the poor girl in a

convent. This was a terrible stroke. Such a measure would, to a young lady

unaffected with any particular passion, have been inexpressible punishment;

but to a love-sick maid, equally sagacious and tender, it was despair itself.

  When the ingenuous Hercules returned to the Prior's, he related all that

had happened with his usual frankness. He met with the same remonstrances,

which had some effect upon his mind, though none upon his senses; but the

next day, when he wanted to return to his mistress, in order to reason with her

upon the law of nature and the law of convention, the bailiff acquainted him,

with insulting joy, that she was in a convent.

  "Very well," said he, "I'll go and reason with her in this convent."

  That cannot be, said the bailiff; and then entered into a long explanation of

the  nature  of  a  convent,  telling  him  that  this  word  was  derived  from

conventus, in the Latin, which signifies "an assembly;" and the Huron could

not comprehend, why he might not be admitted into this assembly. As soon

as he was informed that this assembly was a kind of prison, in which girls

were shut up, a shocking institution, unknown in Huronia and England; he

became as furious as was his patron Hercules, when Euritus, king of Œchalia,

no less cruel than the Abbé of St. Yves, refused him the beauteous Iola, hisdaughter, not inferior in beauty to the Abbé's sister. He was upon the point of

going to set fire to the convent to carry off his mistress, or be burnt with her.

Miss Kerkabon, terrified at such a declaration, gave up all hopes of ever

seeing her nephew a sub-deacon; and, sadly weeping, she exclaimed: "The

devil has certainly been in him since he has been christened."


  VII.

  THE HURON REPULSES THE ENGLISH.

  The ingenuous Hercules walked toward the sea-coast wrapped in deep and

gloomy melancholy, with his double charged fusee upon his shoulder, and his

cutlass by his side, shooting now and then a bird, and often tempted to shoot

himself;  but  he  had  still  some  affection  for  life,  for  the  sake  of  his  dear

mistress; by turns execrating his uncle and aunt, all Lower Britany, and his

christening; then blessing them, as they had introduced him to the knowledge

of her he loved. He resolved upon going to burn the convent, and he stopped

short for fear of burning his mistress. The waves of the Channel are not more

agitated by the easterly and westerly winds, than was his heart by so many

contrary emotions.

  He was walking along very fast, without knowing whither he was going,

when  he  heard  the  beat  of  a  drum.  He  saw,  at  a  great  distance,  a  vast

multitude,  part  of  whom  ran  toward  the  coast,  and  the  other  part  in  the

opposite direction.

  A thousand shrieks re-echoed on every side. Curiosity and courage hurried

him, that instant, toward the spot where the greatest clamor arose, which he

attained in a few leaps. The commander of the militia, who had supped with

him at the Prior's, knew him immediately, and he ran to the Huron with open

arms:

  "Ah! it is the sincere American: he will fight for us."

  Upon  which  the  militia,  who  were  almost  dead  with  fear,  recovered

themselves, crying with one voice:

  "It is the Huron, the ingenuous Huron."

  "Gentlemen," said he, "what is the matter? Why are you frightened? Have

they shut your mistresses up in convents?"  Instantly a thousand confused voices cried out:

  "Do you not see the English, who are landing?"

  "Very  well,"  replied  the  Huron,  "they  are  a  brave  people;  they  never

proposed making me a sub-deacon; they never carried off my mistress."

  The commander made him understand, that they were coming to pillage

the Abbé of the Mountain, drink his uncle's wine, and perhaps carry off Miss

St. Yves; that the little vessel which set him on shore in Britany had come

only to reconnoitre the coast; that they were committing acts of hostility,

without  having  declared  war  against  France;  and  that  the  province  was

entirely exposed to them.

  "If this he the case," said he, "they violate the law of nature: let me alone; I

lived a long time among them; I am acquainted with their language, and I will

speak to them. I cannot think they can have so wicked a design."

  During  this  conversation  the  English  fleet  approached;  the  Huron  ran

toward it, and having jumped into a little boat, soon rowed to the Admiral's

ship, and having gone on board, asked "whether it was true, that they were

come to ravage the coast, without having honestly declared war?"

  The Admiral and all his crew burst out into laughter, made him drink some

punch, and sent him back.

  The ingenuous Hercules, piqued at this reception, thought of nothing else

but beating his old friends for his countrymen and the Prior. The gentlemen

of the neighborhood ran from all quarters, and joined them; they had some

cannon, and he discharged them one after the other. The English landed, and

he flew toward them, when he killed three of them with his own hand. He

even wounded the Admiral, who had made a joke of him. The entire militia

were animated with his prowess. The English returned to their ships, and

went on board; and the whole coast re-echoed with the shouts of victory,

"Live the king! live the ingenuous Hercules!"

  Every one ran to embrace him; every one strove to stop the bleeding of

some slight wounds he had received.

  "Ah!" said he, "if Miss St. Yves were here, she would put on a plaster for

me."  The bailiff, who had hid himself in his cellar during the battle, came to pay

his compliments like the rest. But he was greatly surprised, when he heard the

ingenuous Hercules say to a dozen young men, well disposed for his service,

who surrounded him:

  "My friends, having delivered the Abbé of the Mountain is nothing; we

must rescue a nymph."

  The  warm  blood  of  these  youths  was  fired  at  the  expression.  He  was

already followed by crowds, who repaired to the convent. If the bailiff had

not immediately acquainted the commandant with their design, and he had

not sent a detachment after the joyous troop, the thing would have been done.

The Huron was conducted back to his uncle and aunt, who overwhelmed him

with tears and tenderness.

  "I see very well," said his uncle, "that you will never be either a sub-

deacon or a prior; you will be an officer, and one still braver than my brother

the Captain, and probably as poor."

  Miss  Kerkabon  could  not  stop  an  incessant  flood  of  tears,  whilst  she

embraced him, saying, "he will be killed too, like my brother; it were much

better he were a sub-deacon."

  The Huron had, during the battle, picked up a purse full of guineas, which

the Admiral had probably lost. He did not doubt but that this purse would buy

all Lower Britany, and, above all, make Miss St. Yves a great lady. Every one

persuaded him to repair to Versailles, to receive the recompense due to his

services.  The  commandant,  and  the  principal  officers,  furnished  him  with

certificates in abundance. The uncle and aunt also approved of this journey.

He was to be presented to the king without any difficulty. This alone would

give him great weight in the province. These two good folks added to the

English purse a considerable present out of their savings. The Huron said to

himself, "When I see the king, I will ask Miss St. Yves of him in marriage,

and  certainly  he  will  not  refuse  me."  He  set  out  accordingly,  amidst  the

acclamations of the whole district, stifled with embraces, bathed in tears by

his aunt, blessed by his uncle, and recommending himself to the charming

Miss St. Yves.


  VIII.  THE  HURON  GOES  TO  COURT.  SUPS  UPON  THE  ROAD  WITH

SOME HUGUENOTS.

  The ingenuous Hercules took the Saumur road in the coach, because there

was at that time no other convenience. When he came to Saumur, he was

astonished to find the city almost deserted, and to see several families going

away. He was told, that half a dozen years before, Saumur contained upwards

of fifty thousand inhabitants, and that at present there were not six thousand.

He mentioned this at the inn, whilst at supper. Several Protestants were at

table; some complained bitterly, others trembled with rage, others, weeping,

said, Nos dulcia linquimus arva, nos patriam fugimus. The Huron, who did

not understand Latin, had these words explained to him, which signified, "We

abandon our sweet fields;-We fly from our country."

  "And why do you fly from your country, gentlemen?"

  "Because we must otherwise acknowledge the Pope."

  "And why not acknowledge him? You have no god-mothers, then, that

you want to marry; for, I am told it is he that grants this permission."

  "Ah! sir, this Pope says, that he is master of the domains of kings."

  "But, gentlemen, what religion are you of?"

  "Why, sir, we are for the most part drapers and manufacturers."

  "If the Pope, then, is not the master of your clothes and manufactures, you

do very well not to acknowledge him; but as to kings, it is their business, and

why do you trouble yourselves about it?"

  Here a little black man took up the argument, and very learnedly set forth

the grievances of the company. He talked of the revocation of the edict of

Nantes with so much energy; he deplored, in so pathetic a manner, the fate of

fifty thousand fugitive families, and of fifty thousand others converted by

dragoons; that the ingenuous Hercules could not refrain from shedding tears.

  "Whence arises it," said he, "that so great a king, whose renown expands

itself even to the Hurons, should thus deprive himself of so many hearts that

would have loved him, and so many arms that would have served him."

  "Because he has been imposed upon, like other great kings," replied the

little orator, "He has been made to believe, that as soon as he utters a word,all people think as he does; and that he can make us change our religion, just

as his musician Lulli, in a moment, changes the decorations of his opera. He

has not only already lost five or six hundred thousand very useful subjects,

but he has turned many of them into enemies; and King William, who is at

this time master of England, has formed several regiments of these identical

Frenchmen, who would otherwise have fought for their monarch.

  "Such a disaster is more astonishing, as the present Pope, to whom Louis

XIV. sacrifices a part of his people, is his declared enemy. A violent quarrel

has subsisted between them for nearly nine years. It has been carried so far,

that France was in hopes of at length casting off the yoke, by which it has

been  kept  in  subjection  for  so  many  ages  to  this  foreigner,  and,  more

particularly, of not giving him any more money, which is the primum mobile

of the affairs of this world. It, therefore, appears evident, that this great king

has been imposed on, as well with respect to his interest, as the extent of his

power, and that even the magnanimity of his heart has been struck at."

  The Huron, becoming more and more interested, asked:

  "Who were the Frenchmen who thus deceived a monarch so dear to the

Hurons?"

  "They  are  the  Jesuits,"  he  was  answered,  "and,  particularly,  Father  la

Chaise, the kings confessor. It is to be hoped that God will one day punish

them for it, and that they will be driven out, as they now drive us. Can any

misfortune equal ours? Mons. de Louvois besets us on all sides with Jesuits

and dragoons."

  "Well gentlemen," replied the Huron, "I am going to Versailles to receive

the recompense due to my services; I will speak to Mons. de Louvois. I am

told it is he who makes war from his closet. I shall see the king, and I will

acquaint him with the truth. It is impossible not to yield to this truth, when it

is felt. I shall return very soon to marry Miss St. Yves, and I beg you will be

present at our nuptials."

  These  good  people  now  took  him  for  some  great  Lord,  who  traveled

incognito in the coach. Some took him for the king's fool.

  There was at table a disguised Jesuit, who acted as a spy to the Reverend

Father de la Chaise. He gave him an account of everything that passed, andFather de la Chaise reported it to M. de Louvois. The spy wrote. The Huron

and the letter arrived almost at the same time at Versailles.


  IX.

  THE ARRIVAL OF THE HURON AT VERSAILLES. HIS RECEPTION

AT COURT.

  The ingenuous Hercules was set down from a public carriage, in the court

of the kitchens. He asks the chairmen, what hour the king can be seen? The

chairmen laugh in his face, just as the English Admiral had done: and he

treated them in the same manner-he beat them. They were for retaliation, and

the scene had like to have proved bloody, if a soldier, who was a gentleman

of Britany, had not passed by, and who dispersed the mob.

  "Sir," said the traveler to him, "you appear to me to be a brave man. I am

nephew to the Prior of our Lady of the Mountain. I have killed Englishmen,

and  I  am  come  to  speak  to  the  king.  I  beg  you  will  conduct  me  to  his

chamber."

  The soldier, delighted to find a man of courage from his province, who did

not seem acquainted with the customs of the court, told him it was necessary

to be presented to M. de Louvois.

  "Very  well,  then,  conduct  me  to  M.  de  Louvois,  who  will  doubtless

conduct me to the king."

  "It is more difficult to speak to M. de Louvois than the king. But I will

conduct you to Mr. Alexander, first commissioner of war, and this will be

just the same as if you spoke to the minister."

  They accordingly repair to Mr. Alexander's, who is first clerk, but they

cannot be introduced, he being closely engaged in business with a lady of the

court, and no person is allowed admittance.

  "Well,"  said  the  soldier,  "there  is  no  harm  done,  let  us  go  to  Mr.

Alexander's first clerk. This will be just the same as if you spoke to Mr.

Alexander himself."

  The Huron quite astonished, followed him. They remained together half an

hour in a little anti-chamber.  "What is all this?" said the ingenuous Hercules. "Is all the world invisible

in  this  country?  It  is  much  easier  to  fight  in  Lower  Britany  against

Englishmen, than to meet with people at Versailles, with whom one hath

business."

  He  amused  himself  for  some  time  with  relating  his  amours  to  his

countryman; but the clock striking, recalled the soldier to his post, when a

mutual promise was given of meeting on the morrow.

  The Huron remained another half hour in the anti-chamber, meditating

upon Miss St. Yves, and the difficulty of speaking to kings and first clerks.

  At length the patron appeared.

  "Sir," said the ingenuous Hercules, "If I had waited to repulse the English

as long as you have made me wait for my audience, they would certainly

have ravaged all Lower Britany without opposition."

  These words impressed the clerk. He at length said to the inhabitant of

Britany, "What is your request?"

  "A  recompense,"  said  the  other:  "these  are  my  titles;"  showing  his

certificates.

  The  clerk  read,  and  told  him,  "that  probably  he  might  obtain  leave  to

purchase a lieutenancy."

  "Me? what, must I pay money for having repulsed the English? Must I pay

a tax to be killed for you, whilst you are peaceably giving your audience

here? You are certainly jesting. I require a company of cavalry for nothing. I

require that the king shall set Miss St. Yves at liberty from the convent, and

give her to me in marriage. I want to speak to the king in favor of fifty

thousand families, whom I propose restoring to him. In a word, I want to be

useful. Let me be employed and advanced."

  "What is your name, sir, who talk in such a high style?"

  "Oh! oh!" answered the Huron; "you have not then read my certificates?

This is the way they are treated. My name is Hercules de Kerkabon. I am

christened, and I lodge at the Blue Dial." The clerk concluded, like the people

at  Saumur,  that  his  head  was  turned,  and  did  not  pay  him  any  further

attention.  The same day, the Reverend Father de la Chaise, confessor to Louis XIV.,

received his spy's letter, which accused the Breton Kerkabon of favoring in

his heart the Huguenots, and condemning the conduct of the Jesuits. M. de

Louvois had, on his side, received a letter from the inquisitive bailiff, which

depicted the Huron as a wicked, lewd fellow, inclined to burn convents, and

carry off the nuns.

  Hercules,  after  having  walked  in  the  gardens  of  Versailles,  which  had

become irksome to him; after having supped like a native of Huronia and

Lower Britany: had gone to rest, in the pleasant hope of seeing the king the

next  day;  of  obtaining  Miss  St.  Yves  in  marriage;  of  having,  at  least,  a

company  of  cavalry;  and  of  setting  aside  the  persecution  against  the

Huguenots. He was rocking himself asleep with these flattering ideas, when

the Marechaussée entered his chamber, and seized upon his double-charged

fusee and his great sabre.

  They took an inventory of his ready money, and then conducted him to the

castle  erected  by  King  Charles  V.,  son  to  John  II.,  near  the  street  of  St.

Antoine, at the gate des Tournelles.

  What was the Huron's astonishment in his way thither the reader is left to

imagine. He at first fancied it was all a dream; and remained for some time in

a state of stupefaction. Presently, transported with rage, that gave him more

than common strength, he collared two of his conductors who were with him

in the coach, flung them out of the door, cast himself after them, and then

dragged the third, who wanted to hold him. He fell in the attempt, when they

tied him, and replaced him in the carriage.

  "This, then," said he, "is what one gets for driving the English out of

Lower Britany! What wouldst thou say, charming Miss St. Yves, if thou didst

see me in this situation?"

  They at length arrived at the place of their destination. He was carried

without any noise into the chamber in which he was to be locked up, like a

dead corpse going to the grave. This room was already occupied by an old

solitary student of Port Royal, named Gordon, who had been languishing here

for two years.

  "See," said the chief of the Marechaussée, "here is company I bring you;"

and immediately the enormous bolts of this strong door, secured with largeiron bars, were fastened upon them. These two captives were thus separated

from all the universe besides.


  X.

  THE HURON IS SHUT UP IN THE BASTILE WITH A JANSENIST.

  Mr.  Gordon  was  a  healthy  old  man,  of  a  serene  disposition,  who  was

acquainted with two great things; the one was, to bear adversity; the other, to

console  the  afflicted.  He  approached  his  companion  with  an  open

sympathizing air, and said to him, whilst he embraced him:

  "Whoever thou art that is come to partake of my grave, be assured, that I

shall constantly forget myself to soften thy torments in the infernal abyss

where we are plunged. Let us adore Providence that has conducted us here.

Let us suffer in peace, and trust in hope."

  These words had the same effect upon the youth as cordial drops, which

recall a dying person to life, and show to his astonished eyes a glimpse of

light.

  After  the  first  compliments  were  over,  Gordon,  without  urging  him  to

relate  the  cause  of  his  misfortune,  inspired  him  by  the  sweetness  of  his

discourse and by that interest which two unfortunate persons share with each

other, with a desire of opening his heart and of disburdening himself of the

weight  which  oppressed  him;  but  he  could  not  guess  the  cause  of  his

misfortune, and the good man Gordon was as much astonished as himself.

  "God  must,  doubtless,"  said  the  Jansenist  to  the  Huron,  "have  great

designs upon you, since he conducted you from Lake Ontario into England,

from thence to France; caused you to be baptized in Lower Britany, and has

now lodged you here for your salvation."

  "I' faith," replied Hercules, "I believe the devil alone has interfered in my

destiny.[1] My countrymen in America would never have treated me with the

barbarity that I have here experienced; they have not the least idea of it. They

are  called  savages;-they  are  good  people,  but  rustic,  and  the  men  of  this

country are refined villains. I am indeed, greatly surprised to have come from

another world, to be shut up in this, under four bolts with a priest; but I

consider what an infinite number of men set out from one hemisphere to goand get killed in the other, or are cast away in the voyage, and are eaten by

the  fishes.  I  cannot  discover  the  gracious  designs  of  God  over  all  these

people."

  Their dinner was brought them through a wicket. The conversation turned

upon Providence, lettres de cachet, and upon the art of not sinking under

disgrace, to which all men in this world are exposed.

  "It is now two years since I have been here," said the old man, "without

any other consolation than myself and books; and yet I have never been a

single moment out of temper."

  "Ah! Mr. Gordon," cried Hercules, "you are not then in love with your

god-mother. If you were as well acquainted with Miss St. Yves as I am, you

would be in a state of desperation."

  At these words he could not refrain from tears, which greatly relieved him

from his oppression.

  "How is it then that tears solace us?" said the Huron, "It seems to me that

they should have quite an opposite effect."

  "My son," said the good old man, "every thing is physical about us; all

secretions are useful to the body, and all that comforts it, comforts the soul.

We are the machines of Providence."

  The ingenuous Huron, who, as we have already observed more than once,

had a great share of understanding, entered deeply into the consideration of

this idea, the seeds whereof appeared to be in himself. After which he asked

his companion.

  "Why his machine had for two years been confined by four bolts?"

  "By effectual grace," answered Gordon; "I pass for a Jansenist; I know

Arnaud and Nicole; the Jesuits have persecuted us. We believe that the Pope

is nothing more than a bishop, like another, and therefore Father la Chaise

has obtained from the king, his penitent, an order for robbing me without any

form of justice, of the most precious inheritance of man-liberty!"

  "This is very strange," said the Huron, "all the unhappy people I have met

with have been made so solely by the Pope. With respect to your effectual

grace, I acknowledge I do not understand what you mean. But I consider it asa very great favor, that God has let me, in my misfortunes, meet with a man,

who pours into my heart such consolation as I thought myself incapable of

receiving."

  The conversation became each day more interesting and instructive. The

souls of the two captives seemed to unite in one body. The old man had

acquired knowledge, and the young man was willing to receive instruction.

At the end of the first month, he eagerly applied himself to the study of

geometry. Gordon made him read Rohault's Physics, which book was still in

fashion, and he had good sense enough to find in it nothing but doubts and

uncertainties.

  He  afterward  read  the  first  volume  of  the  Enquiry  After  Truth.  This

instructive work gave him new light.

  "What!" said he, "do our imagination and our senses deceive us to that

degree? What, are not our ideas formed by objects, and can we not acquire

them by ourselves?"

  When  he  had  gone  through  the  second  volume,  he  was  not  so  well

satisfied; and he concluded it was much easier to destroy than to build.

  His colleague, astonished that a young ignoramus should make such a

remark, conceived a very high opinion of his understanding, and was more

strongly attached to him.

  "Your Malebranche," said he to Gordon one day, "seems to have written

half his book whilst he was in possession of his reason, and the other half

with the assistance only of imagination and prejudice."

  Some days after, Gordon asked him what he thought of the soul, and the

manner in which we receive our ideas of volition, grace, and free agency.

  "Nothing," replied the Huron. "If I think sometimes, it is that we are under

the  power  of  the  Eternal  Being,  like  the  stars  and  the  elements-that  he

operates everything in us-that we are small wheels of the immense machine,

of which he is the soul-that he acts according to general laws, and not from

particular views. This is all that appears to me intelligible; all the rest is to me

a dark abyss."

  "But this, my son, would be making God the author of sin!"  "But, father, your effectual grace would equally make him the author of

sin; for certainly all those to whom this grace was refused, would sin; and is

not an all-powerful being who permits evil, virtually the author of evil?"

  This sincerity greatly embarrassed the good man; he found that all his

endeavors to extricate himself from this quagmire were ineffectual; and he

heaped such quantities of words upon one another, which seemed to have

meaning, but which in fact had none, that the Huron could not help pitying

him. This question evidently determined the origin of good and evil; and poor

Gordon  was  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  recurring  to  Pandora's  box-

Oromasdes's  egg  pierced  by  Arimanes-the  enmity  between  Typhon  and

Osiris-and, at last, original sin; and these he huddled together in profound

darkness, without their throwing the least glimmering light upon one another.

However,  this  romance  of  the  soul  diverted  their  thoughts  from  the

contemplation of their own misery; and, by a strange magic, the multitude of

calamities dispersed throughout the world diminished the sensation of their

own miseries. They did not dare complain when all mankind was in a state of

sufferance.

  But  in  the  repose  of  night,  the  image  of  the  charming  Miss  St.  Yves

effaced from the mind of her lover every metaphysical and moral idea. He

awoke with his eyes bathed in tears; and the old Jansenist forgot his effectual

grace,  and  the  Abbé  of  St.  Cyran,  and  even  Jansenius  himself,  to  afford

consolation to a youth whom he had judged guilty of a mortal sin.

  After  these  lectures  and  their  reasonings  were  over,  their  adventures

furnished them with subjects of conversation; after this store was exhausted,

they read together, or separately. The Huron's understanding daily increased;

and  he  would  certainly  have  made  great  progress  in  mathematics,  if  the

thought of Miss St. Yves had not frequently distracted him.

  He read histories, which made him melancholy. The world appeared to

him too wicked and too miserable. In fact, history is nothing more than a

picture of crimes and misfortunes. The crowd of innocent and peaceable men

are  always  invisible  upon  this  vast  theatre.  The  dramatis  personæ  are

composed of ambitious, perverse men. The pleasure which history affords is

derived from the same source as tragedy, which would languish and become

insipid, were it not inspired with strong passions, great events, and piteousmisfortunes. Clio must be armed with a poniard as well as Melpomene.

  Though the history of France is not less filled with horror than those of

other nations, it nevertheless appeared to him so disgusting in the beginning,

so dry in the continuation, and so trifling in the end, (even in the time of

Henry  IV.);  ever  destitute  of  grand  monuments,  or  foreign  to  those  fine

discoveries  which  have  illustrated  other  nations;  that  he  was  obliged  to

resolve upon not being tired, in order to go through all the particulars of

obscure calamities confined to a little corner of the world.

  Gordon thought like him. They both laughed with pity when they read of

the sovereigns of Fezensacs, Fesansaguet, and Astrac: such a study could be

relished only by their heirs, if they had any. The brilliant ages of the Roman

Republic made him sometimes quite indifferent as to any other part of the

globe. The spectacle of victorious Rome, the lawgiver of nations, engrossed

his whole soul. He glowed in contemplating a people who were governed for

seven hundred years by the enthusiasm of liberty and glory.

  Thus rolled days, weeks, and months; and he would have thought himself

happy in the sanctuary of despair, if he had not loved.

  The  natural  goodness  of  his  heart  was  softened  still  more  when  he

reflected  upon  the  Prior  of  our  Lady  of  the  Mountain,  and  the  sensible

Kerkabon.

  "What must they think," he would often repeat, "when they can get no

tidings of me? They must think me an ungrateful wretch." This idea rendered

him inconsolable. He pitied those who loved him much more than he pitied

himself.

  [1] In the play called Civilization, Hercules uses the following language:

  "In my barbarian days, I spoke the truth:

  Wrong'd not my neighbor: paid back benefits,

  With benefit and gratitude to boot;

  Dealt justly: held a friend to be a gift,

  Precious as stars dropt down from heaven: bowed

  Before the works of God: beheld in them  His presence, palpable, as at an altar:

  And worshipp'd heaven at the mountain's foot.

  But this

  Was Barbarism, I am wiser now;

  More civilized. I know the way to lie,

  To cheat, deceive, and be a zealous Christian!"-E.


  XI.

  HOW THE HURON DISCLOSES HIS GENIUS.

  Reading  aggrandizes  the  soul,  and  an  enlightened  friend  affords

consolation. Our captive had these two advantages in his favor which he had

never expected.

  "I shall begin to believe in the Metamorphoses," said he, "for I have been

transformed from a brute into a man."

  He formed a chosen library with part of the money which he was allowed

to  dispose  of.  His  friend  encouraged  him  to  commit  to  writing  such

observations as occurred to him. These are his notes upon ancient history:

  "I imagine that nations were for a long time like myself; that they did not

become enlightened till very late; that for many ages they were occupied with

nothing but the present moment which elapsed: that they thought very little of

what was past, and never of the future. I have traversed five or six hundred

leagues in Canada, and I did not meet with a single monument: no one is the

least acquainted with the actions of his predecessors. Is not this the natural

state of man? The human species of this continent appears to me superior to

that of the other. They have extended their being for many ages by arts and

knowledge. Is this because they have beards upon their chins and God has

refused this ornament to the Americans? I do not believe it; for I find the

Chinese have very little beard, and that they have cultivated arts for upwards

of five thousand years. In effect, if their annals go back upwards of four

thousand  years,  the  nation  must  necessarily  have  been  united  and  in  a

flourishing state more than five hundred centuries.

  "One thing particularly strikes me in this ancient history of China, whichis, that almost every thing is probable and natural. I admire it because it is not

tinctured with anything of the marvelous.

  "Why  have  all  other  nations  adopted  fabulous  origins?  The  ancient

chronicles of the history of France, which, by the by, are not very ancient,

make the French descend from one Francus, the son of Hector. The Romans

said they were the issue of a Phrygian, though there was not in their whole

language a single word that had the least connection with the language of

Phrygia. The gods had inhabited Egypt for ten thousand years, and the devils

Scythia, where they had engendered the Huns. I meet with nothing before

Thucydides  but  romances  similar  to  the  Amadis,  and  far  less  amusing.

Apparitions,  oracles,  prodigies,  sorcery,  metamorphoses,  are  interspersed

throughout with the explanation of dreams, which are the bases of the destiny

of the greatest empires and the smallest states. Here are speaking beasts, there

brutes that are adored, gods transformed into men, and men into gods. If we

must have fables, let us, at least, have such as appear the emblem of truth. I

admire the fables of philosophers, but I laugh at those of children, and hate

those of impostors."

  He  one  day  hit  upon  a  history  of  the  Emperor  Justinian.  It  was  there

related, that some Appedeutes of Constantinople had delivered, in very bad

Greek, an edict against the greatest captain of the age, because this hero had

uttered the following words in the warmth of conversation: "Truth shines

forth with its proper light, and people's minds are not illumined with flaming

piles." The Appedeutes declared that this proposition was heretical, bordering

upon  heresy,  and  that  the  contrary  action  was  catholic,  universal,  and

Grecian: "The minds of the people are enlightened but with flaming piles, and

truth  cannot  shine  forth  with  its  own  light."  These  Linostolians  thus

condemned several discourses of the captain, and published an edict.

  "What!" said the Huron, with much emotion, "shall such people publish

edicts?"

  "They are not edicts," replied Gordon: "they are contradictions, which all

the world laughed at in Constantinople, and the Emperor the first. He was a

wise prince, who knew how to reduce the Linostolian Appedeutes to a state

incapable of doing anything but good. He knew that these gentlemen, and

several  other  Pastophores,  had  tired  the  patience  of  the  Emperors,  hispredecessors, with contradictions in more serious matters."

  "He  did  quite  right,"  said  the  Huron,  "the  Pastophores  should  not  be

supported, but constrained."

  He committed several other observations to paper, which astonished old

Gordon.  "What,"  said  he  to  himself,  "have  I  consumed  fifty  years  in

instruction and not attained to the degree of natural good sense of this child,

who is almost a savage? I tremble to think I have so arduously strengthened

prejudices, and he listens to simple nature only."

  The good man had some little books of criticism, some of those periodical

pamphlets  wherein  men,  incapable  of  producing  anything  themselves,

blacken the productions of others; where a Vise insults a Racine, and a Faidit

a Fénelon. The Huron ran over some of them. "I compare them," said he, "to

certain gnats that lodge their eggs in the nostrils of the finest horses, which do

not, however, retard their speed."

  The two philosophers scarce deigned to cast their eyes upon these dregs of

literature.

  They soon after went through the elements of astronomy. The Huron sent

for some globes: he was ravished at this great spectacle.

  "How hard it is," said he, "that I should only begin to be acquainted with

heaven, when the power of contemplating it is ravished from me! Jupiter and

Saturn revolve in these immense spaces;-millions of suns illumine myriads of

worlds; and, in this corner of the earth on which I am cast, there are beings

that deprive me of seeing and studying those worlds to which my eye might

reach, and even that in which God has placed me. The light created for the

whole universe is lost to me. It was not hidden from me in the northern

horizon,  where  I  passed  my  infancy  and  youth.  Without  you,  my  dear

Gordon, I should be annihilated."


  XII.

  THE HURON'S SENTIMENTS UPON THEATRICAL PIECES.

  The  young  Huron  resembled  one  of  those  vigorous  trees,  which,

languishing  in  an  ungrateful  soil,  extend  in  a  little  time  their  roots  and

branches  when  transplanted  to  a  more  favorable  spot;  and  it  was  veryextraordinary that this favorable spot should be a prison.

  Among the books which employed the leisure of the two captives were

some  poems  and  also  translations  of  Greek  tragedies,  and  some  dramatic

pieces in French. Those passages that dwelt on love communicated at once

pleasure and pain to the soul of the Huron. They were but so many images of

his dear Miss St. Yves. The fable of the two pigeons rent his heart: for he was

far estranged from his tender dove.

  Molière enchanted him. He taught him the manners of Paris and of human

nature.

  "To which of his comedies do you give the preference?"

  "Doubtless to his Tartuffe."

  "I am of your opinion," said Gordon; "it was a Tartuffe that flung me into

this dungeon, and perhaps they were Tartuffes who have been the cause of

your misfortunes."

  "What do you think of these Greek tragedies?"

  "They are very good for Grecians."

  But  when  he  read  the  modern  Iphigenia,  Phædrus,  Andromache,  and

Athalia, he was in ecstacy, he sighed, he wept,-and he learned them by heart,

without having any such intention.

  "Read Rodogune," said Gordon; "that is said to be a capital production;

the other pieces which have given you so much pleasure, are trifles compared

to this."

  The young man had scarce got through the first page, before he said, "This

is not written by the same author."

  "How do you know it?"

  "I know nothing yet; but these lines neither touch my ear nor my heart."

  "O!" said Gordon, "the versification does not signify." The Huron asked,

"What must I judge by then?"

  After having read the piece very attentively without any other design than

being pleased, he looked steadfastly at his friend with much astonishment,

not knowing what to say. At length, being urged to give his opinion withrespect to what he felt, this was the answer he made: "I understood very little

of the beginning; the middle disgusted me; but the last scene greatly moved

me,  though  there  appears  to  me  but  little  probability  in  it.  I  have  no

prejudices for or against any one, but I do not remember twenty lines, I, who

recollect them all when they please me."

  "This piece, nevertheless, passes for the best upon our stage."

  "If that be the case," said he, "it is perhaps like many people who are not

worthy of the places they hold. After all, this is a matter of taste, and mine

cannot yet be formed. I may be mistaken; but you know I am accustomed to

say what I think or rather what I feel. I suspect that illusion, fashion, caprice,

often warp the judgments of men."

  Here he repeated some lines from Iphigenia, which he was full of; and

though he declaimed but indifferently, he uttered them with such truth and

emotion that he made the old Jansenist weep. He then read Cinna, which did

not excite his tears, but his admiration.


  XIII.

  THE BEAUTIFUL MISS ST. YVES GOES TO VERSAILLES.

  Whilst  the  unfortunate  Hercules  was  more  enlightened  than  consoled;

whilst his genius, so long stifled, unfolded itself with so much rapidity and

strength; whilst nature, which was attaining a degree of perfection in him,

avenged herself of the outrages of fortune; what became of the Prior, his

good sister, and the beautiful recluse, Miss St. Yves? The first month they

were uneasy, and the third they were immersed in sorrow. False conjectures,

ill-grounded  reports,  alarmed  them.  At  the  end  of  six  months,  it  was

concluded he was dead. At length, Mr. and Miss Kerkabon learned, by a

letter of ancient date, which one of the king's guards had written to Britany,

that a young man resembling the Huron arrived one night at Versailles, but

that since that time no one had heard him spoken of.

  "Alas," said Miss Kerkabon, "our nephew has done some ridiculous thing,

which  has  brought  on  some  terrible  consequences.  He  is  young,  a  Low

Breton, and cannot know how to behave at court. My dear brother, I never

saw Versailles nor Paris; here is a fine opportunity, and we shall perhaps findour poor nephew. He is our brother's son, and it is our duty to assist him.

Who knows? we may perhaps at length prevail upon him to become a sub-

deacon when the fire of youth is somewhat abated. He was much inclined to

the  sciences.  Do  you  recollect  how  he  reasoned  upon  the  Old  and  New

Testaments?  We  are  answerable  for  his  soul.  He  was  baptized  at  our

instigation.  His  dear  mistress  Miss  St.  Yves  does  nothing  but  weep

incessantly. Indeed, we must go to Paris. If he is concealed in any of those

infamous houses of pleasure, which I have often heard of, we will get him

out."

  The Prior was affected at his sister's discourse. He went in search of the

Bishop  of  St.  Malo's,  who  had  baptized  the  Huron,  and  requested  his

protection and advice. The Prelate approved of the journey. He gave the Prior

letters of recommendation to Father la Chaise, the king's confessor, who was

invested with the first dignity in the kingdom; to Harlai, the Archbishop of

Paris, and to Bossuet, Bishop of Meaux.

  At length, the brother and sister set out; but when they came to Paris, they

found themselves bewildered in a great labyrinth without clue or end. Their

fortune was but middling, and they had occasion every day for carriages to

pursue their discovery, which they could not accomplish.

  The  Prior  waited  upon  the  Reverend  Father  la  Chaise;  he  was  with

Mademoiselle du Tron, and could not give audience to Priors. He went to the

Archbishop's door: the Prelate was shut up with the beautiful Mademoiselle

de Lesdiguières about church matters. He flew to the country house of the

Bishop of Meaux: he was engaged in a close examination with Mademoiselle

de  Mauleon,  of  the  mystery  relating  to  Mademoiselle  Guyon.  At  length,

however,  he  gained  access  to  these  two  prelates;  they  both  declared  they

could not interfere with regard to his nephew, as he was not a sub-deacon.

  He at length saw the Jesuit, who received him with open arms, protesting

he had always entertained the greatest private esteem for him, though he had

never known him. He swore that his society had always been attached to the

inhabitants of Lower Britany.

  "But,"  said  he,  "has  not  your  nephew  the  misfortune  of  being  a

Huguenot?"

  "No, certainly, Reverend Father."  "May he not be a Jansenist?"

  "I can assure your Reverence, that he is scarce a Christian. It is about

eleven months since he was christened."

  "This  is  very  well;-we  will  take  care  of  him.  Is  your  benefice

considerable?"

  "No, a very trifle, and our nephew costs us a great deal."

  "Are there any Jansenists in your neighborhood? Take great care, my dear

Mr. Prior, they are more dangerous than Huguenots, or even Atheists."

  "My Reverend Father, we have none; it is not even known at our Lady of

the Mountain what Jansenism is."

  "So much the better; go, there is nothing I will not do for you."

  He dismissed the Prior in this affectionate manner, but thought no more

about him.

  Time  slipped  away,  and  the  Prior  and  his  good  sister  were  almost  in

despair.

  In the meanwhile, the cursed bailiff urged very strenuously the marriage of

his  great  booby  son  with  the  beautiful  Miss  St.  Yves,  who  was  taken

purposely out of the convent. She always entertained a passion for her god-

son in proportion as she detested the husband who was designed for her. The

insult that had been offered her, by shutting her up in a convent, increased her

affection;  and  the  mandate  for  wedding  the  bailiff's  son  completed  her

antipathy for him. Chagrin, tenderness, and terror, racked her soul. Love, we

know,  is  much  more  inventive  and  more  daring  in  a  young  woman  than

friendship in an aged Prior and an aunt upwards of forty-five. Besides, she

had  received  good  instructions  in  her  convent  with  the  assistance  of

romances, which she read by stealth.

  The beautiful Miss St. Yves remembered the letter that had been sent by

one of the king's guards to Lower Britany, which had been spoken of in the

province. She resolved to go herself and gain information at Versailles; to

throw herself at the minister's feet, if her husband should be in prison as it

was said, and obtain justice for him. I know not what secret intelligence she

had gained that at court nothing is refused to a pretty woman; but she knewnot the price of these boons.

  Having taken this resolution, it afforded her some consolation; and she

enjoyed some tranquillity without upraiding Providence with the severity of

her lot. She receives her detested intended father-in-law, caresses her brother,

and spreads happiness throughout the house. On the day appointed for the

ceremony, she secretly departs at four o'clock in the morning, with the little

nuptial presents she has received, and all she could gather. Her plan was so

well laid, that she was about ten leagues upon her journey, when, about noon,

her absence was discovered, and when every one's consternation and surprise

was inexpressible. The inquisitive bailiff asked more questions that day than

he had done for a week before; the intended bridegroom was more stupefied

than ever. The Abbé St. Yves resolved in his rage to pursue his sister. The

bailiff and his son were disposed to accompany him. Thus fate led almost the

whole canton of Lower Britany to Paris.

  The  beautiful  Miss  St.  Yves  was  not  without  apprehensions  that  she

should be pursued. She rode on horseback, and she got all the intelligence she

could from the couriers, without being suspected. She asked if they had not

met a fat abbé, an enormous bailiff, and a young booby, galloping as fast as

they could to Paris. Having learned, on the third day, that they were not far

behind, she took quite a different road, and was skillful and lucky enough to

arrive at Versailles, whilst they were in a fruitless pursuit after her, at Paris.

But  how  was  she  to  behave  at  Versailles?  Young,  handsome,  untutored,

unsupported, unknown, exposed to every danger, how could she dare go in

search of one of the king's guards? She had some thoughts of applying to a

Jesuit of low rank, for there were some for every station of life; as God, they

say, has given different aliments to every species of animals. He had given

the king his confessor, who was called, by all solicitors of benefices, the head

of the Gallican Church. Then came the princes' confessors. The ministers had

none, they were not such dupes. There were Jesuits for the genteel mob, and

particularly those for chambermaids, by whom were known the secrets of

their mistresses; and this was no small vocation, the beautiful Miss St. Yves

addressed herself to one of these last, who was called Father Tout-à-tous (all

to every one). She confessed to him, set forth her adventure, her situation, her

danger, and conjured him to get her a lodging with some good devotee, who

might shelter her from temptation.  The Confessional.

  Father Tout-à-tous introduced her to the wife of the cup-bearer, one of his

most trusty penitents. From the moment Miss St. Yves became her lodger,

she did her utmost to obtain the confidence and friendship of this penitent.

She gained intelligence of the Breton-Guard, and invited him to visit her.

Having learned from him that her lover had been carried off after having had

a conference with one of the clerks, she flew to this clerk. The sight of a fine

woman softened him, for it must be allowed God created woman only to

tame mankind.

  The scribe, thus mollified, acknowledged to her every thing.

  "Your  lover  has  been  in  the  bastile  almost  a  year,  and  without  your

intercession he would, perhaps, have ended hid days there."

  The  tender  Miss  St.  Yves  swooned  at  this  intelligence.  When  she  had

recovered herself, her informer told her:

  "I have no power to do good; all my influence extends to doing harm.

Take my advice, wait upon M. de St. Pouange, who has the power of doing

both good and ill; he is Mons. de Louvois's cousin and favorite. This minister

has two souls: the one is M. de St. Pouange, and Mademoiselle de Belle is the

other, but she is at present absent from Versailles; so that you have nothing to

do but captivate the protector I have pointed out to you."

  The  beautiful  Miss  St.  Yves,  divided  between  some  trifling  joy  and

excessive grief, between a glimmering of hope and dreadful apprehensions,-

pursued by her brother, idolizing her lover, wiping her tears, which flowed in

torrents;  trembling  and  feeble,  yet  summoning  all  her  courage;-in  this

situation, she flew on the wings of love to M. de St. Pouange's.


  XIV.

  RAPID PROGRESS OF THE HURON'S INTELLECT.

  The ingenuous youth was making a rapid progress in the sciences, and

particularly in the science of man. The cause of this sudden disclosure of his

understanding  was  as  much  owing  to  his  savage  education  as  to  the

disposition of his soul; for, having learned nothing in his infancy, he had not

imbibed any prejudices. His mind, not having been warped by error, hadretained all its primitive rectitude. He saw things as they were; whereas the

ideas that are communicated to us in our infancy make us see them all our life

in a false light.

  "Your persecutors are very abominable wretches," said he to his friend

Gordon. "I pity you for being oppressed, but I condemn you for being a

Jansenist. All sects appear to me to be founded in error. Tell me if there be

any sectaries in geometry?"

  "No, my child," said the good old Gordon, heaving a deep sigh; "all men

are  agreed  concerning  truth  when  demonstrated,  but  they  are  too  much

divided about latent truths."

  "If  there  were  but  one  single  hidden  truth  in  your  load  of  arguments,

which have been so often sifted for such a number of ages, it would doubtless

have  been  discovered,  and  the  universe  would  certainly  have  been

unanimous, at least, in that respect. If this truth had been as necessary as the

sun is to the earth, it would have been as brilliant as that planet. It is an

absurdity,  an  insult  to  human  nature-it  is  an  attack  upon  the  Infinite  and

Supreme Being to say there is a truth essential to the happiness of man which

God conceals."

  All that this ignorant youth, instructed only by nature, said, made a very

deep impression upon the mind of the old unhappy scholiast.

  "Is  it  really  certain,"  he  cried,  "that  I  should  have  made  myself  truly

miserable for mere chimeras? I am much more certain of my misery than of

effectual grace. I have spent my time in reasoning about the liberty of God

and human nature, but I have lost my own. Neither St. Augustine nor St.

Prosner will extricate me from my present misfortunes."

  The ingenuous Huron, who gave way to his natural instincts, at length

said:

  "Will you give me leave to speak to you boldly and frankly? Those who

bring upon themselves persecution for such idle disputes seem to me to have

very little sense; those who persecute, appear to me very monsters."

  The two captives entirely coincided with respect to the injustice of their

captivity.

  "I am a hundred times more to be pitied than you," said the Huron; "I amborn free as the air: I had two lives, liberty and the object of my love; and I

am deprived of both. We are both in fetters, without knowing who put them

on  us,  or  without  being  able  to  enquire.  It  is  said  that  the  Hurons  are

barbarians, because they avenge themselves on their enemies; but they never

oppress their friends. I had scarce set foot in France, before I shed my blood

for  this  country.  I  have,  perhaps,  preserved  a  whole  province,  and  my

recompense is imprisonment. In this country men are condemned without

being heard. This is not the case in England. Alas! it was not against the

English that I should have fought."

  Thus his growing philosophy could not brook nature being insulted in the

first of her rights, and he gave vent to his just indignation.

  His companion did not contradict him. Absence ever increases ungratified

love, and philosophy does not diminish it. He as frequently spoke of his dear

Miss St. Yves, as he did of morality or metaphysics. The more he purified his

sentiments, the more he loved. He read some new romances; but he met with

few  that  depicted  to  him  the  real  state  of  his  soul.  He  felt  that  his  heart

stretched beyond the bounds of his author.

  "Alas!" said he, "almost all these writers have nothing but wit and art."

  At length, the good Jansenist priest became, insensibly, the confident of

his tenderness. He was already acquainted with love as a sin with which a

penitent  accuses  himself  at  confession.  He  now  learned  to  know  it  as  a

sentiment equally noble and tender; which can elevate the soul as well as

soften it, and can at times produce virtues. In fine, for the last miracle, a

Huron converted a Jansenist.


  XV.

  THE BEAUTIFUL MISS ST. YVES VISITS M. DE ST. POUANGE.

  The charming Miss St. Yves, still more afflicted than her lover, waited

accordingly upon M. de St. Pouange, accompanied by her friend with whom

she lodged, each having their faces covered with their hoods. The first thing

she saw at the door was the Abbé St. Yves, her brother coming out. She was

terrified, but her friend supported her spirits.

  "For the very reason," said she, "that people have been speaking againstyou, speak to him for yourself. You may he assured, that the accusers in this

part  of  the  world  are  always  in  the  right,  unless  they  are  immediately

detected. Besides, your presence will have greater effect, or else I am much

mistaken, than the words of your brother."

  Ever  so  little  encouragement  to  a  passionate  lover  makes  her  intrepid.

Miss  St.  Yves  appears  at  the  audience.  Her  youth,  her  charms,  her

languishing eyes, moistened with some involuntary tears, attract every one's

attention. Every sycophant to the deputy minister forgot for an instant the idol

of power to contemplate that of beauty. St. Pouange conducted her into a

closet. She spoke with an affecting grace. St. Pouange felt some emotion. She

trembled, but he told her not to be afraid.

  "Return to-night," said he; "your business requires some reflection, and it

must  be  discussed  at  leisure.  There  are  too  many  people  here  at  present.

Audiences  are  rapidly  dispatched.  I  must  get  to  the  bottom  of  all  that

concerns you."

  He then paid her some compliments upon her beauty and address, and

advised her to come at seven in the evening.

  She did not fail attending at the hour appointed, and her pious friend again

accompanied her; but she remained in the hall, where she read the Christian

Pedagogue, whilst St. Pouange and the beauteous Miss St. Yves were in the

back closet. He began by saying:

  "Would you believe it, Miss, that your brother has been to request me to

grant him a lettre de cachet against you; but, indeed, I would sooner grant one

to send him back to Lower Britany."

  "Alas! sir," said she, "lettres de cachet are granted very liberally in your

offices, since people come from the extremity of the kingdom to solicit them

like pensions. I am very far from requesting one against my brother, yet I

have much reason to complain of him. But I respect the liberty of mankind;

and,  therefore,  supplicate  for  that  of  a  man  whom  I  want  to  make  my

husband; of a man to whom the king is indebted for the preservation of a

province; who can beneficially serve him; and who is the son of an officer

killed in his service. Of what is he accused? How could he be treated so

cruelly without being heard?"  The deputy minister then showed her the letter of the spy Jesuit, and that

of the perfidious bailiff.

  "What!" said she with astonishment, "are there such monsters upon earth?

and would they force me to marry the stupid son of a ridiculous, wicked

man? and is it upon such evidence that the fate of citizens is determined?"

  She threw herself upon her knees, and with a flood of tears solicited the

freedom of a brave man who adored her. Her charms appeared to the greatest

advantage in such a situation. She was so beautiful, that St. Pouange, bereft

of all shame, used words with some reserve, which brought on others less

delicate,  which  were  succeeded  by  those  still  more  expressive.  The

revocation of the lettre de cachet was proposed, and he at length went so far

as to state the only means of obtaining the liberty of the man whose interest

she had so violently and affectionately at heart.

  This uncommon conversation continued for a long time. The devotee in

the anti-chamber, in reading her Christian Pedagogue, said to herself:

  "My Lord St. Pouange never before gave so long an audience. Perhaps he

has refused every thing to this poor girl, and she is still entreating him."

  At length her companion came out of the closet in the greatest confusion,

without  being  able  to  speak.  She  was  lost  in  deep  meditation  upon  the

character of the great and the half great, who so slightly sacrifice the liberty

of men and the honor of women.

  She did not utter a syllable all the way back. But having returned to her

friend's, she burst out, and told all that had happened. Her pious friend made

frequent signs of the cross.

  "My dear friend," said she, "you must consult to-morrow Father Tout-à-

tous, our director. He has much influence over M. de St. Pouange. He is

confessor  of  many  of  the  female  servants  of  the  house.  He  is  a  pious

accommodating man, who has also the direction of some women of fashion.

Yield to him; this is my way; and I always found myself right. We weak

women stand in need of a man to lead us: and so, my dear friend, I'll go to-

morrow in search of Father Tout-à-tous."


  XVI.  MISS ST. YVES CONSULTS A JESUIT.

  No sooner was the beautiful and disconsolate Miss St. Yves with her holy

confessor, than she told him, "that a powerful, voluptuous man, had proposed

to  her  to  set  at  liberty  the  man  whom  she  intended  making  her  lawful

husband, and that he required a great price for his service; that she held such

infidelity  in  the  highest  detestation;  and  that  if  her  life  only  had  been

required, she would much sooner have sacrificed it than to have submitted."

  "This is a most abominable sinner," said Father Tout-à-tous, "You should

tell me the name of this vile man. He must certainly be some Jansenist. I will

inform against him to his Reverence, Father de la Chaise, who will place him

in the situation of your dear beloved intended bridegroom."

  The  poor  girl,  after  much  hesitation  and  embarrassment,  at  length

mentioned St. Pouange.

  "My Lord St. Pouange!" cried the Jesuit, "Ah! my child, the case is quite

different. He is cousin to the greatest minister we have ever had; a man of

worth, a protector of the good cause, a good Christian. He could not entertain

such a thought. You certainly must have misunderstood him."

  "Oh! Father, I did but understand him too well. I am lost on which ever

side I turn. The only alternative I have to choose is misery or shame; either

my lover must be buried alive, or I must make myself unworthy of living. I

cannot let him perish, nor can I save him."

  Father  Tout-à-tous  endeavored  to  console  her  with  these  gentle

expressions:

  "In  the  first  place,  my  child,  never  use  the  word  lover.  It  intimates

something worldly, which may offend God. Say my husband. You consider

him as such, and nothing can be more decent.

  "Secondly: Though he be ideally your husband, and you are in hopes he

will be such eventually, yet he is not so in reality, consequently, you are still

free and the mistress of your own conduct.

  Father Tout-à-tous.

  "Thirdly:  Actions  are  not  maliciously  culpable,  when  the  intention  is

virtuous; and nothing can be more virtuous than to procure your husband hisliberty.

  "Fourthly: You have examples in holy antiquity, that miraculously serve

you for a guide. St. Augustin relates, that under the proconsulate of Septimius

Acyndius, in the thirty-fourth year of our salvation, a poor man could not pay

unto  Cæsar  what  belonged  to  Cæsar,  and  was  justly  condemned  to  die,

notwithstanding the maxim, 'Where there is nothing, the king must lose his

right.' The object in question was a pound of gold. The culprit had a wife in

whom God had united beauty and prudence.

  "You  may  assure  yourself,  my  child,  that  when  a  Jesuit  quotes  St.

Augustin, that saint must certainly have been in the right. I advise you to

nothing. You are prudent, and it is to be presumed that you will do your

husband  a  service.  My  Lord  St.  Pouange  is  an  honest  man.  He  will  not

deceive you. This is all I can say. I will pray to God for you, and I hope every

thing will take place for his glory."

  The beautiful Miss St. Yves, who was no less terrified with the Jesuit's

discourse than with the proposals of the deputy minister, returned in despair

to her friend. She was tempted to deliver herself by death from the horror of

her situation.


  XVII.

  THE JESUIT TRIUMPHS.

  The unfortunate Miss St. Yves entreated her friend to kill her; but this

lady, who was fully as indulgent as the Jesuit, spoke to her still more clearly.

  "Alas!" said she, "at this agreeable, gallant, and famous court, business is

always thus transacted. The most considerable, as well as the most indifferent

places are seldom given away without a consideration. The dignities of war

are solicited by the queen of love, and, without regard to merit, a place is

often given to him who has the handsomest advocate.

  "You are in a situation that is extremely critical. The object is to restore

your lover to liberty, and to marry him. It is a sacred duty that you are to

fulfill. The world will applaud you. It will be said, that you only allowed

yourself to be guilty of a weakness, through an excess of virtue."

  "Heavens!" cried Miss St. Yves, "What kind of virtue is this? What alabyrinth of distress! What a world! What men to become acquainted with! A

Father  de  la  Chaise  and  a  ridiculous  bailiff  imprison  my  lover;  I  am

persecuted  by  my  family;  assistance  is  offered  me,  only  that  I  may  be

dishonored! A Jesuit has ruined a brave man, another Jesuit wants to ruin me.

On  every  side  snares  are  laid  for  me,  and  I  am  upon  the  very  brink  of

destruction! I must even speak to the king; I will throw myself at his feet as

he goes to mass or to the theatre."

  "His attendants will not let you approach," said her good friend; "and if

you  should  be  so  unfortunate  as  to  speak  to  him,  M.  de  Louvois,  or  the

Reverend Father de la Chaise, might bury you in a convent for the rest of

your days."

  Whilst  this  generous  friend  thus  increased  the  perplexities  of  Miss  St.

Yves's tortured soul, and plunged the dagger deeper in her heart, a messenger

arrived from M. de St. Pouange with a letter, and two fine pendant earrings.

Miss St. Yves, with tears, refused to accept of any part of the contents of the

packet; but her friend took the charge of them upon herself.

  As  soon  as  the  messenger  had  gone,  the  confidante  read  the  letter,  in

which a petit-souper (a little supper) was proposed to the two friends for that

night.  Miss  St.  Yves  protested  she  would  not  go,  whilst  her  pious  friend

endeavored to make her try on the diamond earrings; but Miss St. Yves could

not endure them, and opposed it all the day long; being entirely wrapped up

in  the  contemplation  of  her  lover's  imprisonment.  At  length,  after  a  long

resistance-after  sighs,  moans,  and  torrents  of  tears-driven  by  excitement

almost to the verge of insanity-weakened with the conflict, overwhelmed and

irresolute,  the  innocent  victim,  not  knowing  whether  she  was  going,  was

dragged by this artful woman to the fatal supper of the "good Christian and

protector of the good cause," M. de St. Pouange.

  The meeting.

  XVIII.

  MISS ST. YVES DELIVERS HER LOVER AND A JANSENIST.

  At day-break she fled to Paris with the minister's mandate. It would be

difficult to depict the agitation of her mind in this journey. Imagine a virtuous

and noble soul, humbled by its own reproaches, intoxicated with tenderness,distracted with the remorse of having betrayed her lover, and elated with the

pleasure of releasing the object of her adoration. Her torments and conflicts

by turns engaged her reflections. She was no longer that innocent girl whose

ideas  were  confined  to  a  provincial  education.  Love  and  misfortunes  had

united to remould her. Sentiment had made as rapid a progress in her mind,

as reason had in that of her lover.

  Her dress was dictated by the greatest simplicity. She viewed with horror

the trappings with which she had appeared before her fatal benefactor. Her

companion  had  taken  the  earrings  without  her  having  looked  at  them.

Anxious  and  confused,  idolizing  the  Huron  and  detesting  herself,  she  at

length arrived at the gate of that dreadful castle-the palace of vengeance-

where crimes and innocence are alike immured.

  When she was upon the point of getting out of the coach her strength

failed her. Some people came to her assistance. She entered, whilst her heart

was  in  the  greatest  palpitation,  her  eyes  streaming,  and  her  whole  frame

bespoke the greatest consternation. She was presented to the governor. He

was going to speak to her, but she had lost all power of expression: she

showed her order, whilst, with great difficulty, she articulated some accents.

The governor entertained a great esteem for his prisoner, and he was greatly

pleased at his being released. His heart was not callous, like those of most of

his brethren, who think of nothing but the fees their captives are to pay them;

extort their revenues from their victims; and living by the misery of others,

conceive a horrid joy at the lamentations of the unfortunate.

  He sent for the prisoner into his apartment. The two lovers swooned at the

sight of each other. The beautiful Miss St. Yves remained for a long time

motionless,  without  any  symptoms  of  life;  the  other  soon  recalled  his

fortitude.

  "This lady," said the governor, "is probably your wife. You did not tell me

you were married. I am informed that it is through her generous solicitude

that you have obtained your liberty."

  "Alas!" said the beautiful Miss St. Yves, in a faltering voice, "I am not

worthy of being his wife;" and swooned again.

  When she recovered her senses, she presented, with a trembling hand and

averted eyes, the grant and written promise of a company.  The Huron, equally astonished and affected, awoke from one dream to fall

into another.

  "Why was I shut up here? How could you deliver me? Where are the

monsters that immured me? You are a divinity sent from heaven to succor

me."

  The  beautiful  Miss  St.  Yves,  with  a  dejected  air,  looked  at  her  lover,

blushed, and instantly turned away her streaming eyes. In a word, they told

him all she knew, and all she had undergone, except what she was willing to

conceal forever, but which any other than the Huron, more accustomed to the

world and better acquainted with the customs of courts, would easily have

guessed.

  "Is it possible," said he, "that a wretch like the bailiff can have deprived

me of my liberty?

  "Alas! I find that men, like the vilest of animals, can all injure.

  "But is it possible that a monk, a Jesuit, the king's confessor, should have

contributed to my misfortunes as much as the bailiff, without my being able

to imagine under what pretence this detestable knave has persecuted me? Did

he make me pass for a Jansenist? In fine, how came you to remember me? I

did not deserve it; I was then only a savage.

  "What! could you, without advice, without assistance, undertake a journey

to Versailles?

  "You there appeared, and my fetters were broken!

  "There must then be in beauty and virtue an invincible charm, that opens

gates of adamant and softens hearts of steel."

  At the word virtue, a flood of tears issued from the eyes of the beautiful

Miss St. Yves. She did not know how far she had been virtuous in the crime

with which she reproached herself.

  Her lover thus continued:

  "Thou  angel,  who  hast  broken  my  chains,  if  thou  hast  had  sufficient

influence (which I cannot yet comprehend) to obtain justice for me, obtain it

likewise for an old man who first taught me to think, as thou didst to love.

Misfortunes have united us; I love him as a father; I can neither live withoutthee nor him."

  "I solicit?"

  "The same man."

  "Who!"

  "Yes, I will be beholden to you for everything, and I will owe nothing to

any  one  but  yourself.  Write  to  this  man  in  power.  Overwhelm  me  with

kindness-complete what you have begun-perfect your miracle."

  She was sensible she ought to do everything her lover desired. She wanted

to write, but her hand refused its office. She began her letter three times, and

tore it as often. At length she got to the end, and the two lovers left the

prison, after having embraced the old martyr to efficacious grace.

  The happy yet disconsolate Miss St. Yves knew where her brother lodged:

thither she repaired; and her lover took an apartment at the same house.

  They had scarce reached their lodging, before her protector sent the order

for releasing the good old Gordon, at the same time making an appointment

with her for the next day.

  She gave the order of release to her lover, and refused the appointment of

a benefactor whom she could no more see without expiring with shame and

grief.

  Her lover would not have left her upon any other errand than to release his

friend.  He  flew  to  the  place  of  his  confinement  and  fulfilled  this  duty,

reflecting,  meanwhile,  upon  the  strange  vicissitudes  of  this  world,  and

admiring the courageous virtue of a young lady, to whom two unfortunate

men owed more than life.


  XIX.

  THE  HURON,  THE  BEAUTIFUL  MISS  ST.  YVES,  AND  THEIR

RELATIONS, ARE CONVENED.

  The generous and respectable, but injured girl, was with her brother the

Abbé de St. Yves, the good Prior of the Mountain, and Lady de Kerkabon.

They were equally astonished, but their situations and sentiments were very

different. The Abbé de St. Yves was expiating the wrongs he had done hissister at her feet, and she pardoned him. The prior and his sympathizing sister

likewise wept, but it was for joy. The filthy bailiff and his insupportable son

did not trouble this affecting scene. They had set out upon the first report that

their antagonist had been released. They flew to bury in their own province

their folly and fear.

  The four dramatis personæ, variously agitated, were waiting for the return

of the young man who had gone to deliver his friend. The Abbé de St. Yves

did not dare to raise his eyes to meet those of his sister. The good Kerkabon

said:

  "I shall then see once more my dear nephew."

  "You will see him again," said the charming Miss St. Yves, "but he is no

longer the same man. His behavior, his manners, his ideas, his sense, have all

undergone a complete mutation. He has become as respectable, as he was

before  ignorant  and  strange  to  everything.  He  will  be  the  honor  and

consolation of your family; would to heaven that I might also be the honor of

mine!"

  "What, are you not the same as you were?" said the prior. "What then has

happened to work so great a change?"

  During  this  conversation  the  Huron  returned  in  company  with  the

Jansenist.  The  scene  was  now  changed,  and  became  more  interesting.  It

began by the uncle and aunt's tender embraces. The Abbé de St. Yves almost

kissed the knees of the ingenuous Huron, who, by the by, was no longer

ingenuous. The language of the eyes formed all the discourse of the two

lovers, who, nevertheless, expressed every sentiment with which they were

penetrated. Satisfaction and acknowledgment sparkled in the countenance of

the one, whilst embarrassment was depicted in Miss St. Yves's melting but

half averted eyes. Every one was astonished that she should mingle grief with

so much joy.

  The venerable Gordon soon endeared himself to the whole family. He had

been unhappy with the young prisoner, and this was a sufficient title to their

esteem. He owed his deliverance to the two lovers, and this alone reconciled

him to love. The acrimony of his former sentiments was dismissed from his

heart-he was converted by gratitude, as well as the Huron. Every one related

his  adventures  before  supper.  The  two  Abbés  and  the  aunt  listened  likechildren to the relation of stories of ghosts, and both were deeply interested.

  "Alas!" said Gordon, "there are perhaps upwards of five hundred virtuous

people in the same fetters as Miss St. Yves has broken. Their misfortunes are

unheeded.  Many  hands  are  found  to  strike  the  unhappy  multitude,-how

seldom one to succor them."

  This very just reflection increased his sensibility and gratitude. Everything

heightened the triumph of the beautiful Miss St. Yves. The grandeur and

intrepidity  of  her  soul  were  the  subject  of  each  one's  admiration.  This

admiration was blended with that respect which we feel in spite of ourselves

for a person who we think has some influence at court. But the Abbé de St.

Yves enquired:

  "What could my sister do to obtain this influence so soon?"

  Supper being ready, every one was already seated, when, lo! the worthy

confidante of Versailles arrived, without being acquainted with anything that

had passed. She was in a coach and six, and it was easily seen to whom the

equipage belonged. She entered with that air of authority assumed by people

in power who have a great deal of business-saluted the company with much

indifference, and, pulling the beautiful Miss St. Yves on one side, said:

  "Why  do  you  make  people  wait  so  long?  Follow  me.  There  are  the

diamonds you forgot."

  However  softly  she  uttered  these  expressions,  the  Huron,  nevertheless,

overheard  them.  He  saw  the  diamonds.  The  brother  was  speechless.  The

uncle and aunt exhibited the surprise of good people, who had never before

beheld such magnificence. The young man, whose mind was now formed by

an  experience  of  twelve  months,  could  not  help  making  some  reflections

against his will, and was for a moment in anxiety. His mistress perceived it,

and a mortal paleness spread itself over her countenance; a tremor seized her,

and it was with difficulty she could support herself.

  "Ah! madam," said she to her fatal friend, "you have ruined me-you have

given me the mortal blow."

  These words pierced the heart of the Huron: but he had already learned to

possess  himself.  He  did  not  dwell  upon  them,  lest  he  should  make  his

mistress uneasy before her brother, but turned pale as well as she.  Miss  St.  Yves,  distracted  with  the  change  she  perceived  in  her  lover's

countenance, pulled the woman out of the room into the passage, and there

threw the jewels at her feet, saying:

  "Alas! these were not my seducers, as you well know: but he that gave

them shall never set eyes on me again."

  Her friend took them up, whilst Miss St. Yves added:

  "He may either take them again, or give them to you. Begone, and do not

make me still more odious to myself."

  The ambassadress at length departed, not being able to comprehend the

remorse to which she had been witness.

  The beautiful Miss St. Yves, greatly oppressed and feeling a revolution in

her body that almost suffocated her, was compelled to go to bed; but that she

might not alarm any one she kept her pains and sufferings to herself: and

under pretence of only being weary, she asked leave to take a little rest. This,

however,  she  did  not  do  till  she  had  reanimated  the  company  with

consolatory and flattering expressions, and cast such a kind look upon her

lover as darted fire into his soul.

  The supper, of which she did not partake, was in the beginning gloomy;

but this gloominess was of that interesting kind which inspires reflection and

useful  conversation,  so  superior  to  that  frivolous  excitement  commonly

exhibited, and which is usually nothing more than a troublesome noise.

  Gordon, in a few words, gave the history of Jansenism and Molinism; of

those  persecutions  with  which  one  party  hampered  the  other;  and  of  the

obstinacy of both. The Huron entered into a criticism thereupon, pitying those

men who, not satisfied with all the confusion occasioned by these opposite

interests, create evils by imaginary interests and unintelligible absurdities.

Gordon  related-the  other  judged.  The  guests  listened  with  emotion,  and

gained new lights. The duration of misfortunes, and the shortness of life, then

became the topics. It was remarked that all professions have peculiar vices

and dangers annexed to them; and that from the prince down to the lowest

beggar, all seemed alike to accuse providence. How happens it that so many

men,  for  so  little,  perform  the  office  of  persecutors,  sergeants,  and

executioners,  to  others?  With  what  inhuman  indifference  does  a  man  inauthority sign papers for the destruction of a family; and with what joy, still

more barbarous, do mercenaries execute them.

  "I saw in my youth," said the good old Gordon, "a relation of the Marshal

de Marillic, who, being prosecuted in his own province on account of that

illustrious but unfortunate man, concealed himself under a borrowed name in

Paris.  He  was  an  old  man  near  seventy-two  years  of  age.  His  wife,  who

accompanied him, was nearly of the same age. They had a libertine son, who

at fourteen years of age absconded from his father's house, turned soldier, and

deserted. He had gone through every gradation of debauchery and misery; at

length, having changed his name, he was in the guards of Cardinal Richelieu,

(for  this  priest,  as  well  as  Mazarine,  had  guards)  and  had  obtained  an

exempt's staff in their company of sergeants.

  "This adventurer was appointed to arrest the old man and his wife, and

acquitted himself with all the obduracy of a man who was willing to please

his master. As he was conducting them, he heard these two victims deplore

the long succession of miseries which had befallen them from their cradle.

This aged couple reckoned as one of their greatest misfortunes the wildness

and loss of their son. He recollected them, but he nevertheless led them to

prison; assuring them, that his Reverence was to be served in preference to

every body else. His Eminence rewarded his zeal.

  "I have seen a spy of Father de la Chaise betray his own brother, in hopes

of  a  little  benefice,  which  he  did  not  obtain;  and  I  saw  him  die,  not  of

remorse, but of grief at having been cheated by the Jesuit.

  "The vocation of a confessor, which I for a long while exercised, made me

acquainted with the secrets of families. I have known very few, who, though

immersed in the greatest distress, did not externally wear the mask of felicity

and every appearance of joy; and I have always observed that great grief was

the fruit of our unconstrained desires."

  "For my part," said the Huron, "I imagine, that a noble, grateful, sensible

man, may always be happy; and I hope to enjoy an uncheckered felicity with

the charming, generous Miss St. Yves. For I flatter myself," added he, in

addressing himself to her brother with a friendly smile, "that you will not

now refuse me as you did last year: besides, I shall pursue a more decent

method."  The Abbé was confounded in apologies for the past, and in protesting an

eternal attachment.

  Uncle Kerkabon said this would be the most glorious day of his whole life.

His good aunt Kerkabon, in ecstasies of joy, cried out:

  "I  always  said  you  would  never  be  a  sub-deacon.  This  sacrament  is

preferable to the other; would to God I had been honored with it! but I will

serve you for a mother."

  And now all vied with each other in applauding the gentle Miss St. Yves.

  Her lover's heart was too full of what she had done for him, and he loved

her too much, for the affair of the jewels to make any permanent impression

on him. But those words, which he too well heard, "you have given me the

mortal blow", still secretly terrified him, and interrupted all his joy; whilst the

eulogiums  paid  his  beautiful  mistress  still  increased  his  love.  In  a  word,

nothing was thought of but her,-nothing was mentioned but the happiness

those two lovers deserved. A plan was agitated to live altogether at Paris, and

schemes  of  grandeur  and  fortune  were  formed.  These  hopes,  which  the

smallest ray of happiness engenders, were predominant. But the Huron felt,

in the secret recesses of his heart, a sentiment that exploded the illusion. He

read over the promises signed by St. Pouange, and the commission signed

Louvois. These men were painted to him such as they were, or such as they

were thought to be. Every one spoke of the ministers and administration with

the freedom of convivial conversation, which is considered in France as the

most precious liberty to be obtained on earth.

  "If I were king of France," said the Huron, "this is the kind of minister that

I would choose for the war department. I would have a man of the highest

birth, as he is to give orders to the nobility. I would require that he should

himself have been an officer, and have passed through the various gradations;

or, at least, that he had attained the rank of Lieutenant General, and was

worthy of being a Marshal of France. For, to be acquainted with the details of

the service, is it not necessary that he himself should have served? and will

not officers obey, with a hundred times more alacrity, a military man, who

like themselves has been signalized by his courage, rather than a mere man of

the cabinet, who, whatever natural ability he may possess, can, at most, only

guess at the operations of a campaign? I should not be displeased at myminister's generosity, even though it might sometimes embarrass a little the

keeper of the royal treasure. I should desire him to have a facility in business,

and that he should distinguish himself by that kind of gaiety of mind, which

is the lot of men superior to business, which is so agreeable to the nation, and

which renders the performance of every duty less irksome."

  This  is  the  character  he  would  have  chosen  for  a  minister,  as  he  had

constantly observed that such an amiable disposition is incompatible with

cruelty.

  Monsieur de Louvois would not, perhaps, have been satisfied with the

Huron's wishes. His merit lay in a different walk. But whilst they were still at

table, the disorder of the unhappy Miss St. Yves took a fatal turn. Her blood

was on fire,-the symptoms of a malignant fever had appeared. She suffered,

but did not complain, being unwilling to disturb the pleasure of the guests.

  Her brother, thinking that she was not asleep, went to the foot of her bed.

He was astonished at the condition he found her in. Every body flew to her.

Her lover appeared next to her brother. He was certainly the most alarmed,

and the most affected of any one; but he had learned to unite discretion to all

the happy gifts nature had bestowed upon him, and a quick sensibility of

decorum began to prevail over him.

  A neighboring physician was immediately sent for. He was one of those

itinerant doctors who confound the last disorder they were consulted upon

with the present;-who follow a blind practice in a science from which the

most  mature  investigations  and  careful  observations  do  not  preclude

uncertainty and danger. He greatly increased the disorder by prescribing a

fashionable nostrum. Can fashion extend to medicine? This frenzy was then

too prevalent in Paris.

  The grief of Miss St. Yves contributed still more than her physician to

render her disorder fatal. Her body suffered martyrdom in the torments of her

mind. The crowd of thoughts which agitated her breast, communicated to her

veins a more dangerous poison than that of the most burning fever.


  XX.

  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  BEAUTIFUL  MISS  ST.  YVES,  AND  ITSCONSEQUENCES.

  Another  physician  was  called  in.  But,  instead  of  assisting  nature  and

leaving it to act in a young person whose organs recalled the vital stream, he

applied himself solely to counteract the effects of his brother's prescription.

The disorder, in two days, became mortal. The brain, which is thought to be

the seat of the mind, was as violently affected as the heart, which, we are

told, is the seat of the passions. By what incomprehensible mechanism are

our organs held in subjection to sentiment and thought? How is it that a

single melancholy idea shall disturb the whole course of the blood; and that

the  blood  should  in  turn  communicate  irregularities  to  the  human

understanding? What is that unknown fluid which certainly exists and which,

quicker and more active than light, flies in less than the twinkling of an eye

into all the channels of life,-produces sensations, memory, joy or grief, reason

or frenzy,-recalls with horror what we would choose to forget; and renders a

thinking  animal,  either  a  subject  of  admiration,  or  an  object  of  pity  and

compassion?

  These were the reflections of the good old Gordon; and these observations,

so natural, which men seldom make, did not prevent his feeling upon this

occasion; for he was not of the number of those gloomy philosophers who

pique themselves upon being insensible.

  He was affected at the fate of this young woman, like a father who sees his

dear child yielding to a slow death. The Abbé de St. Yves was desperate; the

prior and his sister shed floods of tears; but who could describe the situation

of her lover? All expression falls far short of the intensity of his affliction.

  His aunt, almost lifeless, supported the head of the departing fair in her

feeble arms; her brother was upon his knees at the foot of the bed; her lover

squeezed her hand, which he bathed in tears; his groans rent the air, whilst he

called her his guardian angel, his life, his hope, his better half, his mistress,

his wife. At the word wife, a sigh escaped her, whilst she looked upon him

with  inexpressible  tenderness,  and  then  abruptly  gave  a  horrid  scream.

Presently in one of those intervals when grief, the oppression of the senses,

and pain subside and leave the soul its liberty and powers, she cried out:

  "I your wife? Ah! dear lover, this name, this happiness, this felicity, were

not destined for me! I die, and I deserve it. O idol of my heart! O you, whomI sacrificed to infernal demons-it is done-I am punished-live and be happy!"

  These tender but dreadful expressions were incomprehensible; yet they

melted and terrified every heart. She had the courage to explain herself, and

her auditors quaked with astonishment, grief, and pity. They with one voice

detested the man in power, who repaired a shocking act of injustice only by

his  crimes,  and  who  had  forced  the  most  amiable  innocence  to  be  his

accomplice.

  "Who? you guilty?" said her lover, "no, you are not. Guilt can only be in

the heart;-yours is devoted solely to virtue and to me."

  This opinion he corroborated by such expressions as seemed to recall the

beautiful Miss St. Yves back to life. She felt some consolation from them and

was  astonished  at  being  still  beloved.  The  aged  Gordon  would  have

condemned  her  at  the  time  he  was  only  a  Jansenist;  but  having  attained

wisdom, he esteemed her, and wept.

  In the midst of these lamentations and fears, whilst the dangerous situation

of  this  worthy  girl  engrossed  every  breast,  and  all  were  in  the  greatest

consternation, a courier arrived from court.

  "A courier? from whom, and upon what account?"

  He was sent by the king's confessor to the Prior of the Mountain. It was

not  Father  de  la  Chaise  who  wrote,  but  brother  Vadbled,  his  valet  de

chambre,  a  man  of  great  consequence  at  that  time,  who  acquainted  the

archbishops  with  the  reverend  Father's  pleasure,  who  gave  audiences,

promised benefices, and sometimes issued lettres de cachet.

  He  wrote  to  the  Abbé  of  the  Mountain,  "that  his  reverence  had  been

informed of his nephew's exploits: that his being sent to prison was through

mistake; that such little accidents frequently happened, and should therefore

not be attended to; and, in fine, it behoved him, the prior, to come and present

his  nephew  the  next  day:  that  he  was  to  bring  with  him  that  good  man

Gordon; and that he, brother Vadbled, should introduce them to his reverence

and M. de Louvois, who would say a word to them in his anti-chamber."

  To which he added, "that the history of the Huron, and his combat against

the English, had been related to the king; that doubtless the king would deign

to take notice of him in passing through the gallery, and perhaps he mighteven nod his head to him."

  The letter concluded by flattering him with hopes that all the ladies of the

court would show their eagerness to recognize his nephew; and that several

among them would say to him, "Good day, Mr. Huron;" and that he would

certainly be talked of at the king's supper.

  The letter was signed, "Your affectionate brother Jesuit, Vadbled."

  The prior having read the letter aloud, his furious nephew for an instant

suppressed his rage, and said nothing to the bearer: but turning toward the

companion  of  his  misfortunes,  asked  him,  what  he  thought  of  that

communication? Gordon replied:

  "This, then, is the way that men are treated! They are first beaten and then,

like monkeys, they dance."

  The Huron resuming his character, which always returned in the great

emotions of his soul, tore the letter to bits, and threw them in the courier's

face:

  "There is my answer," said he.

  Death of Miss St. Ives.-"When the fatal moment came, all around her most

feelingly expressed their grief by incessant tears and lamentations. The Huron

was senseless. Great souls feel more violent sensations than those of less

tender dispositions."


  His  uncle  was  in  terror,  and  fancied  he  saw  thunderbolts,  and  twenty

lettres de cachet at once fall upon him. He immediately wrote the best excuse

he could for these transports of passion in a young man, which he considered

as the ebullition of a great soul.

  But a solicitude of a more melancholy stamp now seized every heart. The

beautiful  and  unfortunate  Miss  St.  Yves  was  already  sensible  of  her

approaching end; she was serene, but it was that kind of shocking serenity,

the result of exhausted nature being no longer able to withstand the conflict.

  "Oh, my dear lover!" said she, in a faltering voice, "death punishes me for

my weakness; but I expire with the consolation of knowing you are free. I

adored you whilst I betrayed you, and I adore you in bidding you an eternaladieu."

  She did not make a parade of a ridiculous fortitude; she did not understand

that miserable glory of having some of her neighbors say, "she died with

courage." Who, at twenty, can be at once torn from her lover, from life, and

what is called honor, without regret, without some pangs? She felt all the

horror of her situation, and made it felt by those expiring looks and accents

which speak with so much energy. In a word, she shed tears like other people

at those intervals that she was capable of giving vent to them.

  Let others strive to celebrate the pompous deaths of those who insensibly

rush into destruction. This is the lot of all animals. We die like them only

when age or disorders make us resemble them by the paralysis of our organs.

Whoever suffers a great loss must feel great regrets. If they are stifled, it is

nothing but vanity that is pursued, even in the arms of death.

  When the fatal moment came, all around her most feelingly expressed

their  grief  by  incessant  tears  and  lamentations.  The  Huron  was  senseless.

Great souls feel more violent sensations than those of less tender dispositions.

The good old Gordon knew enough of his companion to dread that when he

came to himself he would be guilty of suicide. All kinds of arms were put out

of  his  way,  which  the  unfortunate  young  man  perceived.  He  said  to  his

relations and Gordon, without shedding any tears, without a groan, or the

least emotion:

  "Do you then think that any one upon earth hath the right and power to

prevent my putting an end to my life?"

  Gordon  took  care  to  avoid  making  a  parade  of  those  commonplace

declamations and arguments which are relied on to prove that we are not

allowed to exercise our liberty in ceasing to be when we are in a wretched

situation; that we should not leave the house when we can no longer remain

in it; that a man is like a soldier at his post; as if it signified to the Being of

beings whether the conjunction of the particles of matter were in one spot or

another. Impotent reasons, to which a firm and concentrated despair disdains

to listen, and to which Cato replied only with the use of a poniard.

  The Huron's sullen and dreadful silence, his doleful aspect, his trembling

lips, and the shivering of his whole frame, communicated to every spectator's

soul  that  mixture  of  compassion  and  terror,  which  fetters  all  our  powers,precludes discourse, or compels us to speak only in faltering accents. The

hostess and her family were excited. They trembled to behold the state of his

desperation, yet all kept their eyes upon him, and attended to all his motions.

The ice-cold corpse of the beautiful Miss St. Yves had already been carried

into a lower hall out of the sight of her lover, who seemed still in search of it,

though incapable of observing any object.

  In the midst of this spectacle of death, whilst the dead body was exposed

at the door of the house; whilst two priests by the side of the holy water-pot

were repeating prayers with an air of distraction; whilst some passengers,

through idleness, sprinkled the bier with some drops of holy water, and others

went their ways quite indifferent; whilst her relations were drowned in tears,

and every one thought the lover would not survive his loss;-in this situation

St. Pouange arrived with his female Versailles friend.

  He alighted from his coach; and the first object that presented itself was a

bier: he turned away his eyes with that simple distaste of a man bred up in

pleasures, and who thinks he should avoid a spectacle which might recall him

to the contemplation of human misery. He is inclined to go up stairs, whilst

his female friend enquires through curiosity whose funeral it is. The name of

Miss St. Yves is pronounced. At this name she turned, and gave a piercing

shriek. St. Pouange now returns, whilst surprise and grief possess his soul.

The good old Gordon stood with streaming eyes. He for a moment ceased his

lamentations,  to  acquaint  the  courtier  with  all  the  circumstances  of  this

melancholy catastrophe. He spoke with that authority which is the companion

to sorrow and virtue. St. Pouange was not naturally wicked. The torrent of

business  and  amusements  had  hurried  away  his  soul,  which  was  not  yet

acquainted with itself. He did not border upon that grey age which usually

hardens the hearts of ministers. He listened to Gordon with a downcast look,

and some tears escaped him, which he was surprised to shed. In a word, he

repented.

  "I  will,"  said  he,  "absolutely  see  this  extraordinary  man  you  have

mentioned to me. He affects me almost as much as this innocent victim,

whose death I have occasioned."

  Gordon followed him as far as the chamber in which the Prior Kerkabon,

the Abbé St. Yves, and some neighbors, were striving to recall to life theyoung man, who had again fainted.

  "I have been the cause of your misfortunes," said the deputy minister,

when the Huron had regained consciousness, "and my whole life shall be

employed in making reparation for my error."

  The  first  idea  that  struck  the  Huron  was  to  kill  him  and  then  destroy

himself. But he was without arms, and closely watched. St. Pouange was not

repulsed with refusals accompanied with reproach, contempt, and the insults

he deserved, which were lavished upon him. Time softens everything. Mons.

de Louvois at length succeeded in making an excellent officer of the Huron,

who has appeared under another name at Paris and in the army, respected by

all honest men, being at once a warrior and an intrepid philosopher.

  He never mentioned this adventure without being greatly affected, and yet

his greatest consolation was to speak of it. He cherished the memory of his

beloved Miss St. Yves to the last moment of his life.[1]

  The Abbé St. Yves and the Prior were each provided with good livings.

The good Kerkabon rather chose to see his nephew invested with military

honors than in the sub-deaconry. The devotee of Versailles kept the diamond

earrings, and received besides a handsome present. Father Tout-à-tous had

presents of chocolate, coffee, and confectionery, with the Meditations of the

Reverend Father Croiset, and the Flower of the Saints, bound in Morocco.

Good old Gordon lived with the Huron till his death, in the most friendly

intimacy: he had also a benefice, and forgot, forever, essential grace, and the

concomitant  concourse.  He  took  for  his  motto,  "Misfortunes  are  of  some

use." How many worthy people are there in the world who may justly say,

"Misfortunes are good for nothing?"

  [1] In the Play, Civilization, the Huron musingly soliloquizes:

  "And what is love to man? An only gift

  Too precious to be idly thrown away!

  For is it not as precious as our land,

  Which, heeding not another's golden sky-

  Soft airs, sweet flowers, hill and dale conjoin'd

  By nature's cunning past comparison-  Is still our land; and, as our land, surpasses

  Far such fairy worlds?


  "There are some dreams that last a life-mine

  Is one of these. I shall dream on till death

  Shall end the vision!


  "It is not hard to die! And life is but

  A shadow on the wall-a falling leaf

  Toy'd with by autumn winds-a flower-a star

  Among the infinite, infinitesimal!

  We are but breath whispering against the wind,-

  Sand in the desert!-dew upon the sea!"-E.


  MICROMEGAS:

  A  SATIRE  ON  THE  PHILOSOPHY,  IGNORANCE.  AND  SELF-

CONCEIT OF MANKIND.

  A medieval exploring vessel. [1]

  I.

  A VOYAGE TO THE PLANET SATURN, BY A NATIVE OF SIRIUS.

  In one of the planets that revolve round the star known by the name of

Sirius, was a certain young gentleman of promising parts, whom I had the

honor to be acquainted with in his last voyage to this our little ant-hill. His

name was Micromegas, an appellation admirably suited to all great men, and

his stature amounted to eight leagues in height, that is, twenty-four thousand

geometrical paces of five feet each.

  Some of your mathematicians, a set of people always useful to the public,

will, perhaps, instantly seize the pen, and calculate that Mr. Micromegas,

inhabitant of the country of Sirius, being from head to foot four and twenty

thousand paces in length, making one hundred and twenty thousand royalfeet, that we, denizens of this earth, being at a medium little more than five

feet high, and our globe nine thousand leagues in circumference: these things

being premised, they will then conclude that the periphery of the globe which

produced him must be exactly one and twenty millions six hundred thousand

times greater than that of this our tiny ball. Nothing in nature is more simple

and common. The dominions of some sovereigns of Germany or Italy, which

may  be  compassed  in  half  an  hour,  when  compared  with  the  empires  of

Ottoman, Russia, or China, are no other than faint instances of the prodigious

difference that nature hath made in the scale of beings. The stature of his

excellency being of these extraordinary dimensions, all our artists will agree

that the measure around his body might amount to fifty thousand royal feet-a

very agreeable and just proportion.

  His  nose  being  equal  in  length  to  one-third  of  his  face,  and  his  jolly

countenance engrossing one-seventh part of his height, it must be owned that

the nose of this same Sirian was six thousand three hundred and thirty-three

royal  feet  to  a  hair,  which  was  to  be  demonstrated.  With  regard  to  his

understanding, it is one of the best cultivated I have known. He is perfectly

well acquainted with abundance of things, some of which are of his own

invention; for, when his age did not exceed two hundred and fifty years, he

studied,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  country,  at  the  most  celebrated

university of the whole planet, and by the force of his genius discovered

upwards of fifty propositions of Euclid, having the advantage by more than

eighteen  of  Blaise  Pascal,  who,  (as  we  are  told  by  his  own  sister,)

demonstrated two and thirty for his amusement and then left off, choosing

rather to be an indifferent philosopher than a great mathematician.

  About the four hundred and fiftieth year of his age, or latter end of his

childhood, he dissected a great number of small insects not more than one

hundred feet in diameter, which are not perceivable by ordinary microscopes,

of which he composed a very curious treatise, which involved him in some

trouble. The mufti of the nation, though very old and very ignorant, made

shift to discover in his book certain lemmas that were suspicious, unseemly,

rash, heretic, and unsound, and prosecuted him with great animosity, for the

subject of the author's inquiry was whether, in the world of Sirius, there was

any difference between the substantial forms of a flea and a snail.

  Micromegas  defended  his  philosophy  with  such  spirit  as  made  all  thefemale sex his proselytes; and the process lasted two hundred and twenty

years; at the end of which time, in consequence of the mufti's interest, the

book  was  condemned  by  judges  who  had  never  read  it,  and  the  author

expelled from court for the term of eight hundred years.

  Not  much  affected  at  his  banishment  from  a  court  that  teemed  with

nothing but turmoils and trifles, he made a very humorous song upon the

mufti,  who  gave  himself  no  trouble  about  the  matter,  and  set  out  on  his

travels from planet to planet, in order (as the saying is) to improve his mind

and  finish  his  education.  Those  who  never  travel  but  in  a  post-chaise  or

berlin, will, doubtless, be astonished at the equipages used above; for we that

strut upon this little mole hill are at a loss to conceive anything that surpasses

our own customs. But our traveler was a wonderful adept in the laws of

gravitation, together with the whole force of attraction and repulsion, and

made such seasonable use of his knowledge, that sometimes by the help of a

sunbeam, and sometimes by the convenience of a comet, he and his retinue

glided from sphere to sphere, as the bird hops from one bough to another. He

in a very little time posted through the milky way, and I am obliged to own

he saw not a twinkle of those stars supposed to adorn that fair empyrean,

which  the  illustrious  Dr.  Derham  brags  to  have  observed  through  his

telescope. Not that I pretend to say the doctor was mistaken. God forbid! But

Micromegas was upon the spot, an exceeding good observer, and I have no

mind to contradict any man. Be that as it may, after many windings and

turnings, he arrived at the planet Saturn; and, accustomed as he was to the

sight  of  novelties,  he  could  not  for  his  life  repress  a  supercilious  and

conceited  smile,  which  often  escapes  the  wisest  philosopher,  when  he

perceived  the  smallness  of  that  globe,  and  the  diminutive  size  of  its

inhabitants; for really Saturn is but about nine hundred times larger than this

our  earth,  and  the  people  of  that  country  mere  dwarfs,  about  a  thousand

fathoms  high.  In  short,  he  at  first  derided  those  poor  pigmies,  just  as  an

Indian fiddler laughs at the music of Lully, at his first arrival in Paris: but as

this Sirian was a person of good sense, he soon perceived that a thinking

being  may  not  be  altogether  ridiculous,  even  though  he  is  not  quite  six

thousand feet high; and therefore he became familiar with them, after they

had  ceased  to  wonder  at  his  extraordinary  appearance.  In  particular,  he

contracted  an  intimate  friendship  with  the  secretary  of  the  Academy  ofSaturn, a man of good understanding, who, though in truth he had invented

nothing of his own, gave a very good account of the inventions of others, and

enjoyed in peace the reputation of a little poet and great calculator. And here,

for the edification of the reader, I will repeat a very singular conversation that

one day passed between Mr. Secretary and Micromegas.

  [1] The Gazettes record that this vessel ran ashore on the coast of Bothnia,

when returning from the polar circle with a party of philosophers on board

who had been making observations, for which nobody has hitherto been the

wiser; but, according to this romance, the vessel was illegally captured in the

Baltic sea by the Sirian giant Micromegas and the Saturnian dwarf.-E.


  II.

  THE  CONVERSATION  BETWEEN  MICROMEGAS  AND  THE

INHABITANT OF SATURN.

  His excellency having laid himself down, and the secretary approached his

nose:

  "It must be confessed," said Micromegas, "that nature is full of variety."

  "Yes," replied the Saturnian, "nature is like a parterre, whose flowers-"

  "Pshaw!" cried the other, "a truce with your parterres."

  "It is," resumed the secretary, "like an assembly of fair and brown women,

whose dresses-"

  "What a plague have I to do with your brunettes?" said our traveler.

  "Then it is like a gallery of pictures, the strokes of which-"

  "Not at all," answered Micromegas, "I tell you once for all, nature is like

nature, and comparisons are odious."

  "Well, to please you," said the secretary-

  "I won't be pleased," replied the Sirian, "I want to be instructed; begin,

therefore, without further preamble, and tell me how many senses the people

of this world enjoy."

  "We  have  seventy  and  two,"  said  the  academician,  "but  we  are  daily

complaining of the small number, as our imagination transcends our wants,for, with the seventy-two senses, our five moons and ring, we find ourselves

very much restricted; and notwithstanding our curiosity, and the no small

number of those passions that result from these few senses, we have still time

enough to be tired of idleness."

  "I  sincerely  believe  what  you  say,"  cried  Micromegas  "for,  though  we

Sirians have near a thousand different senses, there still remains a certain

vague desire, an unaccountable inquietude incessantly admonishing us of our

own unimportance, and giving us to understand that there are other beings

who are much our superiors in point of perfection. I have traveled a little, and

seen mortals both above and below myself in the scale of being, but I have

met with none who had not more desire than necessity, and more want than

gratification. Perhaps I shall one day arrive in some country where nought is

wanting, but hitherto I have had no certain information of such a happy land."

  The Saturnian and his guest exhausted themselves in conjectures upon this

subject,  and  after  abundance  of  argumentation  equally  ingenious  and

uncertain, were fain to return to matter of fact.

  "To what age do you commonly live?" said the Sirian.

    "Lack-a-day! a mere trifle," replied the little gentleman.

  "It is the very same case with us," resumed the other, "the shortness of life

is our daily complaint, so that this must be an universal law in nature."

  "Alas!"  cried  the  Saturnian,  "few,  very  few  on  this  globe  outlive  five

hundred  great  revolutions  of  the  sun;  (these,  according  to  our  way  of

reckoning, amount to about fifteen thousand years.) So, you see, we in a

manner begin to die the very moment we are born: our existence is no more

than a point, our duration an instant, and our globe an atom. Scarce do we

begin  to  learn  a  little,  when  death  intervenes  before  we  can  profit  by

experience. For my own part, I am deterred from laying schemes when I

consider myself as a single drop in the midst of an immense ocean. I am

particularly ashamed, in your presence, of the ridiculous figure I make among

my fellow-creatures."

  To this declaration, Micromegas replied.

  "If you were not a philosopher, I should be afraid of mortifying your pride

by telling you that the term of our lives is seven hundred times longer thanthe date of your existence: but you are very sensible that when the texture of

the body is resolved, in order to reanimate nature in another form, which is

the consequence of what we call death-when that moment of change arrives,

there is not the least difference betwixt having lived a whole eternity, or a

single day. I have been in some countries where the people live a thousand

times longer than with us, and yet they murmured at the shortness of their

time. But one will find every where some few persons of good sense, who

know how to make the best of their portion, and thank the author of nature

for his bounty. There is a profusion of variety scattered through the universe,

and yet there is an admirable vein of uniformity that runs through the whole:

for example, all thinking beings are different among themselves, though at

bottom they resemble one another in the powers and passions of the soul.

Matter, though interminable, hath different properties in every sphere. How

many principal attributes do you reckon in the matter of this world?"

  "If you mean those properties," said the Saturnian, "without which we

believe this our globe could not subsist, we reckon in all three hundred, such

as extent, impenetrability, motion, gravitation, divisibility, et cætera."

  "That small number," replied the traveler, "probably answers the views of

the creator on this your narrow sphere. I adore his wisdom in all his works. I

see infinite variety, but every where proportion. Your globe is small: so are

the inhabitants. You have few sensations; because your matter is endued with

few properties. These are the works of unerring providence. Of what color

does your sun appear when accurately examined?"

  "Of a yellowish white," answered the Saturnian, "and in separating one of

his rays we find it contains seven colors."

  "Our sun," said the Sirian, "is of a reddish hue, and we have no less than

thirty-nine original colors. Among all the suns I have seen there is no sort of

resemblance, and in this sphere of yours there is not one face like another."

  After  divers  questions  of  this  nature,  he  asked  how  many  substances,

essentially different, they counted in the world of Saturn; and understood that

they numbered but thirty: such as God; space; matter; beings endowed with

sense  and  extension;  beings  that  have  extension,  sense,  and  reflection;

thinking beings who have no extension; those that are penetrable; those that

are  impenetrable,  and  also  all  others.  But  this  Saturnian  philosopher  wasprodigiously astonished when the Sirian told him they had no less than three

hundred,  and  that  he  himself  had  discovered  three  thousand  more  in  the

course of his travels. In short, after having communicated to each other what

they knew, and even what they did not know, and argued during a complete

revolution  of  the  sun,  they  resolved  to  set  out  together  on  a  small

philosophical tour.


  III.

  THE VOYAGE OF THESE INHABITANTS OF OTHER WORLDS.

  Our two philosophers were just ready to embark for the atmosphere of

Saturn,  with  a  large  provision  of  mathematical  instruments,  when  the

Saturnian's mistress, having got an inkling of their design, came all in tears to

make  her  protests.  She  was  a  handsome  brunette,  though  not  above  six

hundred  and  threescore  fathoms  high;  but  her  agreeable  attractions  made

amends for the smallness of her stature.

  "Ah! cruel man," cried she, "after a courtship of fifteen hundred years,

when at length I surrendered, and became your wife, and scarce have passed

two hundred more in thy embraces, to leave me thus, before the honeymoon

is over, and go a rambling with a giant of another world! Go, go, thou art a

mere virtuoso, devoid of tenderness and love! If thou wert a true Saturnian,

thou wouldst be faithful and invariable. Ah! whither art thou going? what is

thy design? Our five moons are not so inconstant, nor our ring so changeable

as thee! But take this along with thee, henceforth I ne'er shall love another

man."

  The  little  gentleman  embraced  and  wept  over  her,  notwithstanding  his

philosophy; and the lady, after having swooned with great decency, went to

console herself with more agreeable company.

  Meanwhile our two virtuosi set out, and at one jump leaped upon the ring,

which  they  found  pretty  flat,  according  to  the  ingenious  guess  of  an

illustrious inhabitant of this our little earth. From thence they easily slipped

from moon to moon; and a comet chancing to pass, they sprang upon it with

all their servants and apparatus. Thus carried about one hundred and fifty

million of leagues, they met with the satellites of Jupiter, and arrived upon

the  body  of  the  planet  itself,  where  they  continued  a  whole  year;  duringwhich they learned some very curious secrets, which would actually be sent

to the press, were it not for fear of the gentlemen inquisitors, who have found

among them some corollaries very hard of digestion. Nevertheless, I have

read the manuscript in the library of the illustrious archbishop of who, with

that generosity and goodness which should ever be commended, has granted

me permission to peruse his books; wherefore I promise he shall have a long

article  in  the  next  edition  of  Moreri,  and  I  shall  not  forget  the  young

gentlemen, his sons, who give us such pleasing hopes of seeing perpetuated

the race of their illustrious father. But to return to our travelers. When they

took leave of Jupiter, they traversed a space of about one hundred millions of

leagues, and coasting along the planet Mars, which is well known to be five

times smaller than our little earth, they descried two moons subservient to

that orb, which have escaped the observation of all our astronomers. I know

father Castel will write, and that pleasantly enough, against the existence of

these two moons; but I entirely refer myself to those who reason by analogy.

Those worthy philosophers are very sensible that Mars, which is at such a

distance from the sun, must be in a very uncomfortable situation, without the

benefit of a couple of moons. Be that as it may, our gentlemen found the

planet so small, that they were afraid they should not find room to take a little

repose; so that they pursued their journey like two travelers who despise the

paltry  accommodation  of  a  village,  and  push  forward  to  the  next  market

town. But the Sirian and his companion soon repented of their delicacy, for

they journeyed a long time without finding a resting place, till at length they

discerned a small speck, which was the Earth. Coming from Jupiter, they

could not but be moved with compassion at the sight of this miserable spot,

upon which, however, they resolved to land, lest they should be a second

time  disappointed.  They  accordingly  moved  toward  the  tail  of  the  comet,

where,  finding  an  Aurora  Borealis  ready  to  set  sail,  they  embarked,  and

arrived on the northern coast of the Baltic on the fifth day of July, new style,

in the year 1737.


  IV.

  WHAT BEFELL THEM UPON THIS OUR GLOBE.

  Having  taken  some  repose,  and  being  desirous  of  reconnoitering  the

narrow field in which they were, they traversed it at once from north to south.Every step of the Sirian and his attendants measured about thirty thousand

royal  feet:  whereas,  the  dwarf  of  Saturn,  whose  stature  did  not  exceed  a

thousand fathoms, followed at a distance quite out of breath; because, for

every single stride of his companion, he was obliged to make twelve good

steps at least. The reader may figure to himself, (if we are allowed to make

such comparisons,) a very little rough spaniel dodging after a captain of the

Prussian grenadiers.

  As those strangers walked at a good pace, they compassed the globe in six

and thirty hours; the sun, it is true, or rather the earth, describes the same

space in the course of one day; but it must be observed that it is much easier

to turn upon an axis than to walk a-foot. Behold them then returned to the

spot  from  whence  they  had  set  out,  after  having  discovered  that  almost

imperceptible sea, which is called the Mediterranean; and the other narrow

pond  that  surrounds  this  mole-hill,  under  the  denomination  of  the  great

ocean; in wading through which the dwarf had never wet his mid-leg, while

the  other  scarce  moistened  his  heel.  In  going  and  coming  through  both

hemispheres, they did all that lay in their power to discover whether or not

the globe was inhabited. They stooped, they lay down, they groped in every

corner, but their eyes and hands were not at all proportioned to the small

beings  that  crawl  upon  this  earth;  and,  therefore,  they  could  not  find  the

smallest reason to suspect that we and our fellow-citizens of this globe had

the honor to exist.

  The  dwarf,  who  sometimes  judged  too  hastily,  concluded  at  once  that

there was no living creatures upon earth; and his chief reason was, that he had

seen nobody. But Micromegas, in a polite manner, made him sensible of the

unjust conclusion:

  "For," said he, "with your diminutive eyes you cannot see certain stars of

the fiftieth magnitude, which I easily perceive; and do you take it for granted

that no such stars exist?"

  "But I have groped with great care?" replied the dwarf.

  "Then your sense of feeling must be bad," said the other.

  "But this globe," said the dwarf, "is ill contrived; and so irregular in its

form as to be quite ridiculous. The whole together looks like a chaos. Do but

observe these little rivulets; not one of them runs in a straight line; and theseponds which are neither round, square, nor oval, nor indeed of any regular

figure, together with these little sharp pebbles, (meaning the mountains,) that

roughen the whole surface of the globe, and have torn all the skin from my

feet. Besides, pray take notice of the shape of the whole, how it flattens at the

poles, and turns round the sun in an awkward oblique manner, so as that the

polar circles cannot possibly be cultivated. Truly, what makes me believe

there is no inhabitant on this sphere, is a full persuasion that no sensible being

would live in such a disagreeable place."

  "What then?" said Micromegas, "perhaps the beings that inhabit it come

not  under  that  denomination;  but,  to  all  appearance,  it  was  not  made  for

nothing. Everything here seems to you irregular; because you fetch all your

comparisons from Jupiter or Saturn. Perhaps this is the very reason of the

seeming  confusion  which  you  condemn;  have  I  not  told  you,  that  in  the

course of my travels I have always met with variety?"

  The  Saturnian  replied  to  all  these  arguments;  and  perhaps  the  dispute

would have known no end, if Micromegas, in the heat of the contest, had not

luckily broken the string of his diamond necklace, so that the jewels fell to

the ground; they consisted of pretty small unequal karats, the largest of which

weighed four hundred pounds, and the smallest fifty. The dwarf, in helping to

pick  them  up,  perceived,  as  they  approached  his  eye,  that  every  single

diamond was cut in such a manner as to answer the purpose of an excellent

microscope. He therefore took up a small one, about one hundred and sixty

feet in diameter, and applied it to his eye, while Micromegas chose another of

two thousand five hundred feet. Though they were of excellent powers, the

observers could perceive nothing by their assistance, so they were altered and

adjusted.  At  length,  the  inhabitant  of  Saturn  discerned  something  almost

imperceptible moving between two waves in the Baltic. This was no other

than a whale, which, in a dexterous manner, he caught with his little finger,

and, placing it on the nail of his thumb, showed it to the Syrian, who laughed

heartily  at  the  excessive  smallness  peculiar  to  the  inhabitants  of  this  our

globe. The Saturnian, by this time convinced that our world was inhabited,

began to imagine we had no other animals than whales; and being a mighty

debater, he forthwith set about investigating the origin and motion of this

small  atom,  curious  to  know  whether  or  not  it  was  furnished  with  ideas,

judgment, and free will. Micromegas was very much perplexed upon thissubject.  He  examined  the  animal  with  the  most  patient  attention,  and  the

result of his inquiry was, that he could see no reason to believe a soul was

lodged in such a body. The two travelers were actually inclined to think there

was no such thing as mind in this our habitation, when, by the help of their

microscope, they perceived something as large as a whale floating upon the

surface  of  the  sea.  It  is  well  known  that,  at  this  period,  a  flight  of

philosophers were upon their return from the polar circle, where they had

been making observations, for which nobody has hitherto been the wiser. The

gazettes record, that their vessel ran ashore on the coast of Bothnia and that

they with great difficulty saved their lives; but in this world one can never

dive to the bottom of things. For my own part, I will ingenuously recount the

transaction just as it happened, without any addition of my own; and this is

no small effort in a modern historian.


  V.

  THE TRAVELERS CAPTURE A VESSEL.

  Micromegas  stretched  out  his  hand  gently  toward  the  place  where  the

object appeared, and advanced two fingers, which he instantly pulled back,

for fear of being disappointed, then opening softly and shutting them all at

once, he very dexterously seized the ship that contained those gentlemen, and

placed it on his nail, avoiding too much pressure, which might have crushed

the whole in pieces.

  "This," said the Saturnian dwarf, "is a creature very different from the

former."

  Upon which the Sirian placing the supposed animal in the hollow of his

hand,  the  passengers  and  crew,  who  believed  themselves  thrown  by  a

hurricane upon some rock, began to put themselves in motion. The sailors

having hoisted out some casks of wine, jumped after them into the hand of

Micromegas: the mathematicians having secured their quadrants, sectors, and

Lapland servants, went overboard at a different place, and made such a bustle

in their descent, that the Sirian at length felt his fingers tickled by something

that seemed to move. An iron bar chanced to penetrate about a foot deep into

his forefinger; and from this prick he concluded that something had issued

from the little animal he held in his hand; but at first he suspected nothingmore: for the microscope, that scarce rendered a whale and a ship visible, had

no effect upon an object so imperceptible as man.

  I do not intend to shock the vanity of any person whatever; but here I am

obliged to beg your people of importance to consider that, supposing the

stature of a man to be about five feet, we mortals make just such a figure

upon the earth, as an animal the sixty thousandth part of a foot in height,

would exhibit upon a bowl ten feet in circumference. When you reflect upon

a being who could hold this whole earth in the palm of his hand, and is

provided  with  organs  proportioned  to  those  we  possess,  you  will  easily

conceive that there must be a great variety of created substances;-and pray,

what must such beings think of those battles by which a conqueror gains a

small village, to lose it again in the sequel?

  Micromegas captures a ship.

  I do not at all doubt, but if some captain of grenadiers should chance to

read  this  work,  he  would  add  two  large  feet  at  least  to  the  caps  of  his

company; but I assure him his labor will be in vain; for, do what he will, he

and  his  soldiers  will  never  be  other  than  infinitely  diminutive  and

inconsiderable.

  What  wonderful  address  must  have  been  inherent  in  our  Sirian

philosopher, that enabled him to perceive those atoms of which we have been

speaking. When Leuwenhoek and Hartsoecker observed the first rudiments of

which we are formed, they did not make such an astonishing discovery. What

pleasure, therefore, was the portion of Micromegas, in observing the motion

of those little machines, in examining all their pranks, and following them in

all  their  operations!  With  what  joy  did  he  put  his  microscope  into  his

companion's hand; and with what transport did they both at once exclaim:

  "I see them distinctly,-don't you see them carrying burdens, lying down

and rising up again?"

  So saying, their hands shook with eagerness to see, and apprehension to

lose such uncommon objects. The Saturnian, making a sudden transition from

the most cautious distrust to the most excessive credulity, imagined he saw

them engaged in their devotions and cried aloud in astonishment.

  Nevertheless,  he  was  deceived  by  appearances:  a  case  too  common,whether we do or do not make use of microscopes.


  VI.

  WHAT HAPPENED IN THEIR INTERCOURSE WITH MEN.

  Micromegas  being  a  much  better  observer  than  the  dwarf,  perceived

distinctly that those atoms spoke; and made the remark to his companion,

who was so much ashamed of being mistaken in his first suggestion, that he

would  not  believe  such  a  puny  species  could  possibly  communicate  their

ideas: for, though he had the gift of tongues, as well as his companion, he

could not hear those particles speak; and therefore supposed they had no

language.

  "Besides,  how  should  such  imperceptible  beings  have  the  organs  of

speech? and what in the name of Jove can they say to one another? In order

to speak, they must have something like thought, and if they think, they must

surely have something equivalent to a soul. Now, to attribute anything like a

soul to such an insect species appears a mere absurdity."

  "But just now," replied the Sirian, "you believed they were engaged in

devotional exercises; and do you think this could be done without thinking,

without  using  some  sort  of  language,  or  at  least  some  way  of  making

themselves understood? Or do you suppose it is more difficult to advance an

argument than to engage in physical exercise? For my own part, I look upon

all faculties as alike mysterious."

  "I will no longer venture to believe or deny," answered the dwarf. "In

short I have no opinion at all, let us endeavor to examine these insects, and

we will reason upon them afterward."

  "With all my heart," said Micromegas, who, taking out a pair of scissors

which he kept for paring his nails, cut off a paring from his thumb nail, of

which he immediately formed a large kind of speaking trumpet, like a vast

tunnel, and clapped the pipe to his ear: as the circumference of this machine

included the ship and all the crew, the most feeble voice was conveyed along

the circular fibres of the nail; so that, thanks to his industry, the philosopher

could distinctly hear the buzzing of our insects that were below. In a few

hours he distinguished articulate sounds, and at last plainly understood theFrench language. The dwarf heard the same, though with more difficulty.

  The astonishment of our travelers increased every instant. They heard a

nest of mites talk in a very sensible strain: and that Lusus Naturæ? seemed to

them inexplicable. You need not doubt but the Sirian and his dwarf glowed

with  impatience  to  enter  into  conversation  with  such  atoms.  Micromegas

being  afraid  that  his  voice,  like  thunder,  would  deafen  and  confound  the

mites, without being understood by them, saw the necessity of diminishing

the sound; each, therefore, put into his mouth a sort of small toothpick, the

slender end of which reached to the vessel. The Sirian setting the dwarf upon

his knees, and the ship and crew upon his nail, held down his head and spoke

softly. In fine, having taken these and a great many more precautions, he

addressed himself to them in these words:

  "O ye invisible insects, whom the hand of the Creator hath deigned to

produce in the abyss of infinite littleness! I give praise to his goodness, in that

he hath been pleased to disclose unto me those secrets that seemed to be

impenetrable."

  If ever there was such a thing as astonishment, it seized upon the people

who  heard  this  address,  and  who  could  not  conceive  from  whence  it

proceeded. The chaplain of the ship repeated exorcisms, the sailors swore,

and the philosophers formed a system; but, notwithstanding all their systems,

they could not divine who the person was that spoke to them. Then the dwarf

of Saturn, whose voice was softer than that of Micromegas, gave them briefly

to understand what species of beings they had to do with. He related the

particulars of their voyage from Saturn, made them acquainted with the rank

and quality of Monsieur Micromegas; and, after having pitied their smallness,

asked  if  they  had  always  been  in  that  miserable  state  so  near  akin  to

annihilation; and what their business was upon that globe which seemed to be

the property of whales. He also desired to know if they were happy in their

situation? if they were inspired with souls? and put a hundred questions of the

like nature.

  A certain mathematician on board, braver than the rest, and shocked to

hear his soul called in question, planted his quadrant, and having taken two

observations of this interlocutor, said: "You believe then, Mr., what's your

name, that because you measure from head to foot a thousand fathoms-"  "A thousand fathoms!" cried the dwarf, "good heavens! How should he

know the height of my stature? A thousand fathoms! My very dimensions to

a hair. What, measured by a mite! This atom, forsooth, is a geometrician, and

knows exactly how tall I am; while I, who can scarce perceive him through a

microscope, am utterly ignorant of his extent!"

  "Yes, I have taken your measure," answered the philosopher, "and I will

now do the same by your tall companion."

  The proposal was embraced: his excellency reclined upon his side; for,

had he stood upright, his head would have reached too far above the clouds.

Our mathematicians planted a tall tree near him, and then, by a series of

triangles joined together, they discovered that the object of their observation

was a strapping youth, exactly one hundred and twenty thousand royal feet in

length. In consequence of this calculation, Micromegas uttered these words:

  "I am now more than ever convinced that we ought to judge of nothing by

its external magnitude. O God! who hast bestowed understanding upon such

seemingly contemptible substances, thou canst with equal ease produce that

which  is  infinitely  small,  as  that  which  is  incredibly  great:  and  if  it  be

possible, that among thy works there are beings still more diminutive than

these, they may nevertheless, be endued with understanding superior to the

intelligence of those stupendous animals I have seen in heaven, a single foot

of whom is larger than this whole globe on which I have alighted."

  One of the philosophers assured him that there were intelligent beings

much smaller than men, and recounted not only Virgil's whole fable of the

bees, but also described all that Swammerdam hath discovered, and Réaumur

dissected. In a word, he informed him that there are animals which bear the

same proportion to bees, that bees bear to man; the same as the Sirian himself

compared to those vast beings whom he had mentioned; and as those huge

animals  are  to  other  substances,  before  whom  they  would  appear  like  so

many particles of dust. Here the conversation became very interesting, and

Micromegas proceeded in these words:

  "O ye intelligent atoms, in whom the Supreme Being hath been pleased to

manifest his omniscience and power, without all doubt your joys on this earth

must be pure and exquisite: for, being unincumbered with matter, and, to all

appearance, little else than soul, you must spend your lives in the delights ofpleasure and reflection, which are the true enjoyments of a perfect spirit. True

happiness I have no where found; but certainly here it dwells."

  At this harangue all the philosophers shook their heads, and one among

them, more candid than his brethren, frankly owned, that excepting a very

small number of inhabitants who were very little esteemed by their fellows,

all the rest were a parcel of knaves, fools, and miserable wretches.

  "We  have  matter  enough,"  said  he,  "to  do  abundance  of  mischief,  if

mischief comes from matter; and too much understanding, if evil flows from

understanding. You must know, for example, that at this very moment, while

I am speaking, there are one hundred thousand animals of our own species,

covered with hats, slaying an equal number of their fellow-creatures, who

wear turbans; at least they are either slaying or being slain; and this hath

usually been the case all over the earth from time immemorial."

  The Sirian, shuddering at this information, begged to know the cause of

those horrible quarrels among such a puny race; and was given to understand

that the subject of the dispute was a pitiful mole-hill [called Palestine,] no

larger than his heel. Not that any one of those millions who cut one another's

throats pretends to have the least claim to the smallest particle of that clod.

The question is, whether it shall belong to a certain person who is known by

the name of Sultan, or to another whom (for what reason I know not) they

dignify with the appellation of Pope. Neither the one nor the other has seen or

ever  will  see  the  pitiful  corner  in  question;  and  probably  none  of  these

wretches, who so madly destroy each other, ever beheld the ruler on whose

account they are so mercilessly sacrificed!

  "Ah, miscreants!" cried the indignant Sirian, "such excess of desperate

rage is beyond conception. I have a good mind to take two or three steps, and

trample the whole nest of such ridiculous assassins under my feet."

  "Don't  give  yourself  the  trouble,"  replied  the  philosopher,  "they  are

industrious enough in procuring their own destruction. At the end of ten years

the hundredth part of those wretches will not survive; for you must know

that, though they should not draw a sword in the cause they have espoused,

famine, fatigue, and intemperance, would sweep almost all of them from the

face of the earth. Besides, the punishment should not be inflicted upon them,

but upon those sedentary and slothful barbarians, who, from their palaces,give orders for murdering a million of men and then solemnly thank God for

their success."

  Our traveler was moved with compassion for the entire human race, in

which he discovered such astonishing contrasts. "Since you are of the small

number of the wise," said he, "and in all likelihood do not engage yourselves

in the trade of murder for hire, be so good as to tell me your occupation."

  "We  anatomize  flies,"  replied  the  philosopher,  "we  measure  lines,  we

make calculations, we agree upon two or three points which we understand,

and dispute upon two or three thousand that are beyond our comprehension."

  "How far," said the Sirian, "do you reckon the distance between the great

star of the constellation Gemini and that called Caniculæ?"

  To this question all of them answered with one voice: "Thirty-two degrees

and a half."

  "And what is the distance from hence to the moon?"

  "Sixty semi-diameters of the earth."

  He then thought to puzzle them by asking the weight of the air; but they

answered distinctly, that common air is about nine hundred times specifically

lighter than an equal column of the lightest water, and nineteen hundred times

lighter  than  current  gold.  The  little  dwarf  of  Saturn,  astonished  at  their

answers,  was  now  tempted  to  believe  those  people  sorcerers,  who,  but  a

quarter of an hour before, he would not allow were inspired with souls.

  "Well," said Micromegas, "since you know so well what is without you,

doubtless you are still more perfectly acquainted with that which is within.

Tell me what is the soul, and how do your ideas originate?"

  Here  the  philosophers  spoke  altogether  as  before;  but  each  was  of  a

different opinion. The eldest quoted Aristotle; another pronounced the name

of Descartes; a third mentioned Mallebranche; a fourth Leibnitz; and a fifth

Locke. An old peripatecian lifting up his voice, exclaimed with an air of

confidence. "The soul is perfection and reason, having power to be such as it

is, as Aristotle expressly declares, page 633, of the Louvre edition:

  "Εντελεχεῖά τις ἐστι, καὶ λόγος τοὖ δύναμιν ἓχοντος

  τοιοὗδι εἷ ταἷ."  "I am not very well versed in Greek," said the giant.

  "Nor I either," replied the philosophical mite.

  "Why  then  do  you  quote  that  same  Aristotle  in  Greek?"  resumed  the

Sirian.

  "Because," answered the other, "it is but reasonable we should quote what

we do not comprehend in a language we do not understand."

  Here the Cartesian interposing: "The soul," said he, "is a pure spirit or

intelligence, which hath received before birth all the metaphysical ideas; but

after that event it is obliged to go to school and learn anew the knowledge

which it hath lost."

  "So it was necessary," replied the animal of eight leagues, "that thy soul

should be learned before birth, in order to be so ignorant when thou hast got a

beard upon thy chin. But what dost thou understand by spirit?"

  "I have no idea of it," said the philosopher, "indeed it is supposed to be

immaterial."

  "At least, thou knowest what matter is?" resumed the Sirian.

  "Perfectly well," answered the other. "For example: that stone is gray, is of

a certain figure, has three dimensions, specific weight, and divisibility."

  "I want to know," said the giant, "what that object is, which, according to

thy observation, hath a gray color, weight, and divisibility. Thou seest a few

qualities, but dost thou know the nature of the thing itself?"

  "Not I, truly," answered the Cartesian.

  Upon which the Sirian admitted that he also was ignorant in regard to this

subject. Then addressing himself to another sage, who stood upon his thumb,

he asked "what is the soul? and what are her functions?"

  "Nothing at all," replied this disciple of Mallebranche; "God hath made

everything for my convenience. In him I see everything, by him I act; he is

the universal agent, and I never meddle in his work."

  "That is being a nonentity indeed," said the Sirian sage; and then, turning

to a follower of Leibnitz, he exclaimed: "Hark ye, friend, what is thy opinionof the soul?"

  "In my opinion," answered this metaphysician, "the soul is the hand that

points at the hour, while my body does the office of the clock; or, if you

please, the soul is the clock, and the body is the pointer; or again, my soul is

the  mirror  of  the  universe,  and  my  body  the  frame.  All  this  is  clear  and

uncontrovertible."

  A little partisan of Locke who chanced to be present, being asked his

opinion on the same subject, said: "I do not know by what power I think; but

well I know that I should never have thought without the assistance of my

senses. That there are immaterial and intelligent substances I do not at all

doubt;  but  that  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  communicate  the  faculty  of

thinking to matter, I doubt very much. I revere the eternal power, to which it

would ill become me to prescribe bounds. I affirm nothing, and am contented

to believe that many more things are possible than are usually thought so."

  The Sirian smiled at this declaration, and did not look upon the author as

the least sagacious of the company: and as for the dwarf of Saturn, he would

have  embraced  this  adherent  of  Locke,  had  it  not  been  for  the  extreme

disproportion  in  their  respective  sizes.  But  unluckily  there  was  another

animalcule in a square cap, who, taking the word from all his philosophical

brethren, affirmed that he knew the whole secret, which was contained in the

abridgment of St. Thomas. He surveyed the two celestial strangers from top

to toe, and maintained to their faces that their persons, their fashions, their

suns and their stars, were created solely for the use of man. At this wild

assertion  our  two  travelers  were  seized  with  a  fit  of  that  uncontrollable

laughter, which (according to Homer) is the portion of the immortal gods:

their  bellies  quivered,  their  shoulders  rose  and  fell,  and,  during  these

convulsions, the vessel fell from the Sirian's nail into the Saturnian's pocket,

where these worthy people searched for it a long time with great diligence. At

length, having found the ship and set everything to rights again, the Sirian

resumed the discourse with those diminutive mites, and promised to compose

for them a choice book of philosophy which would demonstrate the very

essence of things. Accordingly, before his departure, he made them a present

of the book, which was brought to the Academy of Sciences at Paris, but

when the old secretary came to open it he saw nothing but blank paper, upon

which:-  "Ay, ay," said he, "this is just what I suspected."


  THE WORLD AS IT GOES.

  THE VISION OF BABOUC.

  The spiritual rulers of Persepolis. [1]

  Among the genii who preside over the empires of the earth, Ithuriel held

one of the first ranks, and had the department of Upper Asia. He one morning

descended into the abode of Babouc, the Scythian, who dwelt on the banks of

the Oxus, and said to him:

  "Babouc, the follies and vices of the Persians have drawn upon them our

indignation. Yesterday an assembly of the genii of Upper Asia was held, to

consider whether we would chastise Persepolis or destroy it entirely. Go to

that city; examine everything; return and give me a faithful account; and,

according to thy report, I will then determine whether to correct or extirpate

the inhabitants."

  "But, my lord," said Babouc with great humility, "I have never been in

Persia, nor do I know a single person in that country."

  "So much the better," said the angel, "thou wilt be the more impartial: thou

hast received from heaven the spirit of discernment, to which I now add the

power of inspiring confidence. Go, see, hear, observe, and fear nothing. Thou

shalt everywhere meet with a favorable reception."

  Babouc mounted his camel, and set out with his servants. After having

traveled  some  days,  he  met,  near  the  plains  of  Senaar,  the  Persian  army,

which was going to attack the forces of India. He first addressed himself to a

soldier, whom he found at a distance from the main army, and asked him

what was the occasion of the war?

  "By all the gods," said the soldier, "I know nothing of the matter. It is none

of my business. My trade is to kill and to be killed, to get a livelihood. It is of

no consequence to me whom I serve. To-morrow, perhaps, I may go over to

the Indian camp; for it is said that they give their soldiers nearly half a copper

drachma a day more than we have in this cursed service of Persia. If thou

desirest to know why we fight, speak to my captain."  Babouc, having given the soldier a small present, entered the camp. He

soon became acquainted with the captain, and asked him the cause of the war.

  "How canst thou imagine that I should know it?" said the captain, "or of

what  importance  is  it  to  me?  I  live  about  two  hundred  leagues  from

Persepolis:  I  hear  that  war  is  declared.  I  instantly  leave  my  family,  and,

having nothing else to do, go, according to our custom, to make my fortune,

or to fall by a glorious death."

  "But are not thy companions," said Babouc, "a little better informed than

thee?"

  "No," said the officer, "there are none but our principal satraps that know

the true cause of our cutting one another's throats."

  Babouc, struck with astonishment, introduced himself to the generals, and

soon became familiarly acquainted with them. At last one of them said:

  "The cause of this war, which for twenty years past hath desolated Asia,

sprang originally from a quarrel between a eunuch belonging to one of the

concubines of the great king of Persia, and the clerk of a factory belonging to

the great king of India. The dispute was about a claim which amounted nearly

to the thirtieth part of a daric. Our first minister, and the representative of

India,  maintained  the  rights  of  their  respective  masters  with  becoming

dignity. The dispute grew warm. Both parties sent into the field an army of a

million of soldiers. This army must be recruited every year with upwards of

four  hundred  thousand  men.  Massacres,  burning  of  houses,  ruin  and

devastation,  are  daily  multiplied;  the  universe  suffers;  and  their  mutual

animosity still continues. The first ministers of the two nations frequently

protest that they have nothing in view but the happiness of mankind; and

every protestation is attended with the destruction of a town, or the desolation

of a province."

  Next day, on a report being spread that peace was going to be concluded,

the Persian and Indian generals made haste to come to an engagement. The

battle  was  long  and  bloody.  Babouc  beheld  every  crime,  and  every

abomination.  He  was  witness  to  the  arts  and  stratagems  of  the  principal

satraps, who did all that lay in their power to expose their general to the

disgrace of a defeat. He saw officers killed by their own troops, and soldiers

stabbing  their  already  expiring  comrades  in  order  to  strip  them  of  a  fewbloody garments torn and covered with dirt. He entered the hospitals to which

they were conveying the wounded, most of whom died through the inhuman

negligence of those who were well paid by the king of Persia to assist these

unhappy men.

  "Are these men," cried Babouc, "or are they wild beasts? Ah! I plainly see

that Persepolis will be destroyed."

  Full  of  this  thought,  he  went  over  to  the  camp  of  the  Indians,  where,

according to the prediction of the genii, he was as well received as in that of

the Persians; but he saw there the same crimes which had already filled him

with horror.

  "Oh!"  said  he  to  himself,  "if  the  angel  Ithuriel  should  exterminate  the

Persians, the angel of India must certainly destroy the Indians."

  But being afterward more particularly informed of all that passed in both

armies, he heard of such acts of generosity, humanity, and greatness of soul,

as at once surprised and charmed him:

    "Unaccountable mortals! as ye are," cried he, "how can you thus unite so

much baseness and so much grandeur, so many virtues and so many vices?"

  Meanwhile the peace was proclaimed; and the generals of the two armies,

neither  of  whom  had  gained  a  complete  victory,  but  who,  for  their  own

private interest, had shed the blood of so many of their fellow-creatures, went

to solicit their courts for rewards. The peace was celebrated in public writings

which announced the return of virtue and happiness to the earth.

  "God  be  praised,"  said  Babouc,  "Persepolis  will  now  be  the  abode  of

spotless innocence, and will not be destroyed, as the cruel genii intended. Let

us haste without delay to the capital of Asia."

  He  entered  that  immense  city  by  the  ancient  gate,  which  was  entirely

barbarous, and offended the eye by its disagreeable rusticity. All that part of

the  town  savored  of  the  time  when  it  was  built;  for,  notwithstanding  the

obstinacy of men in praising ancient at the expense of modern times, it must

be owned that the first essays in every art are rude and unfinished.

  Babouc mingled in a crowd of people composed of the most ignorant,

dirty and deformed of both sexes, who were thronging with a stupid air into a

large  and  gloomy  inclosure.  By  the  constant  hum;  by  the  gestures  of  thepeople; by the money which some persons gave to others for the liberty of

sitting down, he imagined that he was in a market, where chairs were sold:

but observing several women fall down on their knees with an appearance of

looking directly before them, while in reality they were leering at the men by

their sides, he was soon convinced that he was in a temple. Shrill, hoarse,

savage  and  discordant  voices  made  the  vault  re-echo  with  ill  articulated

sounds, that produced the same effect as the braying of asses, when, in the

plains of Pictavia, they answer the cornet that calls them together. He stopped

his ears; but he was ready to shut his mouth and hold his nose, when he saw

several laborers enter into the temple with picks and spades, who removed a

large stone, and threw up the earth on both sides, from whence exhaled a

pestilential vapor. At last some others approached, deposited a dead body in

the opening, and replaced the stone upon it.

  "What!" cried Babouc, "do these people bury their dead in the place where

they adore the deity? What! are their temples paved with carcasses? I am no

longer  surprised  at  those  pestilential  diseases  that  frequently  depopulate

Persepolis.  The  putrefaction  of  the  dead,  and  the  infected  breath  of  such

numbers of the living, assembled and crowded together in the same place, are

sufficient to poison the whole terrestial globe. Oh! what an abominable city is

Persepolis! The angels probably intend to destroy it in order to build a more

beautiful one in its place, and to people it with inhabitants who are more

virtuous and better singers. Providence may have its reasons for so doing; to

its disposal let us leave all future events."

  Burying the dead in churches.-"What!" cried Babouc, "do these people

bury  their  dead  in  the  place  where  they  adore  the  deity?  What!  are  their

temples paved with carcasses?"


  Meanwhile the sun approached his meridian height. Babouc was to dine at

the other end of the city with a lady for whom her husband, an officer in the

army, had given him some letters: but he first took several turns in Persepolis,

where he saw other temples, better built and more richly adorned, filled with

a polite audience, and resounding with harmonious music. He beheld public

fountains, which, though ill-placed, struck the eye by their beauty; squares

where the best kings that had governed Persia seemed to breathe in bronze,

and others where he heard the people crying out:  "When shall we see our beloved master?"

  He admired the magnificent bridges built over the river; the superb and

commodious quays; the palaces raised on both sides; and an immense house,

where  thousands  of  old  soldiers,  covered  with  scars  and  crowned  with

victory, offered their daily praises to the god of armies. At last he entered the

house of the lady, who, with a set of fashionable people, waited his company

to  dinner.  The  house  was  neat  and  elegant;  the  repast  delicious;  the  lady

young, beautiful, witty, and engaging; and the company worthy of her; and

Babouc every moment said to himself:

  "The angel Ithuriel has little regard for the world, or he would never think

of destroying such a charming city."

  In the meantime he observed that the lady, who had begun by tenderly

asking news about her husband, spoke more tenderly to a young magi, toward

the conclusion of the repast. He saw a magistrate, who, in presence of his

wife,  paid  his  court  with  great  vivacity  to  a  widow,  while  the  indulgent

widow held out her hand to a young citizen, remarkable for his modesty and

graceful appearance.

  Babouc then began to fear that the genius Ithuriel had but too much reason

for destroying Persepolis. The talent he possessed of gaining confidence let

him that same day into all the secrets of the lady. She confessed to him her

affection  for  the  young  magi,  and  assured  him  that  in  all  the  houses  in

Persepolis  he  would  meet  with  similar  examples  of  attachment.  Babouc

concluded  that  such  a  society  could  not  possibly  survive:  that  jealousy,

discord, and vengeance must desolate every house; that tears and blood must

be daily shed; and, in fine, that Ithuriel would do well to destroy immediately

a city abandoned to continual disasters.

  Such were the gloomy ideas that possessed his mind, when a grave man in

a black gown appeared at the gate and humbly begged to speak to the young

magistrate. Phis stripling, without rising or taking the least notice of the old

gentleman, gave him some papers with a haughty and careless air, and then

dismissed him. Babouc asked who this man was. The mistress of the house

said to him in a low voice:

  "He is one of the best advocates in the city, and hath studied the law thesefifty years. The other, who is but twenty-five years of age, and has only been

a satrap of the law for two days, hath ordered him to make an extract of a

process he is going to determine, though he has not as yet examined it."

  "This giddy youth acts wisely," said Babouc, "in asking counsel of an old

man. But why is not the old man himself the judge?"

  "Thou  art  surely  in  jest,"  said  they;  "those  who  have  grown  old  in

laborious and inferior posts are never raised to places of dignity. This young

man has a great post, because his father is rich; and the right of dispensing

justice is purchased here like a farm."

  "O unhappy city!" cried Babouc, "this is surely the height of anarchy and

confusion. Those who have thus purchased the right of judging will doubtless

sell their judgments; nothing do I see here but an abyss of iniquity!"

  While he was thus expressing his grief and surprise, a young warrior, who

that very day had returned from the army, said to him:

  "Why wouldst thou not have seats in the courts of justice offered for sale?

I myself purchased the right of braving death at the head of two thousand

men who are under my command. It has this year cost me forty daracs of

gold to lie on the earth thirty nights successively in a red dress, and at last to

receive two wounds with an arrow, of which I still feel the smart. If I ruin

myself to serve the emperor of Persia, whom I never saw, the satrap of the

law may well pay something for enjoying the pleasure of giving audience to

pleaders."

  Babouc  was  filled  with  indignation,  and  could  not  help  condemning  a

country, where the highest posts in the army and the law were exposed for

sale. He at once concluded that the inhabitants must be entirely ignorant of

the art of war, and the laws of equity; and that, though Ithuriel should not

destroy them, they must soon be ruined by their detestable administration.

  He was still further confirmed in his bad opinion by the arrival of a fat

man, who, after saluting all the company with great familiarity, went up to

the young officer and said:

  "I can only lend thee fifty thousand darics of gold; for indeed the taxes of

the empire have this year brought me in but three hundred thousand."

  Babouc inquired into the character of this man who complained of havinggained so little, and was informed that in Persepolis there were forty plebian

kings who held the empire of Persia by lease, and paid a small tribute to the

monarch.

  After dinner he went into one of the most superb temples in the city, and

seated himself amidst a crowd of men and women, who had come thither to

pass away the time. A magi appeared in a machine elevated above the heads

of the people, and talked a long time of vice and virtue. He divided into

several parts what needed no division at all: he proved methodically what

was sufficiently clear, and he taught what everybody knew. He threw himself

into a passion with great composure, and went away perspiring and out of

breath. The assembly then awoke and imagined they had been present at a

very instructive discourse. Babouc said:

  "This man had done his best to tire two or three hundred of his fellow-

citizens; but his intention was good, and there is nothing in this that should

occasion the destruction of Persepolis."

  Upon leaving the assembly he was conducted to a public entertainment,

which was exhibited every day in the year. It was in a kind of great hall, at

the end of which appeared a palace. The most beautiful women of Persepolis

and the most considerable satraps were ranged in order, and formed so fine a

spectacle that Babouc at first believed that this was all the entertainment.

Two or three persons, who seemed to be kings and queens, soon appeared in

the vestibule of their palace. Their language was very different from that of

the people; it was measured, harmonious, and sublime. Nobody slept. The

audience kept a profound silence which was only interrupted by expressions

of sensibility and admiration. The duty of kings, the love of virtue, and the

dangers arising from unbridled passions, were all described by such lively

and affecting strokes, that Babouc shed tears. He doubted not but that these

heroes and heroines, these kings and queens whom he had just heard, were

the preachers of the empire; he even purposed to engage Ithuriel to come and

hear them, being content that such a spectacle would forever reconcile him to

the city.

  As  soon  as  the  entertainment  was  finished,  he  resolved  to  visit  the

principal queen, who had recommended such pure and noble morals in the

palace. He desired to be introduced to her majesty, and was led up a narrowstaircase to an ill-furnished apartment in the second story, where he found a

woman in a mean dress, who said to him with a noble and pathetic air:

  "This employment does not afford me a sufficient maintenance. I want

money, and without money there is no comfort."

  Babouc gave her an hundred darics of gold, saying:

  "Had there been no other evil in the city but this, Ithuriel would have been

to blame for being so much offended."

  From thence he went to spend the evening at the house of a tradesman

who dealt in magnificent trifles. He was conducted thither by a man of sense,

with whom he had contracted an acquaintance. He bought whatever pleased

his fancy; and the toy man with great politeness sold him everything for more

than it was worth. On his return home his friends showed him how much he

had been cheated. Babouc set down the name of the tradesman in his pocket-

book, in order to point him out to Ithuriel as an object of peculiar vengeance

on the day when the city should be punished. As he was writing, he heard

somebody knock at the door: this was the toy man himself, who came to

restore him his purse, which he had left by mistake on the counter.

  "How canst thou," cried Babouc, "be so generous and faithful, when thou

hast had the assurance to sell me these trifles for four times their value?"

  "There is not a tradesman," replied the merchant, "of ever so little note in

the city, that would not have returned thee thy purse; but whoever said that I

sold thee these trifles for four times their value is greatly mistaken: I sold

them for ten times their value; and this is so true, that wert thou to sell them

again in a month hence, thou wouldst not get even this tenth part. But nothing

is more just. It is the variable fancies of men that set a value on these baubles;

it is this fancy that maintains an hundred workmen whom I employ; it is this

that gives me a fine house and a handsome chariot and horses; it is this, in

fine,  that  excites  industry,  encourages  taste,  promotes  circulation,  and

produces abundance.

  "I sell the same trifles to the neighboring nation at a much higher rate than

I have sold them to thee, and by these means I am useful to the empire."

  Babouc, after having reflected a moment, erased the tradesman's name

from his tablets.  Babouc, not knowing as yet what to think of Persepolis, resolved to visit

the magi and the men of letters; for, as the one studied wisdom and the other

religion, he hoped that they in conjunction would obtain mercy for the rest of

the people. Accordingly, he went next morning into a college of magi. The

archimandrite confessed to him, that he had an hundred thousand crowns a

year  for  having  taken  the  vow  of  poverty,  and  that  he  enjoyed  a  very

extensive empire in virtue of his vow of humility; after which he left him

with an inferior brother, who did him the honors of the place.

  While the brother was showing him the magnificence of this house of

penitence, a report was spread abroad that Babouc was come to reform all

these  houses.  He  immediately  received  petitions  from  each  of  them,  the

substance of which was, "Preserve us and destroy all the rest." On hearing

their apologies, all these societies were absolutely necessary: on hearing their

mutual accusations, they all deserved to be abolished. He was surprised to

find that all the members of these societies were so extremely desirous of

edifying the world, that they wished to have it entirely under their dominion.

  Soon after a little man appeared, who was a demi-magi, and who said to

him:

  "I plainly see that the work is going to be accomplished: for Zerdust is

returned  to  earth;  and  the  little  girls  prophecy,  pinching  and  whipping

themselves. We therefore implore thy protection against the great lama."

  "What!" said Babouc, "against the royal pontiff, who resides at Tibet?"

  "Yes, against him, himself."

  "What! you are then making war upon him, and raising armies!"

  "No, but he says that man is a free agent, and we deny it. We have written

several pamphlets against him, which he never read. Hardly has he heard our

name mentioned. He has only condemned us in the same manner as a man

orders the trees in his garden to be cleared from caterpillars."

  Babouc was incensed at the folly of these men who made profession of

wisdom; and at the intrigues of those who had renounced the world; and at

the ambition, pride and avarice of such as taught humility and a disinterested

spirit: from all which he concluded that Ithuriel had good reason to destroy

the whole race.  On his return home, he sent for some new books to alleviate his grief, and

in order to exhilarate his spirits, invited some men of letters to dine with him;

when, like wasps attracted by a pot of honey, there came twice as many as he

desired. These parasites were equally eager to eat and to speak; they praised

two  sorts  of  persons,  the  dead  and  themselves;  but  none  of  their

contemporaries, except the master of the house. If any of them happened to

drop a smart and witty expression, the rest cast down their eyes and bit their

lips out of mere vexation that it had not been said by themselves. They had

less dissimulation than the magi, because they had not such grand objects of

ambition. Each of them behaved at once with all the meanness of a valet and

all  the  dignity  of  a  great  man.  They  said  to  each  other's  face  the  most

insulting  things,  which  they  took  for  strokes  of  wit.  They  had  some

knowledge of the design of Babouc's commission; one of them entreated him

in a low voice to extirpate an author who had not praised him sufficiently

about five years before; another requested the ruin of a citizen who had never

laughed  at  his  comedies;  and  the  third  demanded  the  destruction  of  the

academy because he had not been able to get admitted into it. The repast

being ended, each of them departed by himself; for in the whole crowd there

were not two men that could endure the company or conversation of each

other,  except  at  the  houses  of  the  rich,  who  invited  them  to  their  tables.

Babouc thought that it would be no great loss to the public if all these vermin

were destroyed in the general catastrophe.

  Having now got rid of these men of letters, he began to read some new

books,  where  he  discovered  the  true  spirit  by  which  his  guests  had  been

actuated. He observed with particular indignation those slanderous gazettes,

those archives of bad taste, dictated by envy, baseness, and hunger; those

ungenerous satires, where the vulture is treated with lenity, and the dove torn

in  pieces;  and  those  dry  and  insipid  romances,  filled  with  characters  of

women to whom the author was an utter stranger.

  All these detestable writings he committed to the flames, and went to pass

the evening in walking. In this excursion he was introduced to an old man

possessed of great learning, who had not come to increase the number of his

parasites. This man of letters always fled from crowds; he understood human

nature, availed himself of his knowledge, and imparted it to others with great

discretion. Babouc told him how much he was grieved at what he had seenand read.

  "Thou hast read very despicable performances," said the man of letters;

"but in all times, in all countries, and in all kinds of literature, the bad swarm

and the good are rare. Thou hast received into thy house the very dregs of

pedantry.  In  all  professions,  those  who  are  least  worthy  of  appearing  are

always sure to present themselves with the greatest impudence. The truly

wise live among themselves in retirement and tranquillity; and we have still

some men and some books worthy of thy attention."

  While he was thus speaking, they were joined by another man of letters;

and  the  conversation  became  so  entertaining  and  instructive,  so  elevated

above  vulgar  prejudices,  and  so  conformable  to  virtue,  that  Babouc

acknowledged he had never heard the like.

  "These are men," said he to himself, "whom the angel Ithuriel will not

presume to touch, or he must be a merciless being indeed."

  Though reconciled to men of letters, he was still enraged against the rest

of the nation.

  "Thou art a stranger," said the judicious person who was talking to him;

"abuses present themselves to thy eyes in crowds, while the good, which lies

concealed,  and  which  is  even  sometimes  the  result  of  these  very  abuses,

escapes thy observation."

  He then learned that among men of letters there were some who were free

from envy; and that even among the magi themselves there were some men

of virtue. In fine, he concluded that these great bodies, which by their mutual

shocks seemed to threaten their common ruin, were at bottom very salutary

institutions; that each society of magi was a check upon its rivals; and that

though these rivals might differ in some speculative points, they all taught the

same morals, instructed the people, and lived in subjection to the laws; not

unlike to those preceptors who watch over the heir of a family while the

master of the house watches over them. He conversed with several of these

magi, and found them possessed of exalted souls. He likewise learned that

even among the fools who pretended to make war on the great lama there had

been  some  men  of  distinguished  merit;  and  from  all  these  particulars  he

conjectured that it might be with the manners of Persepolis as it was with the

buildings;  some  of  which  moved  his  pity,  while  others  filled  him  withadmiration.

  He said to the man of letters:

  "I plainly see that these magi, whom I at first imagined to be so dangerous,

are in reality extremely useful; especially when a wise government hinders

them  from  rendering  themselves  too  necessary;  but  thou  wilt  at  least

acknowledge that your young magistrates, who purchase the office of a judge

as soon as they can mount a horse, must display in their tribunals the most

ridiculous  impertinence  and  the  most  iniquitous  perverseness.  It  would

doubtless be better to give these places gratuitously to those old civilians who

have spent their lives in the study of the law."

  The man of letters replied:

  "Thou hast seen our army before thy arrival at Persepolis; thou knowest

that our young officers fight with great bravery, though they buy their posts;

perhaps  thou  wilt  find  that  our  young  magistrates  do  not  give  wrong

decisions, though they purchase the right of dispensing justice."

  He  led  him  next  day  to  the  grand  tribunal,  where  an  affair  of  great

importance was to be decided. The cause was known to all the world. All the

old advocates that spoke on the subject were wavering and unsettled in their

opinions. They quoted an hundred laws, none of which were applicable to the

question. They considered the matter in a hundred different lights, but never

in its true point of view. The judges were more quick in their decisions than

the advocates in raising doubts. They were unanimous in their sentiments.

They decided justly, because they followed the light of reason. The others

reasoned falsely because they only consulted their books.

  Babouc concluded that the best things frequently arose from abuses. He

saw the same day that the riches of the receivers of the public revenue, at

which he had been so much offended, were capable of producing an excellent

effect; for the emperor having occasion for money, he found in an hour by

their means what he could not have procured in six months by the ordinary

methods. He saw that those great clouds, swelled with the dews of the earth,

restored  in  plentiful  showers  what  they  had  thence  derived.  Besides,  the

children of these new gentlemen, who were frequently better educated than

those of the most ancient families, were sometimes more useful members of

society; for he whose father hath been a good accountant may easily becomea good judge, a brave warrior, and an able statesman.

  Babouc was insensibly brought to excuse the avarice of the farmer of the

revenues, who in reality was not more avaricious than other men, and besides

was  extremely  necessary.  He  overlooked  the  folly  of  those  who  ruined

themselves in order to obtain a post in the law or army; a folly that produces

great magistrates and heroes. He forgave the envy of men of letters, among

whom there were some that enlightened the world; and he was reconciled to

the ambitious and intriguing magi, who were possessed of more great virtues

than little vices. But he had still many causes of complaint. The gallantries of

the  ladies  especially,  and  the  fatal  effects  which  these  must  necessarily

produce, filled him with fear and terror.

  As  he  was  desirous  of  prying  into  the  characters  of  men  of  every

condition, he went to wait on a minister of state; but trembled all the way, lest

some wife should be assassinated by her husband in his presence. Having

arrived at the statesman's, he was obliged to remain two hours in the anti-

chamber before his name was sent in, and two hours more after that was

done. In this interval, he resolved to recommend to the angel Ithuriel both the

minister and his insolent porters. The anti-chamber was filled with ladies of

every rank, magi of all colors, judges, merchants, officers, and pedants, and

all of them complained of the minister. The miser and the usurer said:

  "Doubtless this man plunders the provinces."

  The capricious reproached him with fickleness; the voluptuary said:

  "He thinks of nothing but his pleasure."

  The factious hoped to see him soon ruined by a cabal; and the women

flattered themselves that they should soon have a younger minister.

  Babouc heard their conversation, and could not help saying:

  "This is surely a happy man; he hath all his enemies in his anti-chamber;

he crushes with his power those that envy his grandeur; he beholds those who

detest him groveling at his feet."

  At length he was admitted into the presence-chamber, where he saw a

little old man bending under the weight of years and business, but still lively

and full of spirits.  The minister was pleased with Babouc, and to Babouc he appeared a man

of great merit. The conversation became interesting. The minister confessed

that he was very unhappy; that he passed for rich, while in reality he was

poor;  that  he  was  believed  to  be  all-powerful,  and  yet  was  constantly

contradicted; that he had obliged none but a parcel of ungrateful wretches;

and that, in the course of forty years labor, he had hardly enjoyed a moment's

rest. Babouc was moved with his misfortunes; and thought that if this man

had been guilty of some faults, and Ithuriel had a mind to banish him, he

ought not to cut him off, but to leave him in possession of his place.

  While Babouc was talking to the minister, the beautiful lady with whom

he  had  dined  entered  hastily,  her  eyes  and  countenance  showing  all  the

symptoms  of  grief  and  indignation.  She  burst  into  reproaches  against  the

statesman; she shed tears; she complained bitterly that her husband had been

refused a place to which his birth allowed him to aspire, and which he had

fully merited by his wounds and his service. She expressed herself with such

force;  she  uttered  her  complaints  with  such  a  graceful  air;  she  overthrew

objections with so much address, and enforced her arguments with so much

eloquence, that she did not leave the chamber till she had made her husband's

fortune.

  Babouc gave her his hand, and said: "Is it possible, madam, that thou canst

take so much pains to serve a man whom thou dost not love, and from whom

thou hast everything to fear?"

  "A man whom I do not love!" cried she "know, sir, that my husband is the

best friend I have in the world; and there is nothing I would not sacrifice for

him, except my own inclinations."

  The lady conducted Babouc to her own house. The husband, who had at

last arrived overwhelmed with grief, received his wife with transports of joy

and gratitude. He embraced by turns his wife, the little magi, and Babouc.

Wit, harmony, cheerfulness, and all the graces, embellished the repast.

  Babouc,  though  a  Scythian,  and  sent  by  a  geni,  found,  that  should  he

continue much longer in Persepolis, he would forget even the angel Ithuriel.

He began to grow fond of a city, the inhabitants of which were polite, affable,

and beneficent, though fickle, slanderous, and vain. He was much afraid that

Persepolis would be condemned. He was even afraid to give in his account.  This, however, he did in the following manner. He caused a little statue,

composed of different metals, of earth, and stones, the most precious and the

most vile, to be cast by one of the best founders in the city, and carried it to

Ithuriel.

  "Wilt thou break," said he, "this pretty statue, because it is not wholly

composed of gold and diamonds?"

  Ithuriel immediately understood his meaning, and resolved to think no

more of punishing Persepolis, but to leave "The world as it goes."

  "For," said he, "if all is not well, all is passable."

  Thus Persepolis was suffered to remain; nor did Babouc complain like

Jonas,  who,  [according  to  the  scriptures,]  was  highly  incensed  at  the

preservation of Nineveh.


  [1] When Babouc visited the college of the magi, "the archimandrite [the

chief  of  the  monks]  confessed  to  him,  that  he  had  an  hundred  thousand

crowns a year for having taken the vow of poverty, and that he enjoyed a

very extensive empire in virtue of his vow of humility." (See page 365.)-E.

  THE BLACK AND THE WHITE.

  Procession of Souls to Judgment with Good and Evil Genii. From Frieze

in the Grotto del Cardinale.


  The adventure of the youthful Rustan is generally known throughout the

whole province of Candahar. He was the only son of a Mirza of that country.

The title of Mirza there is much the same as that of Marquis among us, or that

of Baron among the Germans. The mirza, his father, had a handsome fortune.

Young Rustan was to be married to a mirzasse, or young lady of his own

rank. The two families earnestly desired their union. Rustan was to become

the comfort of his parents, to make his wife happy, and to live blest in her

possession.

  But he had unfortunately seen the princess of Cachemire at the fair of

Kaboul, which is the most considerable fair in the world, and much more

frequented than those of Bassora and Astracan. The occasion that brought the

old prince of Cachemire to the fair with his daughter was as follows:  He had lost the two most precious curiosities of his treasury; one of them

was  a  diamond  as  thick  as  a  man's  thumb,  upon  which  the  figure  of  his

daughter was engraved by an art which was then possessed by the Indians,

and has since been lost; the other was a javelin, which went of itself wherever

its owner thought proper to send it. This is nothing very extraordinary among

us, but it was thought so at Cachemire.

  A fakir belonging to his highness stole these two curiosities; he carried

them to the princess:

  "Keep these two curiosities with the utmost care; your destiny depends

upon them;" said he, and then departed.

  The Duke of Cachemire, in despair, resolved to visit the fair of Kaboul, in

order to see whether there might not, among the merchants who go thither

from all quarters of the world, be some one possessed of his diamond and his

weapon. The princess carried his diamond well fastened to her girdle; but the

javelin, which she could not so easily hide, she had carefully locked up at

Cachemire, in a large chest.

  Rustan and she saw each other at Kaboul. They loved one another with all

the sincerity of persons of their age, and all the tenderness of affection natural

to those of their country. The princess gave Rustan her diamond as a pledge

of her love, and he promised at his departure to go incognito to Cachemire, in

order to pay her a visit.

  The  young  mirza  had  two  favorites,  who  served  him  as  secretaries,

grooms, stewards, and valets de chambre. The name of one was Topaz; he

was handsome, well-shaped, fair as a Circassian beauty, as mild and ready to

serve as an Armenian, and as wise as a Gueber. The name of the other was

Ebene;  he  was  a  very  beautiful  negro,  more  active  and  industrious  than

Topaz,  and  one  that  thought  nothing  difficult.  The  young  mirza

communicated  his  intention  of  traveling  to  these.  Topaz  endeavored  to

dissuade  him  from  it,  with  the  circumspect  zeal  of  a  servant  who  was

unwilling to offend him. He represented to him the great danger to which he

exposed himself. He asked him how he could leave two families in despair?

how he could pierce the hearts of his parents? He shook the resolution of

Rustan; but Ebene confirmed it anew, and obviated all his objections.  The young man was not furnished with money to defray the charge of so

long  a  voyage.  The  prudent  Topaz  would  not  have  lent  him  any;  Ebene

supplied him. He with great address stole his master's diamond, made a false

one exactly like it which he put in its place, and pledged the true one to an

Armenian for several thousand rupees.

  As  soon  as  the  marquis  possessed  these  rupees,  all  things  were  in

readiness for his departure. An elephant was loaded with his baggage. His

attendants mounted on horseback.

  Topaz said to his master: "I have taken the liberty to expostulate with you

upon your enterprise, but after expostulating it is my duty to obey. I am

devoted to you, I love you, I will follow you to the extremity of the earth; but

let us by the way consult the oracle that is but two parasongs distant from

here."

  Rustan consented. The answer returned by the oracle, was:

  "If you go to the east you will be at the west."

  Rustan could not guess the meaning of this answer. Topaz maintained that

it boded no good. Ebene, always complaisant to his master, persuaded him

that it was highly favorable.

  There was another oracle at Kaboul; they went to it. The oracle of Kaboul

made answer in these words:

  "If you possess, you will cease to possess; if you are conqueror, you will

not conquer, if you are Rustan, you will cease to be so."

  This oracle seemed still more unintelligible than the former.

  "Take care of yourself," said Topaz.

  "Fear nothing," said Ebene; and this minister, as may well be imagined,

was always thought in the right by his master, whose passions and hopes he

encouraged.  Having  left  Kaboul,  they  passed  through  a  vast  forest.  They

seated  themselves  upon  the  grass  in  order  to  take  a  repast,  and  left  their

horses grazing. The attendants were preparing to unload the elephant which

carried the dinner, the table, cloth, plates, &c., when, all on a sudden, Topaz

and Ebene were perceived by the little caravan to be missing. They were

called, the forest resounded with the names of Topaz and Ebene; the lackeysseek  them  on  every  side,  and  fill  the  forest  with  their  cries;  they  return

without having seen anything, and without having received any answer.

  "We have," said they to Rustan, "found nothing but a vulture that fought

with an eagle, and stripped it of all its feathers."

  The mention of this combat excited the curiosity of Rustan; he went on

foot  to  the  place;  he  perceived  neither  vulture  nor  eagle;  but  he  saw  his

elephant, which was still loaded with baggage, attacked by a huge rhinoceros:

one struck with its horn, the other with its proboscis. The rhinoceros desisted

upon seeing Rustan; his elephant was brought back, but his horses were not

to be found.

  "Strange things happen in forests to travelers," cried Rustan.

  The servants were in great consternation, and the master in despair from

having at once lost his horse, his dear negro, and the wise Topaz, for whom

he still entertained a friendship, though always differing from him in opinion.

  The hope of being soon at the feet of the beautiful princess still consoled

the mirza, who, journeying on, now met with a huge streaked ass, which a

vigorous two-handed country clown beat with an oaken cudgel. The asses of

this sort are extremely beautiful, very scarce, and beyond comparison swift in

running. The ass resented the repeated blows of the clown by kicks which

might have rooted up an oak. The young mirza, as was reasonable, took upon

him the defence of the ass, which was a charming creature, the clown betook

himself to flight, crying to the ass, "You shall pay for this."

  The ass thanked her deliverer in her own language, and approaching him,

permitted his caresses and caressed him in her turn. After dinner, Rustan

mounted her, and took the road to Cachemire with his servants, who followed

him, some on foot and some upon the elephant. Scarce had he mounted his

ass,  when  that  animal  turned  toward  Kaboul,  instead  of  proceeding  to

Cachemire. It was to no purpose for her master to turn the bridle, to kick, to

press the sides of the beast with his knees, to spur, to slacken the bridle, to

pull toward him, to whip both on the right and the left. The obstinate animal

persisted in running toward Kaboul.

  Rustan in despair fretted and raved, when he met with a dealer in camels,

who said to him:  "Master, you have there a very malicious beast, that carries you where you

do not choose to go. If you will give it to me, I will give you the choice of

four of my camels."

  Rustan thanked providence for having thrown so good a bargain in the

way.

  "Topaz was very much in the wrong," said he, "to tell me that my journey

would prove unprosperous."

  He mounts the handsome camel, the others follow; he rejoins his caravan

and fancies himself on the road to happiness.

  Scarce had he journeyed four parasongs, when he was stopped by a deep,

broad, and impetuous torrent, which rolled over huge rocks white with foam.

The two banks were frightful precipices which dazzled the sight and made the

blood run cold. To pass was impracticable; to go to the right or to the left was

impossible.

  "I am beginning to be afraid," said Rustan, "that Topaz was in the right in

blaming my journey, and that I was in the wrong in undertaking it. If he were

still here he might give me good advice. If I had Ebene with me, he would

comfort me and find expedients; but everything fails me."

  This perplexity was increased by the consternation of his attendants. The

night  was  dark,  and  they  passed  it  in  lamentations.  At  last  fatigue  and

dejection made the amorous traveler fall asleep. He awoke at day-break, and

saw,  spanning  the  torrent,  a  beautiful  marble  bridge  which  reached  from

shore to shore.

  Nothing was heard but exclamations, cries of astonishment and joy. Is it

possible? Is this a dream? What a prodigy is this! What an enchantment!

Shall we venture to pass? The whole company kneeled, rose up, went to the

bridge, kissed the ground, looked up to heaven, stretched out their hands, set

their feet on it with trembling, went to and fro, fell into ecstasies; and Rustan

said:

  "At last heaven favors me. Topaz did not know what he was saying. The

oracles were favorable to me. Ebene was in the right, but why is he not here?"

  Scarce had the company got beyond the torrent, when the bridge sunk into

the water with a prodigious noise.  "So much the better, so much the better," cried Rustan. "Praised be God,

blessed be heaven; it would not have me return to my country, where I should

be nothing more than a gentleman. The intention of heaven is, that I should

wed her I love. I shall become prince of Cachemire; thus in possessing my

mistress I shall cease to possess my little marquisate at Candahar. 'I shall be

Rustan,  and  I  shall  not  be  Rustan,'  because  I  shall  have  become  a  great

prince: thus is a great part of the oracle clearly explained in my favor. The

rest will be explained in the same manner. I am very happy. But why is not

Ebene with me? I regret him a thousand times more than Topaz."

  He  proceeded  a  few  parasongs  farther  with  the  greatest  alacrity

imaginable; but, at the close of day, a chain of mountains more rugged than a

counterscarp, and higher than the tower of Babel would have been had it been

finished, stopped the passage of the caravan, which was again seized with

dread.

  All the company cried out: "It is the will of God that we perish here! he

broke the bridge merely to take from us all hopes of returning; he raised the

mountain for no other reason than to deprive us of all means of advancing.

Oh, Rustan! oh, unhappy marquis! we shall never see Cachemire; we shall

never return to the land of Candahar."

  The most poignant anguish, the most insupportable dejection, succeeded

in the soul of Rustan, to the immoderate joy which he had felt, to the hopes

with  which  he  had  intoxicated  himself.  He  was  no  longer  disposed  to

interpret the prophecies in his favor.

  "Oh, heavens! oh, God of my fathers!" said he, "must I then lose my friend

Topaz!"

  As he pronounced these words, fetching deep sighs and shedding tears in

the midst of his disconsolate followers, the base of the mountain opened, a

long gallery appeared to the dazzled eyes in a vault lighted with a hundred

thousand  torches.  Rustan  immediately  begins  to  exult,  and  his  people  to

throw  themselves  upon  their  knees  and  to  fall  upon  their  backs  in

astonishment, and cry out, "A miracle! a miracle! Rustan is the favorite of

Witsnow,  the  well-beloved  of  Brahma.  He  will  become  the  master  of

mankind."  Rustan  believed  it;  he  was  quite  beside  himself;  he  was  raised  above

himself.

  "Alas, Ebene," said he, "my dear Ebene, where are you? Why are you not

witness of all these wonders? How did I lose you? Beauteous princess of

Cachemire, when shall I again behold your charms!"

  He advances with his attendants, his elephants, and his camels, under the

hollow  of  the  mountain;  at  the  end  of  which  he  enters  into  a  meadow

enameled with flowers and encompassed with rivulets. At the extremity of

the meadows are walks of trees to the end of which the eye cannot reach, and

at the end of these alleys is a river, on the sides of which are a thousand

pleasure  houses  with  delicious  gardens.  He  everywhere  hears  concerts  of

vocal and instrumental music; he sees dances; he makes haste to go upon one

of the bridges of the river; he asks the first man he meets what fine country

that is?

  He whom he addressed himself to answered:

  "You are in the province of Cachemire; you see the inhabitants immersed

in joy and pleasure. We celebrate the marriage of our beauteous princess,

who  is  going  to  be  married  to  the  lord  Barbabou,  to  whom  her  father

promised her. May God perpetuate their felicity!"

  At these words Rustan fainted away, and the Cachemirian lord thought he

was troubled with the falling sickness. He caused him to be carried to his

house, where he remained a long time insensible. He sent in search of the two

most able physicians in that part of the country. They felt the patient's pulse,

who having somewhat recovered his spirits, sobbed, rolled his eyes, and cried

from time to time, "Topaz, Topaz, you were entirely in the right!"

  One of the two physicians said to the Cachemirian lord:

  "I perceive, by this young man's accent, that he is from Candahar, and that

the air of this country is hurtful to him. He must be sent home. I perceive by

his eyes that he has lost his senses. Entrust me with him, I will carry him

back to his own country, and cure him."

  The other physician maintained that grief was his only disorder; and that it

was proper to carry him to the wedding of the princess, and make him dance.

Whilst they were in consultation, the patient recovered his health. The twophysicians were dismissed, and Rustan remained along with his host.

  "My lord," said he, "I ask your pardon for having been so free as to faint in

your presence. I know it to be a breach of politeness. I entreat you to accept

of my elephant, as an acknowledgment of the kindness you have shown me."

  He then related to him all his adventure, taking particular care to conceal

from him the occasion of his journey.

  "But, in the name of Witsnow and Brahma," said he to him, "tell me who

is this happy Barbabou, who is to marry the princess of Cachemire? Why has

her father chosen him for his son-in-law, and why has the princess accepted

of him for an husband?"

  "Sir," answered the Cachemirian, "the princess has by no means accepted

of  Barbabou.  She  is,  on  the  contrary,  in  tears,  whilst  the  whole  province

joyfully celebrates her marriage. She has shut herself up in a tower of her

palace.  She  does  not  choose  to  see  any  of  the  rejoicings  made  upon  the

occasion."

  Rustan,  at  hearing  this,  perceived  himself  revived.  The  bloom  of  his

complexion,  which  grief  had  caused  to  fade,  appeared  again  upon  his

countenance.

  "Tell me, I entreat you," continued he, "why the prince of Cachemire is

obstinately bent upon giving his daughter to lord Barbabou whom she does

not love?"

  "This  is  the  fact,"  answered  the  Cachemirian.  "Do  you  know  that  our

august prince lost a large diamond and a javelin which he considered as of

great value?"

  "Ah! I very well know that," said Rustan.

  "Know then," said his host, "that our prince, being in despair at not having

heard of his two precious curiosities, after having caused them to be sought

for all over the world, promised his daughter to whoever should bring him

either the one or the other. A lord Barbabou came who had the diamond, and

he is to marry the princess to-morrow."

  Rustan turned pale, stammered out a compliment, took leave of his host,

and galloped upon his dromedary to the capital city, where the ceremony wasto be performed. He arrives at the palace of the prince, he tells him he has

something of importance to communicate to him, he demands an audience.

He is told that the prince is taken up with the preparations for the wedding.

  "It is for that very reason," said he, "that I am desirous of speaking to

him." Such is his importunity, that he is at last admitted.

  "Prince,"  said  he,  "may  God  crown  all  your  days  with  glory  and

magnificence! Your son-in-law is a knave."

  "What! a knave! how dare you speak in such terms? Is that a proper way

of speaking to a duke of Cachemire of a son-in-law of whom he has made

choice?"

  "Yes, he is a knave," continued Rustan; "and to prove it to your highness, I

have brought you back your diamond."

  The duke, surprised at what he heard, compared the two diamonds; and as

he was no judge of precious stones, he could not determine which was the

true one.

  "Here are two diamonds," said he, "and I have but one daughter, I am in a

strange perplexity."

  He sent for Harbabou, and asked him if he had not imposed upon him,

Harbabou swore he had bought his diamond from an Armenian; the other did

not tell him who he had his from; but he proposed an expedient, which was

that he should engage his rival in single combat.

  "It is not enough for your son-in-law to give a diamond," said he, "he

should also give proofs of valor. Do not you think it just that he who kills his

rival should marry the princess?"

    "Undoubtedly," answered the prince. "It will be a fine sight for the court.

Fight directly. The conqueror shall take the arms of the conquered according

to the customs of Cachemire, and he shall marry my daughter."

  The two pretenders to the hand of the princess go down into the court.

Upon the stairs there was a jay and a raven. The raven cried, "Fight, fight."

The jay cried, "Don't fight."

  This made the prince laugh; the two rivals scarce took any notice of it.

They  begin  the  combat.  All  the  courtiers  made  a  circle  round  them.  Theprincess, who kept herself constantly shut up in her tower, did not choose to

behold this sight. She never dreampt that her lover was at Cachemire, and she

hated Barbabou to such a degree, that she could not bear the sight of him. The

combat had the happiest result imaginable. Barbabou was killed outright; and

this greatly rejoiced the people, because he was ugly and Rustan was very

handsome.  The  favor  of  the  public  is  almost  always  determined  by  this

circumstance.

  The  conqueror  put  on  the  coat  of  mail,  scarf,  and  the  casque  of  the

conquered, and came, followed by the whole court, to present himself under

the windows of his mistress. The multitude cried aloud: "Beautiful princess,

come and see your handsome lover, who has killed his ugly rival." These

words were re-echoed by her women. The princess unluckily looked out of

the window, and seeing the armor of a man she hated, she ran like one frantic

to her strong box and took out the fatal javelin, which flew to pierce Rustan,

notwithstanding his cuirass. He cried out loudly, and at this cry the princess

thought she again knew the voice of her unhappy lover.

  She ran down stairs, with her hair disheveled, and death in her eyes as well

as  her  heart.  Rustan  had  already  fallen,  all  bloody,  into  the  arms  of  his

attendants.  She  sees  him.  Oh,  moment!  oh,  sight!  oh,  discovery  of

inexpressible grief, tenderness and horror! She throws herself upon him, and

embraces him.

  "You receive," said she, "the first and last kisses of your mistress and your

murderer."

  She pulls the dart from the wound, plunges it in her heart, and dies upon

the body of the lover whom she adores. The father, terrified, in despair, and

ready to die like his daughter, tries in vain to bring her to life. She was no

more. He curses the fatal dart, breaks it to pieces, throws away the two fatal

diamonds; and whilst he prepared the funeral of his daughter instead of her

marriage, he caused Rustan, who weltered in his blood and had still some

remains of life, to be carried to his palace.

  He was put into bed. The first objects he saw on each side of his deathbed

were Topaz and Ebene. This surprise made him in some degree recover his

strength.

  "Cruel men," said he, "why did you abandon me? Perhaps the princesswould still be alive if you had been with the unhappy Rustan."

  "I have not forsaken you a moment," said Topaz.

  "I have always been with you," said Ebene.

  "Ah!  what  do  you  say?  why  do  you  insult  me  in  my  last  moments?"

answered Rustan, with a languishing voice.

  "You may believe me," said Topaz. "You know I never approved of this

fatal journey, the dreadful consequences of which I foresaw. I was the eagle

that fought with the vulture and stripped it of its feathers; I was the elephant

that carried away the baggage, in order to force you to return to your own

country; I was the streaked ass that carried you, whether you would or no, to

your father; it was I that made your horses go astray; it was I that caused the

torrent that prevented your passage; it was I that raised the mountain which

stopped up a road so fatal to you; I was the physician that advised you to

return to your own country; I was the jay that cried to you not to fight."

  "And I," said Ebene, "was the vulture that he stripped of his feathers, the

rhinoceros who gave him a hundred strokes with the horn, the clown that beat

the streaked ass, the merchant who made you a present of camels to hasten

you to your destruction; I dug the cavern that you crossed, I am the physician

that encouraged you to walk, the raven that cried out to you to combat."

  "Alas!" said Topaz, "remember the oracles: 'If you go to the east you will

be at the west.'"

  "Yes," said Ebene, "here the dead are buried with their faces turned to the

west. The oracle was plain enough, though you did not understand it. You

possessed, and you did not possess; for though you had the diamond, it was a

false one, and you did not know it. You are conqueror, and you die; you are

Rustan, and you cease to be so: all has been accomplished."

  Whilst he spoke thus, four white wings covered the body of Topaz, and

four black ones that of Ebene.

  "What do I see?" cried Rustan.

  Topaz and Ebene answered together: "You see your two geniuses."

  "Good gentlemen," cried the unhappy Rustan, "how came you to meddle;

and what occasion had a poor man for two geniuses?"  "It is a law," answered Topaz; "every man has too geniuses. Plato was the

first man who said so, and others have repeated it after him. You see that

nothing can be more true. I who now speak to you, am your good genius. I

was charged to watch over you to the last moment of your life. Of this task I

have faithfully acquitted myself."

  "But," said the dying man, "if your business was to serve me, I am of a

nature much superior to yours. And then how can you have the assurance to

say you are my good genius, since you have suffered me to be deceived in

everything I have undertaken, and since you suffer both my mistress and me

to die miserably?"

  "Alas!" said Topaz, "it was your destiny."

  "If destiny does all," answered the dying man, "what is a genius good for?

And you, Ebene, with your four black wings, you are, doubtless, my evil

genius."

  "You have hit it," answered Ebene.

  "Then I suppose you were the evil genius of my princess likewise," said

Rustan.

  "No," replied Ebene, "she had an evil genius of her own, and I seconded

him perfectly."

  "Ah!  cursed  Ebene,"  said  Rustan,  "if  you  are  so  malicious,  you  don't

belong  to  the  same  master  with  Topaz:  you  have  been  formed  by  two

different principles, one of which is by nature good, the other evil."

  "That does not follow," said Ebene, "this is a very knotty point."

  "It is not possible," answered the dying man, "that a benevolent being

could create so destructive a genius."

  "Possible or not possible," replied the genius, "the thing is just as I say."

  "Alas!" said Topaz, "my poor unfortunate friend, don't you see that that

rogue is so malicious as to encourage you to dispute, in order to inflame your

blood and hasten your death?"

  "Get  you  gone,"  said  the  melancholy  Rustan,  "I  am  not  much  better

satisfied with you than with him. He at least acknowledges that it was his

intention to hurt me; and you, who pretended to defend me, have done me noservice at all."

  "I am very sorry for it," said the good genius.

  "And I too," said the dying man; "there is something at the bottom of all

this which I cannot comprehend."

  "Nor I neither," said the good genius.

  "I shall know the truth of the matter in a moment," said Rustan. "We shall

see that," said Topaz.

  The whole scene then vanished. Rustan again found himself in the house

of his father, which he had not quitted, and in his bed, where he had slept an

hour.

  He awakes in astonishment, perspiring all over, and quite wild. He rubs

himself, he calls, he rings the bell. His valet de chambre, Topaz, runs in, in

his nightcap, and yawning.

  "Am I dead or alive?" cried out Rustan, "shall the beauteous princess of

Cachemire escape?

  "Does your lordship rave?" answered Topaz, coldly.

  "Ah!" cried Rustan, "what then is become of this barbarous Ebene, with

his four black wings! It is he that makes me die by so cruel a death."

  "My lord," answered Topaz, "I left him snoring up stairs. Would you have

me bid him come down?"

  "The villain," said Rustan, "has persecuted me for six months together. It

was he who carried me to the fatal fair of Kaboul; it is he that cheated me of

the diamond which the princess presented me; he is the sole cause of my

journey, of the death of my princess, and of the wound with a javelin, of

which I die in the flower of my age."

  "Take heart," said Topaz, "you were never at Kaboul; there is no princess

of Cachemire; her father never had any children but two boys, who are now

at college; you never had a diamond; the princess cannot be dead, because

she never was born; and you are in perfect health."

  "What! is it not then true that you attended me whilst dying, and in the bed

of the prince of Cachemire? Did you not acknowledge to me, that, in order topreserve  me  from  so  many  dangers,  you  were  an  eagle,  an  elephant,  a

streaked ass, a physician, and a jay?"

  "My lord, you have dreampt all this," answered Topaz; "our ideas are no

more of our own creating whilst we are asleep than whilst we are awake. God

has thought proper that this train of ideas should pass in your head, most

probably to convey some instruction to you, of which you may make a good

use."

  "You make a jest of me," replied Rustan, "how long have I slept?"

  "My lord," said Topaz, "you have not yet slept an hour."

  "Cursed reasoner," returned Rustan, "how is it possible that I could be in

the space of an hour at the fair of Kaboul six months ago; that I could have

returned from thence, have traveled to Cachemire, and that Barbabou, the

princess, and I, should have died?"

  "My lord," said Topaz, "nothing can be more easy and more common; and

you might have traveled around the world, and have met with a great many

more adventures in much less time. Is it not true that you can, in an hour's

time, read the abridgment of the Persian history, written by Zoroaster? yet

this abridgment contains eight hundred thousand years. All these events pass

before  your  eyes  one  after  another,  in  an  hour's  time.  Now  you  must

acknowledge, that it is as easy to Brahma to confine them to the space of an

hour, as to extend them to the space of eight hundred thousand years. It is

exactly the same thing. Imagine to yourself that time turns upon a wheel

whose diameter is infinite. Under this vast wheel is a numerous multitude of

wheels  one  within  another.  That  in  the  centre  is  imperceptible,  and  goes

round an infinite number of times, whilst the great wheel performs but one

revolution. It is evident that all the events which have happened from the

beginning of the world, to its end, might have happened in much less time

than the hundred thousandth part of a second; and one may even go so far as

to assert that the thing is so."

  "I cannot comprehend all this," said Rustan.

  "If you want information," said Topaz, "I have a parrot that will easily

explain it to you. He was born some time before the deluge; he has been in

the ark; he has seen a great deal; yet he is but a year and a half old. He willrelate to you his history, which is extremely interesting."

  "Go fetch your parrot," said Rustan, "it will amuse me till I again find

myself disposed to sleep."

  "It is with my sister, the nun," said Topaz: "I will go and fetch it. It will

please you; its memory is faithful, it relates in a simple manner, without

endeavoring to show wit at every turn."

  "So much the better," said Rustan, "I like that manner of telling stories."

  The parrot being brought to him, spoke in this manner:

  N.B. Mademoiselle Catherine Vade could never find the history of the

parrot in the commonplace-book of her late cousin Anthony Vade, author of

that tale. This is a great misfortune, considering what age that parrot lived in.


  Young Memnon. [1]

  MEMNON THE PHILOSOPHER.

  Memnon one day took it into his head to become a great philosopher. "To

be perfectly happy," said he to himself, "I have nothing to do but to divest

myself entirely of passions; and nothing is more easy, as everybody knows.

In the first place, I will never be in love; for, when I see a beautiful woman, I

will say to myself, these cheeks will one day grow sallow and wrinkled, these

eyes be encircled with vermilion, that bosom become lean and emaciated,

that head bald and palsied. Now I have only to consider her at present in

imagination as she will afterwards appear in reality, and certainly a fair face

will never turn my head.

  "In the second place, I shall always be temperate. It will be in vain to

tempt me with good cheer, with delicious wines, or the charms of society, I

will have only to figure to myself the consequences of excess-an aching head,

a loathing stomach, the loss of reason, of health, and of time: I will then only

eat to supply the waste of nature; my health will be always equal, my ideas

pure and luminous. All this is so easy that there is no merit in accomplishing

it."

  "But," says Memnon, "I must think a little of how I am to regulate my

fortune: why, my desires are moderate, my wealth is securely placed with theReceiver  General  of  the  finances  of  Nineveh.  I  have  wherewithal  to  live

independent; and that is the greatest of blessings. I shall never be under the

cruel necessity of dancing attendance at court. I will never envy any one, and

nobody will envy me. Still all this is easy. I have friends, and I will preserve

them, for we shall never have any difference. I will never take amiss anything

they may say or do; and they will behave in the same way to me. There is no

difficulty in all this."

  Having thus laid this little plan of philosophy in his closet, Memnon put

his head out of the window. He saw two women walking under the plane-

trees near his house. The one was old, and appeared quite at her ease. The

other was young, handsome, and seemingly much agitated. She sighed, she

wept, and seemed on that account still more beautiful. Our philosopher was

touched, not, to be sure, with the lady, (he was too much determined not to

feel any uneasiness of that kind) but with the distress which he saw her in. He

came down stairs, and accosted the young Ninevite, designing to console her

with philosophy. That lovely person related to him, with an air of the greatest

simplicity, and in the most affecting manner, the injuries she sustained from

an imaginary uncle-with what art he had deprived her of some imaginary

property, and of the violence which she pretended to dread from him.

  "You appear to me," said she, "a man of such wisdom, that if you will

come to my house and examine into my affairs, I am persuaded you will be

able to relieve me from the cruel embarrassment I am at present involved in."

  Memnon  did  not  hesitate  to  follow  her,  to  examine  her  affairs

philosophically, and to give her sound counsel.

  The afflicted lady led him into a perfumed chamber, and politely made

him sit down with her on a large sofa, where they both placed themselves

opposite to each other, in the attitude of conversation; the one eager in telling

her  story,  the  other  listening  with  devout  attention.  The  lady  spoke  with

downcast eyes, whence there sometimes fell a tear, and which, as she now

and then ventured to raise them, always met those of the sage Memnon. Their

discourse was full of tenderness, which redoubled as often as their eyes met.

Memnon took her affairs exceedingly to heart, and felt himself every instant

more and more inclined to oblige a person so virtuous and so unhappy. By

degrees, in the warmth of conversation they drew nearer. Memnon counseledher with great wisdom, and gave her most tender advice.

  At this interesting moment, as may easily be imagined, who should come

in but the uncle. He was armed from head to foot, and the first thing he said

was, that he would immediately sacrifice, as was just, both Memnon and his

niece. The latter, who made her escape, knew that he was disposed to pardon,

provided a good round sum were offered to him. Memnon was obliged to

purchase his safety with all he had about him. In those days people were

happy  in  getting  so  easily  quit.  America  was  not  then  discovered,  and

distressed ladies were not then so dangerous as they are now.

  Memnon, covered with shame and confusion, got home to his own house.

He  there  found  a  card  inviting  him  to  dinner  with  some  of  his  intimate

friends.

  "If I remain at home alone," said he, "I shall have my mind so occupied

with this vexatious adventure, that I shall not be able to eat a bit, and I shall

bring upon myself some disease. It will therefore be prudent in me to go to

my intimate friends and partake with them of a frugal repast. I shall forget, in

the sweets of their society, the folly I have this morning been guilty of."

  Accordingly  he  attends  the  meeting;  he  is  discovered  to  be  uneasy  at

something, and he is urged to drink and banish care.

  "A little wine, drank in moderation, comforts the heart of God and man:"

so reasoned Memnon the philosopher, and he became intoxicated. After the

repast, play is proposed.

  "A little play, with one's intimate friends, is a harmless pastime." He plays

and loses all in his purse, and four times as much on his word. A dispute

arises on some circumstance in the game, and the disputants grow warm. One

of his intimate friends throws a dice-box at his head, and strikes out one of

his eyes. The philosopher Memnon is carried home drunk and penniless, with

the loss of an eye.

  He sleeps out his debauch, and, when his head becomes clear, he sends his

servant to the Receiver General of the finances of Nineveh, to draw a little

money to pay his debt of honor to his intimate friends. The servant returns

and informs him, that the Receiver General had that morning been declared a

fraudulent bankrupt, and that by this means an hundred families are reducedto poverty and despair. Memnon, almost beside himself, puts a plaster on his

eye and a petition in his pocket, and goes to court to solicit justice from the

king against the bankrupt. In the saloon he meets a number of ladies, all in

the  highest  spirits,  and  sailing  along  with  hoops  four-and-twenty  feet  in

circumference. One of them, slightly acquainted with him, eyed him askance,

and cried aloud: "Ah! what a horrid monster!"

  Another, who was better acquainted with him, thus accosts him: "Good-

morrow, Mr. Memnon, I hope you are well, Mr. Memnon. La! Mr. Memnon,

how  did  you  lose  your  eye?"  and  turning  upon  her  heel,  she  tripped

unconcernedly away.

  Memnon hid himself in a corner, and waited for the moment when he

could throw himself at the feet of the monarch. That moment at last arrived.

Three  times  he  kissed  the  earth,  and  presented  his  petition.  His  gracious

majesty received him very favorably, and referred the paper to one of his

satraps. The satrap takes Memnon aside, and says to him with a haughty air

and satirical grin:

  "Hark ye, you fellow with the one eye, you must be a comical dog indeed,

to address yourself to the king rather than to me: and still more so, to dare to

demand  justice  against  an  honest  bankrupt,  whom  I  honor  with  my

protection, and who is also a nephew to the waiting-maid of my mistress.

Proceed no further in this business, my good friend, if you wish to preserve

the eye you have left."

  Memnon  having  thus,  in  his  closet,  resolved  to  renounce  women,  the

excess of the table, play, and quarreling, but especially having determined

never to go to court, had been in the short space of four-and-twenty hours

duped and robbed by a gentle dame, had got drunk, had gamed, had been

engaged in a quarrel, had got his eye knocked out, and had been at court,

where he was sneered at and insulted.

  Petrified  with  astonishment,  and  his  heart  broken  with  grief,  Memnon

returns  homeward  in  despair.  As  he  was  about  to  enter  his  house,  he  is

repulsed by a number of officers who are carrying off his furniture for the

benefit  of  his  creditors.  He  falls  down  almost  lifeless  under  a  plane-tree.

There he finds the fair dame of the morning, who was walking with her dear

uncle; and both set up a loud laugh on seeing Memnon with his plaster. Thenight approached, and Memnon made his bed on some straw near the walls of

his house. Here the ague seized him, and he fell asleep in one of the fits,

when a celestial spirit appeared to him in a dream.

  It was all resplendent with light: it had six beautiful wings, but neither

feet, nor head, and could be likened to nothing.

  "What art thou?" said Memnon.

  "Thy good genius," replied the spirit.

  "Restore  me  then  my  eye,  my  health,  my  fortune,  my  reason,"  said

Memnon; and he related how he had lost them all in one day. "These are

adventures which never happen to us in the world we inhabit," said the spirit.

  "And what world do you inhabit?" said the man of affliction.

  "My  native  country,"  replied  the  other,  "is  five  hundred  millions  of

leagues distant from the sun, in a little star near Sirius, which you see from

hence."

  "Charming country!" said Memnon. "And are there indeed with you no

jades to dupe a poor devil, no intimate friends that win his money and knock

out an eye for him, no fraudulent bankrupts, no satraps, that make a jest of

you while they refuse you justice?"

  "No," said the inhabitant of the star, "we have nothing of the kind. We are

never duped by women, because we have none among us; we never commit

excesses at table, because we neither eat nor drink; we have no bankrupts,

because with us there is neither silver nor gold; our eyes cannot be knocked

out, because we have not bodies in the form of yours; and satraps never do us

injustice, because in our world we are all equal."

  "Pray my lord," said Memnen, "without women and without eating how

do you spend your time?"

  "In watching, over the other worlds that are entrusted to us; and I am now

come to give you consolation."

  "Alas!" replied Memnon, "why did you not come yesterday to hinder me

from committing so many indiscretions?"

  "I was with your elder brother Hassan," said the celestial being. "He is still

more to be pitied than you are. His most gracious majesty, the sultan of theIndies, in whose court he has the honor to serve, has caused both his eyes to

be put out for some small indiscretion; and he is now in a dungeon, his hands

and feet loaded with chains."

  "'Tis a happy thing, truly," said Memnon, "to have a good genius in one's

family, when out of two brothers, one is blind of an eye, the other blind of

both; one stretched upon straw, the other in a dungeon."

  "Your fate will soon change," said the spirit of the star. "It is true you will

never recover your eye; but, except that, you may be sufficiently happy if you

never again take it into your head to be a perfect philosopher."

  "Is it then impossible?" said Memnon.

  "As  impossible  as  to  be  perfectly  wise,  perfectly  strong,  perfectly

powerful, perfectly happy. We ourselves are very far from it. There is a world

indeed where all this takes place; but, in the hundred thousand millions of

worlds dispersed over the regions of space, everything goes on by degrees.

There is less philosophy and less enjoyment in the second than in the first,

less in the third than in the second, and so forth till the last in the scale, where

all are completely fools."

  "I am afraid," said Memnon, "that our little terraqueous globe here is the

madhouse  of  those  hundred  thousand  millions  of  worlds,  of  which  your

lordship does me the honor to speak."

  "Not quite," said the spirit, "but very nearly; everything must be in its

proper place."

  "But  are  those  poets  and  philosophers  wrong,  then,  who  tell  us  that

everything is for the best?"

  "No, they are right, when we consider things in relation to the gradation of

the whole universe."

  "Oh!  I  shall  never  believe  it  till  I  recover  my  eye  again,"  said  the

unfortunate Memnon.

  Memnon and the distressed Ninevite.-"The afflicted lady led him into a

perfumed  chamber,  where  they  both  placed  themselves  opposite  to  each

other, in the attitude of conversation; the one eager in telling her story, the

other listening with devout attention."  [1] The above engraving from Chamber's Guide to the British Museum,

represents a head and bust of Memnon, "formed of a single block of fine

syene granite, one piece of which is red, while the rest is blue or grayish. The

sculptor, with admirable taste, used the red part for the head, and the darker

part for the breast. Although the statue has all the characteristics of Egyptian

sculpture-the projecting eyes, thick lips, high ears, and small chin-yet such is

the beauty of the execution, so much sweetness and mildness is there in the

expression of the countenance, that the effect is, on the whole, extremely

pleasing. Here, in short, we have the masterpiece of some Egyptian sculptor

of superior genius, whose name has perished. Here also, if we are to accept

the statue as a genuine likeness, we behold the features of the great Egyptian

Pharaoh,  at  whose  name,  some  fourteen  centuries  before  Christ,  the

Mediterranean  nations  trembled.  Doubtless  on  such  a  subject  the  sculptor

would do his best; striving, while transmitting the features of the hero to

posterity, to produce also a countenance that would be the ideal of Egyptian

beauty."-E.


  ANDRÉ DES TOUCHES AT SIAM.

  André Des Touches was a very agreeable musician in the brilliant reign of

Louis XIV. before the science of music was perfected by Rameau; and before

it was corrupted by those who prefer the art of surmounting difficulties to

nature and the real graces of composition.

  Before  he  had  recourse  to  these  talents  he  had  been  a  musketeer,  and

before that, in 1688, he went into Siam with the Jesuit Tachard, who gave

him many marks of his affection, for the amusement he afforded on board the

ship; and Des Touches spoke with admiration of father Tachard for the rest of

his life.

  At Siam he became acquainted with the first commissary of Barcalon,

whose  name  was  Croutef;  and  he  committed  to  writing  most  of  those

questions which he asked of Croutef, and the answers of that Siamese. They

are as follows:

  DES TOUCHES.-How many soldiers have you?    CROUTEF.-Fourscore thousand, very indifferently paid.

  DES TOUCHES.-And how many Talapolins?

  CROUTEF.-A hundred and twenty thousand, very idle and very rich. It is

true  that  in  the  last  war  we  were  beaten,  but  our  Talapolins  have  lived

sumptuously, and built fine houses.

  DES  TOUCHES.-Nothing  could  have  discovered  more  judgment.  And

your finances, in what state are they?

    CROUTEF.-In a very bad state. We have, however, about ninety thousand

men employed to render them prosperous, and if they have not succeeded, it

has not been their fault; for there is not one of them who does not honorably

seize  all  that  he  can  get  possession  of,  and  strip  and  plunder  those  who

cultivate the ground for the good of the state.

  DES TOUCHES.-Bravo! And is not your jurisprudence as perfect as the

rest of your administration?

  CROUTEF.-It is much superior. We have no laws, but we have five or six

thousand volumes on the laws. We are governed in general by customs; for it

is known that a custom, having been established by chance, is the wisest

principle  that  can  be  imagined.  Besides,  all  customs  being  necessarily

different in different provinces, the judges may choose at their pleasure a

custom which prevailed four hundred years ago, or one which prevailed last

year. It occasions a variety in our legislation, which our neighbors are forever

admiring. This yields a certain fortune to practitioners. It is a resource for all

pleaders who are destitute of honor, and a pastime of infinite amusement for

the  judges,  who  can  with  safe  consciences  decide  causes  without

understanding them.

  DES  TOUCHES.-But  in  criminal  cases-you  have  laws  which  may  be

depended upon.

    CROUTEF.-God forbid! We can condemn men to exile, to the galleys, to

be  hanged;  or  we  can  discharge  them,  according  to  our  own  fancy.  We

sometimes complain of the arbitrary power of the Barcalon; but we choose

that all our decisions should be arbitrary.

  DES TOUCHES.-That is very just. And the torture-do you put people to

the torture?  CROUTEF.-It  is  our  greatest  pleasure.  We  have  found  it  an  infallible

secret to save a guilty person, who has vigorous muscles, strong and supple

hamstrings, nervous arms, and firm loins; and we gaily break on the wheel all

those innocent persons to whom nature has given feeble organs. It is thus we

conduct ourselves with wonderful wisdom and prudence. As there are half

proofs, I mean half truths, it is certain there are persons who are half innocent

and half guilty. We commence, therefore, by rendering them half dead; we

then go to breakfast; afterwards ensues entire death, which gives us great

consideration in the world, which is one of the most valuable advantages of

our offices.

  DES TOUCHES.-It must be allowed that nothing can be more prudent and

humane. Pray tell me what becomes of the property of the condemned?

    CROUTEF.-The children are deprived of it. For you know that nothing

can be more equitable than to punish the single fault of a parent on all his

descendants.

  DES  TOUCHES.-Yes.  It  is  a  great  while  since  I  have  heard  of  this

jurisprudence.

    CROUTEF.-The people of Laos, our neighbors, admit neither the torture,

nor arbitrary punishments, nor the different customs, nor the horrible deaths

which are in use among us; but we regard them as barbarians who have no

idea of good government. All Asia is agreed that we dance the best of all its

inhabitants, and that, consequently, it is impossible they should come near us

in jurisprudence, in commerce, in finance, and, above all, in the military art.

  DES TOUCHES.-Tell me, I beseech you, by what steps men arrive at the

magistracy in Siam.

    CROUTEF.-By ready money. You perceive that it may be impossible to

be a good judge, if a man has not by him thirty or forty thousand pieces of

silver. It is in vain a man may be perfectly acquainted with all our customs; it

is to no purpose that he has pleaded five hundred causes with success-that he

has a mind which is the seat of judgment, and a heart replete with justice; no

man can become a magistrate without money. This, I say, is the circumstance

which distinguishes us from all Asia, and particularly from the barbarous

inhabitants of Laos, who have the madness to recompense all kinds of talents,and not to sell any employment.

  André des Touches, who was a little off his guard, said to the Siamese,

that most of the airs which he had just sung sounded discordant to him; and

wished to receive information concerning real Siamese music. But Croutef,

full of his subject, and enthusiastic for his country, continued in these words:

  "What does it signify that our neighbors, who live beyond our mountains,

have better music than we have, or better pictures; provided we have always

wise and humane laws? It is in that circumstance we excel. For example:

  "If a man has adroitly stolen three or four hundred thousand pieces of

gold, we respect him, and we go and dine with him. But if a poor servant gets

awkwardly  into  his  possession  three  or  four  pieces  of  copper  out  of  his

mistress's box, we never fail of putting that servant to a public death; first,

lest he should not correct himself; secondly, that he may not have it in his

power to produce a great number of children for the state, one or two of

whom might possibly steal a few little pieces of copper, or become great

men; thirdly, because it is just to proportion the punishment to the crime, and

that it would be ridiculous to give any useful employment in a prison to a

person guilty of so enormous a crime.

  "But  we  are  still  more  just,  more  merciful,  more  reasonable  in  the

chastisements which we inflict on those who have the audacity to make use

of their legs to go wherever they choose. We treat those warriors so well who

sell  us  their  lives,  we  give  them  so  prodigious  a  salary,  they  have  so

considerable a part in our conquests, that they must be the most criminal of

all men to wish to return to their parents on the recovery of their reason,

because they had been enlisted in a state of intoxication. To oblige them to

remain in one place, we lodge about a dozen leaden balls in their heads; after

which they become infinitely useful to their country.

  "I will not speak of a great number of excellent institutions, which do not

go so far as to shed the blood of men, but which render life so pleasant and

agreeable that it is impossible the guilty should avoid becoming virtuous. If a

farmer has not been able to pay promptly a tax which exceeds his ability, we

sell the pot in which he dresses his food; we sell his bed, in order that, being

relieved of all his superfluities, he may be in a better condition to cultivate

the earth."  DES TOUCHES.-That is extremely harmonious!

    CROUTEF.-To comprehend our profound wisdom, you must know that

our fundamental principle is to acknowledge in many places as our sovereign,

a shaven-headed foreigner who lives at the distance of nine hundred miles

from  us.  When  we  assign  some  of  our  best  territories  to  any  of  our

Talapolins, which it is very prudent in us to do, that Siamese Talapolin must

pay the revenue of his first year to that shaven-headed Tartar, without which

it is clear our lands would be unfruitful.

  But  the  time,  the  happy  time,  is  no  more,  when  that  tonsured  priest

induced one half of the nation to cut the throats of the other half, in order to

decide whether Sammonocodom had played at leap-frog or at some other

game; whether he had been disguised in an elephant or in a cow; if he had

slept three hundred and ninety days on the right side, or on the left. Those

grand questions, which so essentially affect morality, agitated all minds; they

shook the world; blood flowed plentifully for it; women were massacred on

the bodies of their husbands; they dashed out the brains of their little infants

on the stones, with a devotion, with a grace, with a contrition truly angelic.

Woe to us! degenerate offspring of pious ancestors, who never offer such

holy sacrifices! But, heaven be praised, there are yet among us at least a few

good souls, who would imitate them if they were permitted.

  DES TOUCHES.-Tell me, I beseech you, sir, if at Siam you divide the

tone major into two commas, or into two semi-commas; and if the progress of

the fundamental sounds are made by one, three, and nine?

  CROUTEF. By Sammonocodom, you are laughing at me. You observe no

bounds. You have interrogated me on the form of our government, and you

speak to me of music!

  DES TOUCHES.Music is everything. It was at the foundation of all the

politics of the Greeks. But I beg your pardon; you have not a good ear; and

we will return to our subject. You said, that in order to produce a perfect

harmony-

  CROUTEF.-I was telling you, that formerly the tonsured Tartar pretended

to dispose of all the kingdoms of Asia; which occasioned something very

different from perfect harmony. But a very considerable benefit resulted from

it;  for  people  were  then  more  devout  toward  Sammonocodom  and  hiselephant than they are now; for, at the present time, all the world pretends to

common sense, with an indiscretion truly pitiable. However, all things go on;

people divert themselves, they dance, they play, they dine, they sup, they

make love; this makes every man shudder who entertains good intentions.

  DES TOUCHES.-And what would you have more? You only want good

music. If you had good music, you might call your nation the happiest in the

world.

  THE BLIND PENSIONERS AT QUINZE VINGT.

  A SHORT DIGRESSION.-When the hospital of the Quinze Vingt was

first  founded,  the  pensioners  were  all  equal,  and  their  little  affairs  were

concluded upon by a majority of votes. They distinguished perfectly by the

touch between copper and silver coin; they never mistook the wine of Brie

for that of Burgundy. Their sense of smelling was finer than that of their

neighbors who had the use of two eyes. They reasoned very well on the four

senses; that is, they knew everything they were permitted to know, and they

lived as peaceably and as happily as blind people could be supposed to do.

But unfortunately one of their professors pretended to have clear ideas in

respect to the sense of seeing, he drew attention; he intrigued; he formed

enthusiasts; and at last he was acknowledged chief of the community. He

pretended to be a judge of colors, and everything was lost.

  This dictator of the Quinze Vingt chose at first a little council, by the

assistance of which he got possession of all the alms. On this account, no

person had the resolution to oppose him. He decreed, that all the inhabitants

of the Quinze Vingt were clothed in white. The blind pensioners believed

him; and nothing was to be heard but their talk of white garments, though, in

fact, they possessed not one of that color. All their acquaintance laughed at

them. They made their complaints to the dictator, who received them very ill;

he  rebuked  them  as  innovators,  freethinkers,  rebels,  who  had  suffered

themselves  to  be  seduced  by  the  errors  of  those  who  had  eyes,  and  who

presumed to doubt that their chief was infallible. This contention gave rise to

two parties.

  To appease the tumult, the dictator issued a decree, importing that all their

vestments were red. There was not one vestment of that color in the Quinze

Vingt. The poor men were laughed at more than ever. Complaints were againmade by the community. The dictator rushed furiously in; and the other blind

men were as much enraged. They fought a long time; and peace was not

restored until the members of the Quinze Vingt were permitted to suspend

their judgments in regard to the color of their dress.

  A deaf man, reading this little history, allowed that these people, being

blind, were to blame in pretending to judge of colors; but he remained steady

to his own opinion, that those persons who were deaf were the only proper

judges of music.

  Boodh resting "upon the face of the waters," supported by serpents.[1]

  BABABEC.

  When I was in the city of Benarez, on the borders of the Ganges, the

country  of  the  ancient  Brahmins,  I  endeavored  to  instruct  myself  in  their

religion and manners. I understood the Indian language tolerably well. I heard

a  great  deal,  and  remarked  everything.  I  lodged  at  the  house  of  my

correspondent Omri, who was the most worthy man I ever knew. He was of

the religion of the Brahmins: I have the honor to be a Mussulman. We never

exchanged one word higher than another about Mahomet or Brahma. We

performed our ablutions each on his own side; we drank of the same sherbet,

and we ate of the same rice, as if we had been two brothers.

  One day we went together to the pagoda of Gavani. There we saw several

bands of Fakirs. Some of whom were Janguis, that is to say, contemplative

Fakirs; and others were disciples of the ancient Gymnosophists, who led an

active life. They all have a learned language peculiar to themselves; it is that

of the most ancient Brahmins; and they have a book written in this language,

which they call the Shasta. It is, beyond all contradiction, the most ancient

book in all Asia, not excepting the Zend.

  I happened by chance to cross in front of a Fakir, who was reading in this

book.

  "Ah! wretched infidel!" cried he, "thou hast made me lose a number of

vowels that I was counting, which will cause my soul to pass into the body of

a hare instead of that of a parrot, with which I had before the greatest reason

to flatter myself."

  I gave him a rupee to comfort him for the accident. In going a few pacesfarther, I had the misfortune to sneeze. The noise I made roused a Fakir, who

was in a trance.

  "Heavens!" cried he, "what a dreadful noise. Where am I? I can no longer

see the tip of my nose,-the heavenly light has disappeared."

  "If I am the cause," said I, "of your not seeing farther than the length of

your nose, here is a rupee to repair the great injury I have done you. Squint

again, my friend, and resume the heavenly light."

  Having thus brought myself off discreetly enough, I passed over to the

side of the Gymnosophists, several of whom brought me a parcel of mighty

pretty nails to drive into my arms and thighs, in honor of Brahma. I bought

their nails, and made use of them to fasten down my boxes. Others were

dancing upon their hands, others cut capers on the slack rope, and others went

always upon one foot. There were some who dragged a heavy chain about

with them, and others carried a packsaddle; some had their heads always in a

bushel-the best people in the world to live with. My friend Omri took me to

the cell of one of the most famous of these. His name was Bababec: he was as

naked as he was born, and had a great chain about his neck, that weighed

upwards of sixty pounds. He sat on a wooden chair, very neatly decorated

with little points of nails that penetrated into his flesh; and you would have

thought he had been sitting on a velvet cushion. Numbers of women flocked

to  him  to  consult  him.  He  was  the  oracle  of  all  the  families  in  the

neighborhood; and was, truly speaking, in great reputation. I was witness to a

long conversation that Omri had with him.

  [1]  Boodhism,  is  described  in  Webster's  Dictionary  as  "a  system  of

religion in Eastern Asia, embraced by more than one third of the human race.

It teaches that, at distant intervals, a Boodh, or deity, appears, to restore the

world from a state of ignorance and decay, and then sinks into a state of

entire non-existence, or rather, perhaps, of bare existence without attributes,

action, or consciousness. This state, called Nirvana, or Nicban, is regarded as

the ultimate supreme good, and the highest reward of virtue among men.

Four Boodhs have thus appeared in the world, and passed into Nirvana, the

last of whom, Gaudama, became incarnate about 500 years before Christ,

from  his  death,  in  543  B.C.,  many  thousand  years  will  elapse  before  the

appearance of another; so that the system, in the mean time, is practically oneof pure atheism."


  The serpent has ever been a significant emblem in religion and mythology.

Being "the most subtle beast of the field," it was naturally accepted as the

emblem of wisdom. With its tail in its mouth it formed a circle, which was

regarded by the ancients as the emblem of eternity. Moses set up a brazen

serpent on a cross in the wilderness as an emblem of healing. Æsculapius, the

god of medicine, is seen on ancient statues with a serpent twining around a

staff by his side, symbolizing health, prudence and foresight. Hygiea, the

goddess of health, is represented in works of art as a virgin dressed in a long

robe and feeding a serpent from a cup. Mercury is always shown holding in

his right hand a wand with two twined serpents. The nine coiled serpents in

the  above  engraving,  correspond  with  the  nine  muses  in  the  Grecian

mythology. The cobra, whose poison is death, is an emblem of the destroying

power,  and  destruction,  or  rather  change,  symbolizes  new  formation,

renovation  or  creation.  Thus  eternal  formation,  proceeds  from  eternal

destruction. The serpent also figures in a beautiful allegory concerning the

introduction of knowledge among mankind, i.e., "the knowledge of good and

evil."-E.

  The Fakir.

    RELIGIOUS ZEAL.


  The  most  earnest  and  zealous  advocates  of  modern  Christianity  are,

undoubtedly, to be found in the ranks of that grotesque organization known

as  the  "Salvation  Army";  but  the  wildest  efforts  of  these  misguided

propagandists fall far short of the intense religious fervor displayed by the

zealous followers of Brahma.

  A contributor to Cassell's Illustrated Travels describes a religious festival

which he witnessed a few years ago at Hurdwar on the Ganges, while on an

elephant  shooting  expedition  in  the  Dehra  Dhoon,  Northern  India,  which

vividly  illustrates  the  folly  and  fanaticism  of  these  degraded  religious

devotees,  and  which  is  only  second  in  repulsiveness  to  the  horrible

ceremonies of Juggernaut.

  "There is," says this writer, "a religious festival every year at Hurdwar, butevery sixth year the ceremonies are more holy and the crowd of pilgrims

larger. The Koom Mela, a religious feast of great holiness in native eyes,

occurs every eleven years, and the pilgrims on such occasions arrive from

every part of India. The crowd usually numbers over two millions. But it is

when the festivals occurring at intervals of six years and at intervals of eleven

years  happen  to  meet  in  the  same  year  that  the  crowd  is  the  largest,  the

importance of the fair greatest, and the concourse of fanatic fakirs and holy

Brahmins,  from  every  hole  and  corner  of  India,  the  most  striking  and

remarkable.  Merchants  arrive  from  the  most  distant  countries;  not  from

different parts of India only, but from Persia, Thibet, China, Afghanistan, and

even from Russia. It was one of these festivals and giant fairs that we had the

good fortune to see.

  "As the day of the great festival approaches, the fakirs-who by the way are

always stark naked, and generally as disgusting specimens of humanity as it

is  possible  to  conceive-and  the  Brahmins,  excite  their  hearers  by

increasingly-fervent speeches, by self-applied tortures, frightful contortions,

and wild dances and gestures, to which the crowd loudly responds by shouts

and wild yells. Early on the morning of the day which to their mind is more

holy  than  any  other  in  their  whole  lifetime,  the  assembled  people  to  the

number of two or even three millions, repair to the ghauts and patiently wait

for  the  signal,  to  begin  their  work  of  regeneration  and  salvation.  This

desirable end is attained by each and every individual who within a certain

time, during the tinkling of a well-known bell, precipitates himself into the

river, washes himself thoroughly, and repeats a short prayer. This done, the

pilgrim must leave the river again, and if he has not entered it until the bell

began to tinkle, and has succeeded in going through his performance and left

the water again before the sound of the bell has ceased, his sins from his birth

are remitted and washed away, and his happy future after death is assured,

unless he commits some specifically named and very enormous sins. The

other pilgrims, who by reason of the great crowd cannot reach the water in

time  to  go  through  the  whole  performance  as  required  by  the  Brahmins,

receive blessings commensurate with the length of their stay in the water

while the bell was ringing. Even the unfortunate pilgrims who altogether fail

to enter the water at the right moment, are consoled by the partial removal of

their  load  of  wickedness;  but  the  blessings  which  accompany  a  fullperformance  of  what  the  Brahmins  require,  are  so  superior  to  the  favors

following  an  incomplete  or  tardy  immersion,  that  it  is  not  strange

extraordinary efforts are made to enter the water at the first sound of the bells

and gongs.

  "The crowd was made up of men and women of half-a-hundred tribes of

nations, in every variety of dress and partial nakedness. Many men wore their

loincloths only; the women's hair was loose and flying to the wind; all were

newly and hideously painted; many were intoxicated, not only with opium

and spirits, but with religious frenzy and impatient waiting. As the exciting

moment  approached  shouts  rent  the  air;  the  priests  harangued  louder  and

louder; the fakirs grew wilder and more incoherent; then gradually the great

noise  subsided,  when  suddenly  a  single  bell,  immediately  followed  by  a

hundred more, broke the silence, and with one accord, shouting like madmen,

the people rushed forward and the foremost ranks threw themselves into the

water. Then there arose a mighty shout, the many gongs joined in, and the

bells redoubled their efforts. But the confusion, the crushing, the struggling

for very life, the surging of the mad masses at the water's edge, defy all

description.

  "As the first rows of men and women reached the water they were upset

and overturned by the people in their rear, who passed over them into still

deeper water, and in their turn suffered the same fate at the bands of the on-

rushing crowd behind them, until deep water was reached.... The shouts of

excitement were changed to shrieks and passionate cries for help; the men

under water struggled with those above them: weak women were carried out

by the stream or trampled on; men pulled each other down, and in their mad

fear  exerted  their  utmost  strength  without  object  or  purpose.  Then  the

survivors,  trying  to  escape  from  the  water,  met  the  yet  dry  crowd  still

charging down to death, and this increased the dire confusion. It was a horrid

sight, and one I was quite unprepared for, notwithstanding all I had heard

before."-E.

  "Do you think, father," said my friend, "that after having gone through

seven metempsichoses, I may at length arrive at the habitation of Brahma?"

  "That is as it may happen," said the Fakir. "What sort of life do you lead?"

  "I endeavor," answered Omri, "to be a good subject, a good husband, agood father, and a good friend. I lend money without interest to the rich who

want it, and I give it to the poor: I always strive to preserve peace among my

neighbors."

  "But have you ever run nails into your flesh?" demanded the Brahmin.

  "Never, reverend father."

  "I am sorry for it," replied the father; "very sorry for it, indeed. It is a

thousand  pities;  but  you  will  certainly  not  reach  above  the  nineteenth

heaven."

  "No higher!" said Omri. "In truth, I am very well contented with my lot.

What is it to me whether I go into the nineteenth or the twentieth, provided I

do  my  duty  in  my  pilgrimage,  and  am  well  received  at  the  end  of  my

journey? Is it not as much as one can desire, to live with a fair character in

this world, and be happy with Brahma in the next? And pray what heaven do

you think of going to, good master Bababec, with your chain?"

  "Into the thirty-fifth," said Bababec.

  "I admire your modesty," replied Omri, "to pretend to be better lodged

than me. This is surely the result of an excessive ambition. How can you,

who  condemn  others  that  covet  honors  in  this  world,  arrogate  such

distinguished ones to yourself in the next? What right have you to be better

treated than me? Know that I bestow more alms to the poor in ten days, than

the nails you run into your flesh cost for ten years? What is it to Brahma that

you pass the whole day stark naked with a chain about your neck? This is

doing a notable service to your country, doubtless! I have a thousand times

more esteem for the man who sows pulse or plants trees, than for all your

tribe, who look at the tips of their noses, or carry packsaddles, to show their

magnanimity."

  Having  finished  this  speech,  Omri  softened  his  voice,  embraced  the

Brahmin, and, with an endearing sweetness, besought him to throw aside his

nails and his chain, to go home with him, and live with decency and comfort.

  The Fakir was persuaded, he was washed clean, rubbed with essences and

perfumes, and clad in a decent habit; he lived a fortnight in this manner,

behaved  with  prudence  and  wisdom,  and  acknowledged  that  he  was  a

thousand times happier than before; but he lost his credit among the people,the women no longer crowded to consult him; he therefore quitted the house

of the friendly Omri, and returned to his nails and his chain, to regain his

reputation.


  THE STUDY OF NATURE.

  I.

    INTRODUCTION.

  There can be no doubt that everything in the world is governed by fatality.

My own life is a convincing proof of this doctrine. An English lord, with

whom I was a great favorite, had promised me that I should have the first

living that fell to his gift. An old incumbent of eighty happened to die, and I

immediately traveled post to London to remind the earl of his promise. I was

honored with an immediate interview, and was received with the greatest

kindness. I informed his lordship of the death of the rector, and of the hope I

cherished relative to the disposal of the vacant living. He replied that I really

looked very ill. I answered that, thanks to God, my greatest affliction was

poverty. I am sorry for you, said his lordship, and he politely dismissed me

with a letter of introduction to a Mr. Sidrac, who dwelt in the vicinity of

Guildhall. I ran as fast as I could to this gentleman's house, not doubting but

that he would immediately install me in the wished for living. I delivered the

earl's letter, and Mr. Sidrac, who had the honor to be my lord's surgeon, asked

me to sit down, and, producing a case of surgical instruments, began to assure

me that he would perform an operation which he trusted would very soon

relieve me.

  You must know, that his lordship had understood that I was suffering from

some dreadful complaint, and that he generously intended to have me cured

at his own expense. The earl had the misfortune to be as deaf as a post, a fact

with which I, alas! had not been previously acquainted.

  During the time which I lost in defending myself against the attacks of Mr.

Sidrac, who insisted positively upon curing me, whether I would or no, one

out of the fifty candidates who were all on the lookout, came to town, flew to

my lord, begged the vacant living-and obtained it.

  I  was  deeply  in  love  with  an  interesting  girl,  a  Miss  Fidler,  who  hadpromised to marry me upon condition of my being made rector. My fortunate

rival not only got the living, but also my mistress into the bargain!

  My patron, upon being told of his mistake, promised to make me ample

amends, but alas! he died two days afterwards.

  Mr. Sidrac demonstrated to me that, according to his organic structure, my

good patron could not have lived one hour longer. He also clearly proved that

the earl's deafness proceeded entirely from the extreme dryness of the drums

of his ears, and kindly offered, by an application of spirits of wine, to harden

both of my ears to such a degree that I should, in one month only, become as

deaf as any peer of the realm.

  I discovered Mr. Sidrac to be a man of profound knowledge. He inspired

me with a taste for the study of nature, and I could not but be sensible of the

valuable acquisition I had made in acquiring the friendship of a man who was

capable of relieving me, should I need his services. Following his advice, I

applied myself closely to the study of nature, to console myself for the loss of

the rectory and of my enchanting Miss Fidler.

  II.

  THE STUDY OF NATURE.

  After making many profound observations upon nature, (having employed

in the research, my five senses, my spectacles, and a very large telescope,) I

said one day to Mr. Sidrac, unless I am much deceived, philosophy laughs at

us. I cannot discover any trace of what the world calls nature; on the contrary,

everything seems to me to be the result of art. By art the planets are made to

revolve  around  the  sun,  while  the  sun  revolves  on  its  own  axis.  I  am

convinced that some genius has arranged things in such a manner, that the

square of the revolutions of the planets is always in proportion to the cubic

root from their distance to their centre, and one had need be a magician to

find out how this is accomplished. The tides of the sea are the result of art no

less profound and no less difficult to explain.

  All  animals,  vegetables  and  minerals  are  arranged  with  due  regard  to

weight and measure, number and motion. All is performed by springs, levers,

pullies,  hydraulic  machines,  and  chemical  combinations,  from  the

insignificant flea to the being called man, from the grass of the field to the farspreading oak, from a grain of sand to a cloud in the firmament of heaven.

Assuredly,  everything  is  governed  by  art,  and  the  word  nature  is  but  a

chimera.

  What you say, answered Mr. Sidrac, has been said many years ago, and so

much the better, for the probability is greater that your remark is true. I am

always astonished when I reflect, that a grain of wheat cast into the earth will

produce  in  a  short  time  above  a  handful  of  the  same  corn.  Stop,  said  I,

foolishly, you forget that wheat must die before it can spring up again, at

least  so  they  say  at  college.  My  friend  Sidrac,  laughing  heartily  at  this

interruption, replied. That assertion went down very well a few years ago,

when  it  was  first  published  by  an  apostle  called  Paul;  but  in  our  more

enlightened age, the meanest laborer knows that the thing is altogether too

ridiculous even for argument.

  My dear friend, said I, excuse the absurdity of my remark, I have hitherto

been a theologian, and one cannot divest one's self in a moment of every silly

opinion.

  III.

  GOOD ADVICE.

  Some time after this conversation between the disconsolate person, whom

we shall call Goodman, and the clever anatomist, Mr. Sidrac, the latter, one

fine morning, observed his friend in St. James's Park, standing in an attitude

of  deep  thought.  What  is  the  matter?  said  the  surgeon.  Is  there  anything

amiss? No, replied Goodman, but I am left without a patron in the world

since the death of my friend, who had the misfortune to be so deaf. Now

supposing there be only ten thousand clergymen in England, and granting

these ten thousand have each two patrons, the odds against my obtaining a

bishopric are twenty thousand to one; a reflection quite sufficient to give any

man the blue-devils. I remember, it was once proposed to me, to go out as

cabin-boy to the East Indies. I was told that I should make my fortune. But as

I did not think I should make a good admiral, whenever I should arrive at the

distinction, I declined; and so, after turning my attention to every profession

under the sun, I am fixed for life as a poor clergyman, good for nothing.

  Then be a clergyman no longer! cried Sidrac, and turn philosopher: what

is your income? Only thirty guineas a year, replied Goodman; although at thedeath of my mother, it will be increased to fifty. Well, my dear Goodman,

continued  Sidrac,  that  sum  is  quite  sufficient  to  support  you  in  comfort.

Thirty guineas are six hundred and thirty shillings, almost two shillings a day.

With this fixed income, a man need do nothing to increase it, but is at perfect

liberty  to  say  all  he  thinks  of  the  East  India  Company,  the  House  of

Commons,  the  king  and  all  the  royal  family,  of  man  generally  and

individually, and lastly, of God and his attributes; and the liberty we enjoy of

expressing our thoughts upon these most interesting topics, is certainly very

agreeable and amusing.

  Come  and  dine  at  my  table  every  day.  That  will  save  you  some  little

money.  We  will  afterwards  amuse  ourselves  with  conversation,  and  your

thinking  faculty  will  have  the  pleasure  of  communicating  with  mine  by

means  of  speech,  which  is  certainly  a  very  wonderful  thing,  though  its

advantages are not duly appreciated by the greater part of mankind.

  The poor clergyman.-"I remember, it was once proposed to me, to go out

as cabin-boy to the East Indies. I was told that I should make my fortune. But

as I did not think I should make a good admiral, whenever I should arrive at

the  distinction,  I  declined;  and  so,  after  turning  my  attention  to  every

profession under the sun, I am fixed for life as a poor clergyman, good for

nothing."


  IV.

  DIALOGUE UPON THE SOUL AND OTHER TOPICS.

    GOODMAN.-But my dear Sidrac, why do you always say my thinking

faculty and not my soul? If you used the latter term I should understand you

much better.

    SIDRAC.-And  for  my  part,  I  freely  confess,  I  should  not  understand

myself.  I  feel,  I  know,  that  God  has  endowed  me  with  the  faculties  of

thinking and speaking, but I can neither feel nor know that God has given me

a thing called a soul.

    GOODMAN.-Truly upon reflection, I perceive that I know as little about

the matter as you do, though I own that I have, all my life, been bold enough

to believe that I knew. I have often remarked that the eastern nations apply tothe soul the same word they use to express life. After their example, the

Latins  understood  the  word  anima  to  signify  the  life  of  the  animal.  The

Greeks called the breath the soul. The Romans translated the word breath by

spiritus, and thence it is that the word spirit or soul is found in every modern

nation. As it happens that no one has ever seen this spirit or breath, our

imagination has converted it into a being, which it is impossible to see or

touch. The learned tell us, that the soul inhabits the body without having any

place in it, that it has the power of setting our different organs in motion

without being able to reach and touch them, indeed, what has not been said

upon the subject? The great Locke knew into what a chaos these absurdities

had plunged the human understanding. In writing the only reasonable book

upon metaphysics that has yet appeared in the world, he did not compose a

single chapter on the soul; and if by chance he now and then makes use of the

word, he only introduces it to stand for intellect or mind.

  In fact, every human being, in spite of Bishop Berkeley, is sensible that he

has a mind, and that this mind or intellect is capable of receiving ideas; but

no one can feel that there is another being-a soul,-within him, which gives

him motion, feeling and thought. It is, in fact, ridiculous to use words we do

not understand, and to admit the existence of beings of whom we cannot have

the slightest knowledge.

  SIDRAC.-We  are  then  agreed  upon  a  subject  which,  for  so  many

centuries, has been a matter of dispute.

  GOODMAN.-And  I  must  observe  that  I  am  surprised  we  should  have

agreed upon it so soon.

  SIDRAC. Oh! that is not so astonishing. We really wish to know what is

truth. If we were among the Academies, we should argue like the characters

in Rabelais. If we had lived in those ages of darkness, the clouds of which so

long enveloped Great Britain, one of us would very likely have burned the

other. We are so fortunate as to be born in an age comparatively reasonable;

we easily discover what appears to us to be truth, and we are not afraid to

proclaim it.

  GOODMAN.-You are right, but I fear, that, after all, the truth we have

discovered  is  not  worth  much.  In  mathematics,  indeed,  we  have  done

wonders; from the most simple causes we have produced effects that wouldhave  astonished  Apollonius  or  Archimedes:  but  what  have  we  proved  in

metaphysics? Absolutely nothing but our own ignorance.

    SIDRAC.-And do you call that nothing? You grant the supreme Being has

given you the faculties of feeling and thinking, he has in the same manner

given your feet the faculty of walking, your hands their wonderful dexterity,

your stomach the capability of digesting food, and your heart the power of

throwing arterial blood into all parts of your body. Everything we enjoy is

derived from God, and yet we are totally ignorant of the means by which he

governs and conducts the universe. For my own part, as Shakespeare says, I

thank  him  for  having  taught  me  that,  of  the  principles  of  things,  I  know

absolutely nothing. It has always been a question, in what manner the soul

acted upon the body. Before attempting to answer this question, I must be

convinced that I have a soul. Either God has given us this wonderful spark of

intellect, or he has gifted us with some principle that answers equally well. In

either case, we are still the creatures of his divine will and goodness, and that

is all I know about the matter.

    GOODMAN.-But  if  you  do  not  know,  tell  me  at  least,  what  you  are

inclined to think upon the subject. You have opened skulls, and dissected the

human  fœtus.  Have  you  ever,  in  these,  dissections,  discovered  any

appearance of a soul?

  SIDRAC.-Not the least, and I have not been able to understand how an

immortal  and  spiritual  essence,  could  dwell  for  months  together  in  a

membrane. It appears to me difficult to conceive that this pretended soul

existed before the foundation of the body; for in what could it have been

employed during the many ages previous to its mysterious union with flesh?

Again! how can we imagine a spiritual principle waiting patiently in idleness

during a whole eternity, in order to animate a mass of matter for a space of

time, which, compared with eternity, is less than a moment?

  It is worse still, when I am told that God forms immortal souls out of

nothing, and then cruelly dooms them to an eternity of flames and torments.

What? burn a spirit, in which there can be nothing capable of burning; how

can he burn the sound of a voice, or the wind that blows? though both the

sound and wind were material during the short time of their existence; but a

pure spirit-a thought-a doubt-I am lost in the labyrinth; on whichever side Iturn,  I  find  nothing  but  obscurity  and  absurdity,  impossibility  and

contradiction. But I am quite at ease when I say to myself God is master of

all. He who can cause each star to hold its particular course through the broad

expanse of the firmament, can easily give to us sentiments and ideas, without

the aid of this atom, called the soul. It is certain that God has endowed all

animals, in a greater or lesser degree, with thought, memory, and judgment;

he has given them life; it is demonstrated that they have feeling, since they

possess all the organs of feeling; if then they have all this without a soul, why

is it improbable that we have none? and why do mankind flatter themselves

that they alone are gifted with a spiritual and immortal principle?

    GOODMAN.-Perhaps this idea arises from their inordinate vanity. I am

persuaded that if the peacock could speak, he would boast of his soul, and

would affirm that it inhabited his magnificent tail. I am very much inclined to

believe  with  you,  that  God  has  created  us  thinking  creatures,  with  the

faculties of eating, drinking, feeling, &c., without telling us one word about

the matter. We are as ignorant as the peacock I just mentioned, and he who

said that we live and die without knowing how, why, or wherefore, spoke

nothing but the truth.

  SIDRAC.-A celebrated author, whose name I forget, calls us nothing more

than the puppets of Providence, and this seems to me to be a very good

definition. An infinity of movements are necessary to our existence, but we

did  not  ourselves  invent  and  produce  motion.  There  is  a  Being  who  has

created light, caused it to move from the sun to our eyes in about seven

minutes. It is only by means of motion that my five senses are put in action,

and it is only by means of my senses that I have ideas, hence it follows that

my ideas are derived from the great author of motion, and when he informs

me how he communicates these ideas to me, I will most sincerely thank him.

  GOODMAN.-And so will I. As it is I constantly thank him for having

permitted me, as Epictetus says, to contemplate for a period of some years

this  beautiful  and  glorious  world.  It  is  true  that  he  could  have  made  me

happier by putting me in possession of Miss Fidler and a good rectory; but

still, such as I am, I consider myself as under a great obligation to God's

parental kindness and care.

    SIDRAC.-You say that it is in the power of God to give you a good living,and to make you still happier than you are at present. There are many persons

who would not scruple flatly to contradict this proposition of yours. Do you

forget  that  you  yourself  sometimes  complain  of  fatality?  A  man,  and

particularly a priest, ought never to contradict one day an assertion he has

perhaps made the day before. All is but a succession of links, and God is

wiser than to break the eternal chain of events, even for the sake of my dear

friend Goodman.

  GOODMAN.-I  did  not  foresee  this  argument  when  I  was  speaking  of

fatality; but to come at once to the point, if it be so, God is as much a slave as

myself.

  SIDRAC.-He is the slave of his will, of his wisdom, and of the laws which

he has himself instituted; and it is impossible that he can infringe upon any of

them; because it is impossible that he can become either weak or inconsistent.

    GOODMAN.-But,  my  friend,  what  you  say  would  tend  to  make  us

irreligious, for, if God cannot change any of the affairs of the world, what is

the use of teasing him with prayers, or of singing hymns to his praise?

  SIDRAC.-Well! who bids you worship or pray to God? We praise a man

because we think him vain; we entreat of him when we think him weak and

likely to change his purpose on account of our petitions. Let us do our duty to

God, by being just and true to each other. In that consists our real prayers,

and our most heartfelt praises.

  Kwan-yin,  the  goddess  of  mercy.-Burmese  Buddha.-Chinese  figure  in

ivory.[1]

  A CONVERSATION WITH A CHINESE.

  In the year 1723, there was a Chinese in Holland, who was both a learned

man and a merchant, two things that ought by no means to be incompatible;

but which, thanks to the profound respect that is shown to money, and the

little regard that the human species pay to merit, have become so among us.

  This Chinese, who spoke a little Dutch, happened to be in a bookseller's

shop at the same time that some literati were assembled there. He asked for a

book; they offered him Bossuet's Universal History, badly translated. At the

title Universal History-

  "How pleased am I," cried the Oriental, "to have met with this book. Ishall now see what is said of our great empire; of a nation that has subsisted

for upwards of fifty thousand years; of that long dynasty of emperors who

have governed us for such a number of ages. I shall see what these Europeans

think of the religion of our literati, and of that pure and simple worship we

pay to the Supreme Being. What a pleasure will it be for me to find how they

speak of our arts, many of which are of a more ancient date with us than the

eras  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  Europe!  I  fancy  the  author  will  be  greatly

mistaken  in  relation  to  the  war  we  had  about  twenty-two  thousand  five

hundred and fifty-two years ago, with the martial people of Tonquin and

Japan,  as  well  as  the  solemn  embassy  that  the  powerful  emperor  of

Mogulitian sent to request a body of laws from us in the year of the world

500000000000079123450000."

  "Lord bless you," said one of the literati, "there is hardly any mention

made  of  that  nation  in  this  world,  the  only  nation  considered  is  that

marvelous people, the Jews."

  "The  Jews!"  said  the  Chinese,  "those  people  then  must  certainly  be

masters of three parts of the globe at least."

  "They hope to be so some day," answered the other; "but at present they

are those pedlars you see going about here with toys and nicknacks, and who

sometimes do us the honor to clip our gold and silver."

  "Surely you are not serious," exclaimed the Chinese. "Could those people

ever have been in possession of a vast empire?"

  Here I joined in the conversation, and told him that for a few years they

were in possession of a small country to themselves; but that we were not to

judge of a people from the extent of their dominions, any more than of a man

by his riches.

  "But does not this book take notice of some other nations?" demanded the

man of letters.

    "Undoubtedly," replied a learned gentleman who stood at my elbow; "it

treats largely of a small country about sixty leagues wide, called Egypt, in

which  it  is  said  that  there  is  a  lake  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  leagues  in

circumference, made by the hands of man."

  "My  God!"  exclaimed  the  Chinese,  "a  lake  of  one  hundred  and  fiftyleagues in circumference within a spot of ground only sixty leagues wide!

This is very curious!"

  "The inhabitants of that country," continued the doctor, "were all sages."

  "What happy times were those!" cried the Chinese; "but is that all?"

  "No," replied the other, "there is mention made of those famous people the

Greeks."

  "Greeks! Greeks!" said the Asiatic, "who are those Greeks?"

  "Why," replied the philosopher, "they were masters of a little province,

about the two hundredth part as large as China, but whose fame spread over

the whole world."

  "Indeed!" said the Chinese, with an air of openness and ingenuousness; "I

declare I never heard the least mention of these people, either in the Mogul's

country, in Japan, or in Great Tartary."

  "Oh, the barbarian! the ignorant creature!" cried out our sage very politely.

"Why then, I suppose you know nothing of Epaminondas the Theban, nor of

the Pierian Heaven, nor the names of Achilles's two horses, nor of Silenus's

ass? You have never heard speak of Jupiter, nor of Diogenes, nor of Lais, nor

of Cybele, nor of-"

  "I am very much afraid," said the learned Oriental, interrupting him, "that

you  know  nothing  of  that  eternally  memorable  adventure  of  the  famous

Xixofon Concochigramki, nor of the masteries of the great Fi-psi-hi-hi! But

pray tell me what other unknown things does this Universal History treat of?"

  Upon this my learned neighbor harangued for a quarter of an hour together

about the Roman republic, and when he came to Julius Cæsar the Chinese

stopped him, and very gravely said.

  "I think I have heard of him, was he not a Turk?"

  "How!"  cried  our  sage  in  a  fury,  "don't  you  so  much  as  know  the

difference between Pagans, Christians, and Mahometans? Did you never hear

of Constantine? Do you know nothing of the history of the popes?"

  "We  have  heard  something  confusedly  of  one  Mahomet,"  replied  the

Asiatic.  "It is surely impossible," said the other, "but that you must have heard at

least of Luther, Zuinglius, Bellarmin, and Œcolampadius."

  "I shall never remember all those names," said the Chinese, and so saying

he quitted the shop, and went to sell a large quantity of Pekoa tea, and fine

calico, and then after purchasing what merchandise he required, set sail for

his own country, adoring Tien, and recommending himself to Confucius.

  As to myself, the conversation I had been witness to plainly discovered to

me the nature of vain glory; and I could not forbear exclaiming:

  "Since Cæsar and Jupiter are names unknown to the finest, most ancient,

most extensive, most populous, and most civilized kingdom in the universe, it

becomes ye well, O ye rulers of petty states! ye pulpit orators of a narrow

parish, or a little town! ye doctors of Salamanca, or of Bourges! ye trifling

authors, and ye heavy commentators!-it becomes you well, indeed, to aspire

to fame and immortality."

  [1] According to Chambers' work on The British Museum, from which the

above cuts are copied, "the Chinese, are a vast nation of some 300,000,000 of

souls, nearly a third part of the whole human race. The entire population is

subject to the supreme and despotic authority of a single hereditary ruler who

resides  at  Pekin,  the  chief  city  of  the  whole  empire.  Under  him  the

government  is  administered  by  a  descending  hierarchy  of  officials  or

mandarins, who are chosen from all ranks of the people, according to their

talents  as  displayed  in  the  course,  first  of  their  education  at  school  and

college, and afterwards of their public life. The officials are, in short, the men

in highest repute for scholarship and accomplishments in the empire; and the

whole system of the government is that of promotion upwards from the ranks

of the people, according to merit. The Chinese generally are remarkable for

common sense, orderliness, and frugal prudential habits. Printing and paper

being cheap among them, and education universal, they have an immense

literature, chiefly in the departments of the drama, the novel, and the moral

essay; their best writers of fiction are said to resemble Richardson in style,

and their best moralists Franklin. The greatest name in their literature, or

indeed  in  their  history,  is  that  of  Confucius,  a  philosopher  and  religious

teacher who lived about 500 years B.C., and who left a number of books

expounding  and  enforcing  the  great  maxims  of  morality.  During  all  therevolutions that have since elapsed, the doctrines of Confucius have retained

their hold of the Chinese mind, and the religion of China consists in little

more  than  an  attachment  to  these  doctrines,  and  a  veneration  for  their

founder. With abstract notions of the Deity, and of the destiny of man when

he quits this life, the Chinese do not trouble themselves; a moral, correct life,

and especially an honorable discharge of the duties of a son and a citizen, is

the whole aim of their piety. There are, however, some voluntary sects among

them, who superinduce articles of speculative belief on the prosaic code of

morality  established  by  Confucius;  and  forms  of  religious  worship  are

practised over the whole country under the direct sanction of the government.

There are a number of figures, larger and smaller, of Chinese divinities, some

of which are very neatly carved in ivory, wood, and stone. With what precise

feelings the more educated Chinese address these images in prayer-whether

they look upon them as symbols, or whether, like Polytheists generally, they

actually view the carved figures themselves as gifted with powers-it would be

difficult to say; the mass of the people, however, probably never ask the

question, but, from the mere force of custom, come to regard such objects as

the figure of Kwan-yin, the goddess of mercy, and the larger gilt figures of

the  god  and  goddess,  precisely  as  the  Polytheistic  Greeks  or  Romans

regarded their statues in their temples; that is, as real divinities with power for

good  or  evil.  The  religious  sentiment,  however,  sits  very  lightly  on  the

Chinese.  Absence  of  any  feeling  of  the  supernatural  is  perhaps  the  most

remarkable feature of the Chinese character.


  "Buddhism, was founded, as is generally believed, some centuries before

Christ  by  a  Hindoo  prince  and  sage  named  Gautama.  As  originally

propounded, Buddhism is supposed to have been a purer and more reasonable

form of faith than Brahminism, recognising more clearly the spiritual and

moral aims of religion; but, having been expelled from Hindostan during the

early centuries of our era, after having undergone severe persecution from the

Brahmins-at  whose  power  it  struck,  by  proscribing  the  system  of  castesit

sought refuge in the eastern peninsula, Ceylon, Thibet, Japan, and China,

where it has been modified and corrupted into various forms."-E.

  The birth of Minerva from the brain Of Jove.

  The birth of Eve from the side of Adam.    ANDROGYNOUS DEITIES.


  The  ancients  ascribed  the  existence  of  the  universe  to  the  fiat  of

omnipotence. Almighty power conjoined with infinite wisdom had produced

the  world  and  all  that  it  inhabits.  Man,  the  head  of  visible  creation,  was

formed  in  the  image  of  the  gods,  but  the  gods  only  were  endowed  with

generative or creative power. These gods were androgynous-that is, male and

female-containing in one person both the paternal and maternal attributes.

Plato taught that mankind, like the gods, were originally androgynous, and

Moses tells us that Eve, in matured wisdom and beauty, sprang forth from the

side of Adam, even as

  "From great Jove's head, the armed Minerva sprung

  With awful shout."


  "The thought of God as the Divine Mother," says a sincere and intelligent

clergyman in a sermon recently published, "is a very ancient one, found in the

most  early  nature  worships."  "We  thank  Thee  O  God,"  says  the  Rev.

Theodore Parker, "that Thou art our Father and our Mother." "O God," says

St. Augustine, "Thou art the Father, Thou the Mother of Thy children."

  The  preceding  illustration  of  the  birth  of  Minerva,-the  goddess  of

wisdom,-i.e.  wisdom  issuing  from  the  brain  of  Jove,  is  from  Falkener's

Museum of Classical Antiquities. It is taken from an ancient Etruscan patera

(mirror),  now  in  the  Museum  at  Bologna,  and  is  supposed  to  have  been

copied from the pediment of the eastern or main entrance to the Parthenon, or

temple of Minerva. This pediment was the work of Phidias, and, like so many

of the former monuments of ancient art and civilization, is now forever lost to

mankind.

  "The  goddess,"  says  the  distinguished  architect  and  antiquary  M.  De

Quincy, "is shown issuing from the head of Jupiter. She has a helmet on her

head, buckler on her arm, and spear in her hand. Jupiter is seated, holding a

sceptre in one hand and a thunderbolt in the other. On the right of the new

born  goddess  is  Juno,  whose  arms  are  elevated,  and  who  seems  to  have

assisted  at  the  extraordinary  childbirth.  On  the  left  of  Jupiter  is  Venus,recognizable by a sprig of myrtle and a dove. Behind Juno is Vulcan, still

armed with the axe which has cleft the head of the god, and seeming to

regard with admiration the success of his operations."

  The engraving representing the birth of Eve, is from the Speculum Salutis,

or the Mirror of Salvation, of which many manuscript copies were issued, for

the  instruction  of  the  mendicant  friars,  between  the  twelfth  and  fifteenth

centuries.  "Heineken  describes  a  copy  in  the  imperial  library  of  Vienna,

which he attributes to the twelfth century. He says, such was the popularity of

the work with the Benedictines that almost every monastery possessed a copy

of it. Of the four manuscript copies owned by the British Museum, one is

supposed to have been written in the thirteenth century, another copy is in the

Flemish writing of the fifteenth century." This work, which contains several

engravings  and  forty-five  chapters  of  barbarous  Latin  rhymes,  presents  a

good illustration of Christian art as it existed during the period immediately

preceding the revival of letters, when the barbarism and ignorance of the dark

ages had supplanted the artistic culture of ancient Greece and Rome.

  Unprejudiced readers will doubtless admit that the birth of Minerva from

the brain of Jove greatly resembles the birth of Eve from the side of Adam,

and these myths show the analogy existing between the Jewish and Pagan

mythologies; but the design and execution of the respective engravings, show

the retrogression in art that had taken place between the time of the immortal

Phidias  and  that  of  Pope  Innocent  III.[1]-between  Pagan  civilization  as  it

existed  prior  to  the  Christian  era,  and  the  medieval  barbarism  of  the

successors of St. Peter.

  "God  created  man  in  his  own  image,"  says  Godfrey  Higgins  in  the

Anacalypsis, (vol. 2, p. 397.) "Everything was supposed to be in the image of

God; and thus man was created double-the male and female in one person, or

androgynous like God. By some uninitiated Jews, of about the time of Christ,

this double being was supposed to have been created back to back [see the

bearded Bacchus and Ariadne on the following page]; but I believe, from

looking at the twins in all ancient zodiacs, it was side by side; precisely as we

have seen the Siamese boys,-but still male and female. Besides, the book of

Genesis implies that they were side by side, by the woman being taken from

the side of man. Among the Indians the same doctrine is found, as we might

expect."  "We must rise to man," says the eloquent clergyman previously referred

to, "in order to know rightly what God is. Humanity plainly images a power

which is at once the source and pattern of the womanly as well as of the

manly qualities, inasmuch as woman as well as man is needed to fill out the

idea of humanity. The womanly traits-pity, forgiveness, gentleness, patience,

sympathy,  unselfishness-are  as  worthy  of  the  Divine  Being  as  the  manly

traits."-E.

  [1] "It was," says Gibbon, "at the feet of his legate that John of England

surrendered  his  crown;  and  Innocent  may  boast  of  the  two  most  signal

triumphs over sense and humanity, the establishment of transsubstantiation,

and the origin of the inquisition."


  Bacchus and Ariadne. [1]

  PLATO'S DREAM.

  Plato was a great dreamer, as many others have been since his time. He

dreampt that mankind were formerly double; and that, as a punishment for

their crimes, they were divided into male and female.

  He undertook to prove that there can be no more than five perfect worlds,

because there are but five regular mathematical bodies. His Republic was one

of his principal dreams. He dreampt, moreover, that watching arises from

sleep, and sleep from watching; and that a person who should attempt to look

at an eclipse, otherwise than in a pail of water, would surely lose his sight.

Dreams were, at that time, in great repute.

  Here follows one of his dreams, which is not one of the least interesting.

He thought that the great Demiurgos, the eternal geometer, having peopled

the immensity of space with innumerable globes, was willing to make a trial

of the knowledge of the genii who had been witnesses of his works. He gave

to each of them a small portion of matter to arrange, nearly in the same

manner as Phidias and Zeuxis would have given their scholars a statue to

carve, or a picture to paint, if we may be allowed to compare small things to

great.

  Envy.

    Demogorgon had for his lot the lump of mould, which we call the Earth;and having formed it, such as it now appears, he thought he had executed a

masterpiece.  He  imagined  he  had  silenced  Envy  herself,  and  expected  to

receive the highest panegyrics, even from his brethren; but how great was his

surprise, when, at his next appearing among them, they received him with a

general hiss.

  One among them, more satirical than the rest, accosted him thus:

  "Truly you have performed mighty feats! you have divided your world

into two parts; and, to prevent the one from having communication with the

other, you have carefully placed a vast collection of waters between the two

hemispheres. The inhabitants must perish with cold under both your poles,

and  be  scorched  to  death  under  the  equator.  You  have,  in  your  great

prudence, formed immense deserts of sand, so that all who travel over them

may die with hunger and thirst. I have no fault to find with your cows, your

sheep,  your  cocks,  and  your  hens;  but  can  never  be  reconciled  to  your

serpents and your spiders. Your onions and your artichokes are very good

things, but I cannot conceive what induced you to scatter such a heap of

poisonous  plants  over  the  face  of  the  earth,  unless  it  was  to  poison  its

inhabitants. Moreover, if I am not mistaken, you have created about thirty

different kinds of monkeys, a still greater number of dogs, and only four or

five species of the human race. It is true, indeed, you have bestowed on the

latter of these animals a faculty by you called Reason; but, in truth, this same

reason is a very ridiculous thing, and borders very near upon folly. Besides,

you do not seem to have shown any very great regard to this two-legged

creature, seeing you have left him with so few means of defense; subjected

him  to  so  many  disorders,  and  provided  him  with  so  few  remedies;  and

formed him with such a multitude of passions, and so small a portion of

wisdom or prudence to resist them. You certainly was not willing that there

should remain any great number of these animals on the earth at once; for,

without reckoning the dangers to which you have exposed them, you have so

ordered matters that, taking every day through the year, the small pox will

regularly carry off the tenth part of the species, and sister maladies will taint

the springs of life in the nine remaining parts; and then, as if this was not

sufficient, you have so disposed things, that one-half of those who survive

will be occupied in going to law with each other, or cutting one another's

throats.  "Now, they must doubtless be under infinite obligations to you, and it

must be owned you have executed a masterpiece."

    Demogorgon blushed. He was sensible there was much moral and physical

evil in this affair; but still he insisted there was more good than ill in it.

  "It is an easy matter to find fault, good folks," said the genii; "but do you

imagine it is so easy to form an animal, who, having the gift of reason and

free-will, shall not sometimes abuse his liberty? Do you think that, in rearing

between nine and ten thousand different plants, it is so easy to prevent some

few  from  having  noxious  qualities?  Do  you  suppose  that,  with  a  certain

quantity of water, sand, and mud, you could make a globe that should have

neither seas nor deserts?"

  "As for you, my sneering friend, I think you have just finished the planet

Jupiter. Let us see now what figure you make with your great belts, and your

long nights, with four moons to enlighten them. Let us examine your worlds,

and see whether the inhabitants you have made are exempt from follies or

diseases."

  Accordingly the genii fell to examining the planet Jupiter, when the laugh

went strongly against the laugher. The serious genii who had made the planet

Saturn,  did  not  escape  without  his  share  of  the  censure,  and  his  brother

operators, the makers of Mars, Mercury, and Venus, had each in his turn

some reproaches to undergo.

  Several large volumes, and a great number of pamphlets, were written on

this occasion; smart sayings and witty repartees flew about on all sides; they

railed against and ridiculed each other; and, in short, the disputes were carried

on  with  all  the  warmth  of  party  heat,  when  the  eternal  Demiurgos  thus

imposed silence on them all:

  "In your several performances there is both good and bad, because you

have  a  great  share  of  understanding,  but  at  the  same  time  fall  short  of

perfection. Your works will not endure above an hundred millions of years,

after which you will acquire more knowledge, and perform much better. It

belongs to me alone to create things perfect and immortal."

  This was the doctrine Plato taught his disciples. One of them, when he had

finished his harangue, cried out, "And so you then awoke?"  [1] The above representation of a bearded Bacchus and Ariadne is from

Falkener's Museum of Classical Antiquities. The statue was found at Pompeii

in 1847.-E.

  Plato.

  Visiting Seignior Pococurante.

  PLEASURE IN HAVING NO PLEASURE.

  "Hitherto," said Candide to Martin, "I have met with none but unfortunate

people in the whole habitable globe, except in El Dorado, but, observe those

gondoliers, are they not perpetually singing?"

  "You do not see them," answered Martin, "at home with their wives and

brats. The doge has his chagrin, gondoliers theirs. Nevertheless, in the main, I

look  upon  the  gondolier's  life  as  preferable  to  that  of  the  doge;  but  the

difference is so trifling, that it is not worth the trouble of examining into."

  "I have heard great talk," said Candide, "of the Senator Pococurante, who

lives in that fine house at the Brenta, where, they say, he entertains foreigners

in the most polite manner. They pretend this man is a perfect stranger to

uneasiness."

  "I should be glad to see so extraordinary a being," said Martin.

  Candide  thereupon  sent  a  messenger  to  Seignior  Pococurante,  desiring

permission to wait on him the next day.

  Accordingly,  Candide  and  his  friend  Martin  went  in  a  gondola  on  the

Brenta, and arrived at the palace of the noble Pococurante. The gardens were

laid out in elegant taste, and adorned with fine marble statues; his palace was

built after the most approved rules in architecture. The master of the house,

who was a man of sixty, and very rich, received our two travelers with great

politeness,  but  without  much  ceremony,  which  somewhat  disconcerted

Candide, but was not at all displeasing to Martin.

  As soon as they were seated, two very pretty girls, neatly dressed, brought

in  chocolate,  which  was  extremely  well  frothed.  Candide  could  not  help

making encomiums upon their beauty and graceful carriage.

  "The creatures are well enough," said the senator, "but I am heartily tired

of women, of their coquetry, their jealousy, their quarrels, their humors, theirvanity,  their  pride,  and  their  folly;  I  am  weary  of  making  sonnets,  or  of

paying for sonnets to be made on them; and, after all, those two girls begin to

grow very indifferent to me."

  After having refreshed himself, Candide walked into a large gallery, where

he was struck with the sight of a fine collection of paintings.

  "Pray," said Candide, "by what master are the first two of these?"

  "They are Raphael's," answered the senator. "I gave a great deal of money

for them seven years ago, purely out of curiosity, as they were said to be the

finest pieces in Italy; but I cannot say they please me: the coloring is dark and

heavy; the figures do not swell nor come out enough, and the drapery is very

bad. In short, notwithstanding the encomiums lavished upon them, they are

not, in my opinion, a true representation of nature. I approve of no paintings

but where I think I behold nature herself; and there are very few, if any, of

that kind to be met with. I have what is called a fine collection, but it affords

me no delight."

  While dinner was getting ready, Pococurante ordered a concert. Candide

praised the music to the skies.

  "This noise," said the noble Venetian, "may amuse one for a little time, but

if it were to last above half an hour, it would grow very tiresome, though

perhaps no one would care to own it. Music has become the art of executing

that  which  is  difficult.  Now  whatever  is  difficult  cannot  long  continue

pleasing. I might take more pleasure in an opera if they had not made that

species of dramatic entertainment so shockingly monstrous; and I am amazed

that people can bear to see wretched tragedies set to music, where the scenes

are contrived for no other purpose than to lug in, as it were by the ears, three

or  four  ridiculous  songs,  to  give  a  favorite  actress  an  opportunity  of

exhibiting her voice. Let who will or can die away in raptures at the trills of

an eunuch quavering the majestic part of Cæsar or Cato, and strutting in a

foolish manner on the stage; for my part, I have long ago renounced these

paltry entertainments, which constitute the glory of modern Italy, and are so

dearly purchased by crowned heads."

  Candide opposed these sentiments; but he did it in a discreet manner; as

for Martin, he was entirely of the old senator's opinion.  Dinner being served up, they sat down to table, and after a very hearty

repast  returned  to  the  library.  Candide  observing  Homer  richly  bound,

commended the noble Venetian's taste.

  "This," said he, "is a book that was once the delight of the great Pangloss,

the best philosopher in Germany."

  "Homer is no favorite of mine," answered Pococurante, very coolly: "I

was  made  to  believe  once  that  I  took  a  pleasure  in  reading  him;  but  his

continual repetitions of battles have all such a resemblance with each other;

his gods, that are forever in a hurry and bustle without ever doing anything;

his Helen, that is the cause of the war, and yet hardly acts in the whole

performance; his Troy, that holds out so long, without being taken; in short,

all these things together make the poem very insipid to me. I have asked

some learned men, whether they are not in reality as much tired as myself

with reading this poet? Those who spoke ingenuously, assured me that he had

made them fall asleep; and yet, that they could not well avoid giving him a

place in their libraries; but it was merely as they would do an antique, or

those rusty medals which are kept only for curiosity, and are of no manner of

use in commerce."

  "But your excellency does not surely form this same opinion of Virgil?"

said Candide.

  "Why, I grant," replied Pococurante, "that the second, third, fourth, and

sixth book, of his Æneid are excellent; but as for his pious Æneas, his strong

Cloanthus, his friendly Achates, his boy Ascanius, his silly King Latinus, his

ill-bred Amata, his insipid Lavinia, and some other characters much in the

same  strain,  I  think  there  cannot  be  in  nature  anything  more  flat  and

disagreeable.  I  must  confess,  I  much  prefer  Tasso  to  him;  nay,  even  that

sleepy tale-teller Ariosto."

  "May I take the liberty to ask if you do not receive great pleasure from

reading Horace?" said Candide.

  "There are maxims in this writer," replied Pococurante, "from whence a

man of the world may reap some benefit; and the short measure of the verse

makes  them  more  easy  to  retain  in  the  memory.  But  I  see  nothing

extraordinary  in  his  journey  to  Brundusium,  and  his  account  of  his  bad

dinner; nor in his dirty low quarrel between one Rupilius, whose words, as heexpresses it, were full of poisonous filth; and another, whose language was

dipped in vinegar. His indelicate verses against old women and witches have

frequently given me great offense; nor can I discover the great merit of his

telling his friend Mecænas, that if he will but rank him in the class of lyric

poets, his lofty head shall touch the stars. Ignorant readers are apt to praise

everything by the lump in a writer of reputation. For my part, I read only to

please myself. I like nothing but that which makes for my purpose."

  Candide, who had been brought up with a notion of never making use of

his own judgment, was astonished at what he had heard; but Martin found

there was a good deal of reason in the senator's remarks.

  "O! here is a Tully," said Candide: "this great man, I fancy, you are never

tired of reading?"

  "Indeed, I never read him at all," replied Pococurante. "What is it to me

whether he pleads for Rabirius or Cluentius? I try causes enough myself. I

had  once  some  liking  for  his  philosophical  works;  but  when  I  found  he

doubted of everything, I thought I knew as much as himself, and had no need

of a guide to learn ignorance.

  "Ha!" cried Martin, "here are fourscore volumes of the Memoirs of the

Academy of Sciences. Perhaps there may be something curious and valuable

in this collection."

  "Yes,"  answered  Pococurante,  "so  there  might,  if  any  one  of  these

compilers of this rubbish had only invented the art of pin-making; but all

these volumes are filled with mere chimerical systems, without one single

article conducive to real utility."

  "I see a prodigious number of plays," said Candide, "in Italian, Spanish,

and French."

  "Yes," replied the Venetian, "there are, I think, three thousand, and not

three dozen of them good for anything. As to these huge volumes of divinity,

and those enormous collections of sermons, they are not altogether worth one

single  page  in  Seneca;  and  I  fancy  you  will  readily  believe  that  neither

myself, nor any one else, ever looks into them."

  Martin,  perceiving  some  shelves  filled  with  English  books,  said  to  the

senator:  "I  fancy  that  a  republican  must  be  highly  delighted  with  those  books,

which are most of them written with a noble spirit of freedom."

  "It is noble to write as we think," said Pococurante; "it is the privilege of

humanity. Throughout Italy we write only what we do not think; and the

present inhabitants of the country of the Cæsars and Antoninuses dare not

acquire a single idea without the permission of a father dominican. I should

be enamoured of the spirit of the English nation, did it not utterly frustrate the

good effects it would produce, by passion and the spirit of party."

  Candide, seeing a Milton, asked the senator if he did not think that author

a great man?

  "Who?" said Pococurante, sharply; "that barbarian who writes a tedious

commentary in ten books of rambling verse on the first chapter of Genesis?

that slovenly imitator of the Greeks, who disfigures the creation by making

the Messiah take a pair of compasses from heaven's armory to plan the world;

whereas Moses represented the Deity as producing the whole universe by his

fiat? Can I, think you, have any esteem for a writer who has spoiled Tasso's

hell and the devil? who transforms Lucifer sometimes into a toad, and at

others,  into  a  pigmy?  who  makes  him  say  the  same  thing  over  again  an

hundred times? who metamorphoses him into a school-divine? and who, by

an  absurdly  serious  imitation  of  Ariosto's  comic  invention  of  fire-arms,

represents the devils and angels cannonading each other in heaven? Neither I

nor any other Italian can possibly take pleasure in such melancholy reveries;

but the marriage of sin and death, and snakes issuing from the womb of the

former, are enough to make any person sick that is not lost to all sense of

delicacy.  This  obscene,  whimsical,  and  disagreeable  poem,  met  with  the

neglect it deserved at its first publication; and I only treat the author now as

he was treated in his own country by his contemporaries."

  Candide was sensibly grieved at this speech, as he had a great respect for

Homer, and was very fond of Milton.

  "Alas!" said he softly to Martin, "I am afraid this man holds our German

poets in great contempt."

  "There would be no such great harm in that," said Martin.

  "O, what a surprising man!" said Candide still to himself; "what a geniusis this Pococurante! nothing can please him."

  After finishing their survey of the library, they went down into the garden,

when Candide commended the several beauties that offered themselves to his

view.

  "I know nothing upon earth laid out in such bad taste," said Pococurante;

"everything about it is childish and trifling; but I shall soon have another laid

out upon a nobler plan."

  "Well," said Candide to Martin, as soon as our two travelers had taken

leave of his excellency: "I hope you will own, that this man is the happiest of

all mortals, for he is above everything he possesses."

  "But do you not see," said Martin, "that he likewise dislikes everything he

possesses? It was an observation of Plato, long since, that those are not the

best stomachs that reject, without distinction, all sorts of aliments."

  "True,"  said  Candide;  "but  still  there  must  certainly  be  a  pleasure  in

criticising everything, and in perceiving faults where others think they see

beauties."

  "That is," replied Martin, "there is a pleasure in having no pleasure."

  The "yawning oysters" discovered by Pythagoras.

  AN ADVENTURE IN INDIA.

  All the world knows that Pythagoras, while he resided in India, attended

the school of the Gymnosophists, and learned the language of beasts and

plants.[1] One day, while he was walking in a meadow near the seashore, he

heard these words:

  "How unfortunate that I was born an herb! I scarcely attain two inches in

height, when a voracious monster, an horrid animal, tramples me under his

large feet; his jaws are armed with rows of sharp scythes, by which he cuts,

then grinds, and then swallows me. Men call this monster a sheep. I do not

suppose there is in the whole creation a more detestable creature."

  Pythagoras proceeded a little way and found an oyster yawning on a small

rock. He had not yet adopted that admirable law, by which we are enjoined

not to eat those animals which have a resemblance to us.[2] He had scarcely

taken up the oyster to swallow it, when it spoke these affecting words:  "O, Nature, how happy is the herb, which is, as I am, thy work! though it

be cut down, it is regenerated and immortal; and we, poor oysters, in vain are

defended by a double cuirass: villains eat us by dozens at their breakfast, and

all is over with us forever. What an horrible fate is that of an oyster, and how

barbarous are men!"

  Pythagoras shuddered; he felt the enormity of the crime he had nearly

committed;  he  begged  pardon  of  the  oyster  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and

replaced it very carefully on the rock.

  As he was returning to the city, profoundly meditating on this adventure,

he saw spiders devouring flies; swallows eating spiders, and sparrow-hawks

eating swallows. "None of these," said he, "are philosophers."

  On his entrance, Pythagoras was stunned, bruised, and thrown down by a

lot of tatterdemalions, who were running and crying: "Well done, he fully

deserved  it."  "Who?  What?"  said  Pythagoras,  as  he  was  getting  up.  The

people continued running and crying: "O how delightful it will be to see them

boiled!"

  Pythagoras supposed they meant lentiles, or some other vegetables: but he

was in an error; they meant two poor Indians. "Oh!" said Pythagoras, "these

Indians, without doubt, are two great philosophers weary of their lives, they

are desirous of regenerating under other forms; it affords pleasure to a man to

change his place of residence, though he may be but indifferently lodged:

there is no disputing on taste."[3]

  He proceeded with the mob to the public square, where he perceived a

lighted pile of wood, and a bench opposite to it, which was called a tribunal.

On this bench judges were seated, each of whom had a cow's tail in his hand,

and a cap on his head, with ears resembling those of the animal which bore

Silenus when he came into that country with Bacchus, after having crossed

the Erytrean sea without wetting a foot, and stopping the sun and moon; as it

is recorded with great fidelity in the Orphicks.

  Among these judges there was an honest man with whom Pythagoras was

acquainted. The Indian sage explained to the sage of Samos the nature of that

festival to be given to the people of India.

  "These two Indians," said he, "have not the least desire to be committed tothe  flames.  My  grave  brethren  have  adjudged  them  to  be  burnt;  one  for

saying, that the substance of Xaca is not that of Brahma; and the other for

supposing, that the approbation of the Supreme Being was to be obtained at

the point of death without holding a cow by the tail; 'Because,' said he, 'we

may be virtuous at all times, and we cannot always have a cow to lay hold of

just when we may have occasion.' The good women of the city were greatly

terrified at two such heretical opinions; they would not allow the judges a

moment's peace until they had ordered the execution of those unfortunate

men."

  Pythagoras was convinced that from the herb up to man, there were many

causes of chagrin. However, he obliged the judges and even the devotees to

listen to reason, which happened only at that time.

  He went afterwards and preached toleration at Crotona; but a bigot set fire

to his house, and he was burnt-the man who had delivered the two Hindoos

from the flames? Let those save themselves who can![4]

  [1] Perhaps it would be impossible at the present day to convince scientists

that  oysters  formerly  conversed  intelligibly  with  mankind  and  protested

eloquently against human injustice; but all men are not scientists, and there

are  many  worthy  people  who  still  have  implicit  faith  in  ancient  Semitic

records-who  firmly  believe  in  miracles  and  prodigies-and  who  would

consider it rank heresy to doubt that the serpent, though now as mute as an

oyster, formerly held a very animated conversation, in the original Edenic

language, with the inexperienced and confiding female who then graced with

her charming presence the bowers of Paradise; and this sacred narrative of the

"maiden  and  the  reptile"  is  quite  as  repugnant  to  modern  science  as  the

sentimental fish story of "Pythagoras and the oyster".


  As a matter of fact, the doctrine of the metempsichosis, as taught by the

Samian sage, was formerly held in great repute by the most civilized nations

of antiquity, and it is surely as easy to credit the assertion of our author, that

the ancient Gymnosophists "had learned the language of beasts and plants" as

to believe the unquestioned and orthodox statement that a certain quadruped,

(Asinus vulgaris,) -whose romantic history is recorded in the twenty-second

chapter of Numbers,-was once upon a time able to converse in very goodHebrew  with  Monsieur  Balaam,  an  ancient  prophet  of  great  merit  and

renown.-E.

  [2] The resemblance of oysters to mankind, here implied, can only be

apparent to the "eye of faith," and lovers of these delicious bivalves will fail

to recognize the family likeness.-E.

  [3] Pythagoras was born at Samos, about 590 years before the Christian

era.  He  received  an  education  well  calculated  to  enlighten  his  mind  and

invigorate his body. He studied poetry, music, eloquence and astronomy, and

became so proficient in gymnastic exercises, that in his eighteenth year he

won the prize for wrestling at the Olympic games. He then visited Egypt and

Chaldea, and gaining the confidence of the priests, learned from them the

artful policy by which they governed the people. On his return to Samos he

was saluted by the name of Sophist, or wise man, but he declined the name,

and  was  satisfied  with  that  of  philosopher,  or  the  friend  of  wisdom.  He

ultimately  fixed  his  residence  in  Magna  Græcia,  in  the  town  of  Crotona,

where he founded the school called the Italian.


  This school became very prosperous, and hundreds of pupils received the

secret  instructions  of  Pythagoras,  who  taught  by  the  use  of  ciphers  or

numbers,  and  hieroglyphic  writings.  His  pupils  were  thus  enabled  to

correspond  together  in  unknown  characters;  and,  by  the  signs  and  words

employed, they could discover among strangers those who had been educated

in  the  Pythagorean  school.  All  the  pupils  of  the  philosopher  greatly

reverenced their teacher, and deemed it a crime to dispute his word. One of

their expressions "thus saith the Master," has been adopted by modern sects.


  The  Samian  sage  taught  the  doctrine  of  the  metempsichosis,  or  the

transmigration  of  the  soul  into  different  bodies,  which  he  had  probably

learned  from  the  Brahmins;  who  believed  that,  in  these  various

peregrinations, the soul or thinking principle was purged from all evil, and

was  ultimately  absorbed  into  the  Divine  substance  from  which  it  was

supposed to have emanated.


  Godfrey  Higgins  in  the  Anacalypsis  cites  authorities  to  prove  that  thedoctrine of the metempsichosis was held by "many of the early fathers of the

Christians, which they defended on several texts of the New Testament. It

was held by Origin, Calcidius, Synesius, and by the Simonians, Basilidians,

Valentiniens, Marcionites, and the Gnostics in general. It was also held by the

Pharisees among the Jews, and by the most learned of the Greeks, and by

many Chinese, Hindoos and Indians.


  "When all the circumstances relating to Pythagoras and to his doctrines,

both in moral and natural philosophy, are considered," continues Higgins,

"nothing can be more striking than the exact conformity of the latter to the

received opinions of the moderns, and of the former to the moral doctrines of

Jesus Christ."


  "The  pupils  of  Pythagoras,"  says  Eschenburg,  Manual  of  Classical

Literature, "soon amounted to 600, dwelt in one public building, and held

their property in common. Under philosophy, the Italic school included every

object of human knowledge. But Pythagoras considered music and astronomy

of special value. He is supposed to have had some very correct views of

astronomy, agreeing with the true Copernican system. The beautiful fancy of

the music of the spheres is attributed to him. The planets striking on the ether,

through which they pass, must produce a sound; this must vary according to

their different magnitudes, velocities, and relative distances; these differences

were all adjusted with perfect regularity and exact proportions, so that the

movements of the bodies produced the richest tones of harmony; not heard,

however, by mortal ears."


  Pythagoras taught, and his followers maintained, the absolute equality of

property, "all their worldly possessions being brought into a common store".

The early Christians had also "all things in common," and the doctrines of

Jesus and Pythagoras have many points of resemblance. Both were reformers,

both sought to benefit the poor and the oppressed, both taught and practised

the doctrines now known as Communism, and both, for their love to the

human race, suffered a cruel martyrdom from an orthodox and vindictive

priesthood.  In obedience to an oracle, the Romans, long after the death of Pythagoras,

erected a statue to his memory as the wisest of mankind.-E.

  [4] Godfrey Higgins in the Anacalypsis draws aside the veil of Isis, and

explains in a satisfactory manner the reason why Pythagoras, like Socrates

and Jesus, was condemned to death by the established priesthood. Each of

these great reformers had been initiated into the sacred mysteries, and each

taught his followers by secret symbols or parables that contained a hidden

meaning;  so  "that  seeing  the  uninitiated  might  see  and  not  perceive,  and

hearing  might  hear  and  not  understand."  The  reason  that  Jesus  gave  for

following this method was "because it is given unto you (i.e. the initiated) to

know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them (i.e. the people) it

is not given." (Matt. XIII: II.) The mass of mankind, being excluded from this

secret knowledge, were kept in a state of debasement as compared with the

favored few who were acquainted with the jealously guarded secrets of the

Cabala; and the earnest desire of these great reformers-of these noble men

who cheerfully gave their lives to benefit their race-was, without divulging

the secrets of their initiation, to teach mankind to partake of the forbidden

fruit of the tree of knowledge, and to learn "that a virtuous life would secure

eternal happiness." Such philanthropic doctrines were denounced as wicked

and heretical by the orthodox priesthood, who instinctively oppose human

progress, and who, like the silversmith of Ephesus, described by St. Paul, felt

that "this our craft is in danger" should the people become enlightened. They

therefore,  excited  a  popular  clamor,  and  aroused  the  worst  passions  and

prejudices  of  their  followers;  who,  inspired  with  fanatic  zeal,  cruelly  and

wickedly burned Pythagoras of Crotona, poisoned Socrates of Athens, and

crucified Jesus of Nazareth.-E.

  The school at Issoire.

  JEANNOT AND COLIN.

  Many persons, worthy of credit, have seen Jeannot and Colin at school in

the town of Issoire, in Auvergne, France,-a town famous all over the world

for its college and its caldrons.

  Jeannot was the son of a dealer in mules of great reputation; and Colin

owed  his  birth  to  a  good  substantial  farmer  in  the  neighborhood,  who

cultivated the land with four mules; and who, after he had paid all taxes andduties at the rate of a sol per pound, was not very rich at the year's end.

  Jeannot and Colin were very handsome, considering they were natives of

Auvergne;  they  dearly  loved  each  other.  They  had  many  enjoyments  in

common,  and  certain  little  adventures  of  such  a  nature  as  men  always

recollect with pleasure when they afterwards meet in the world.

  Their studies were nearly finished, when a tailor brought Jeannot a velvet

suit of three colors, with a waistcoat from Lyons, which was extremely well

fancied. With these came a letter addressed to Monsieur de la Jeannotière.

  Colin admired the coat, and was not at all jealous; but Jeannot assumed an

air  of  superiority,  which  gave  Colin  some  uneasiness.  From  that  moment

Jeannot  abandoned  his  studies;  he  contemplated  himself  in  a  glass,  and

despised all mankind.

  Soon after, a valet-de-chambre arrived post-haste, and brought a second

letter to the Marquis de la Jeannotière; it was an order from his father, who

desired the young marquis to repair immediately to Paris. Jeannot got into his

chaise, giving his hand to Colin with a smile, which denoted the superiority

of a patron. Colin felt his littleness, and wept. Jeannot departed in all the

pomp of his glory.

  Such readers as take a pleasure in being instructed should be informed that

Monsieur Jeannot the father, had, with great rapidity, acquired an immense

fortune by business. You will ask how such great fortunes are made? My

answer is, by luck. Monsieur Jeannot had a good person, so had his wife; and

she had still some freshness remaining. They went to Paris on account of a

law-suit, which ruined them; when fortune, which raises and depresses men

at her pleasure, presented them to the wife of an undertaker belonging to one

of the hospitals for the army. This undertaker, a man of great talents, might

make it his boast, that he had buried more soldiers in a year than cannons

destroy in ten. Jeannot pleased the wife; the wife of Jeannot interested the

undertaker.  Jeannot  was  employed  in  the  undertaker's  business;  this

introduced him to other business. When our boat runs with wind and stream,

we have nothing to do but let it sail on. We then make an immense fortune

with  ease.  The  poor  creatures  who  from  the  shore  see  you  pursue  your

voyage with full sail, stare with astonishment; they cannot conceive to what

you  owe  your  success;  they  envy  you  instinctively,  and  write  pamphletsagainst you which you never read.

  This  is  just  what  happened  to  Jeannot  the  father,  who  soon  became

Monsieur de la Jeannotière; and who having purchased a marquisate in six

months  time,  took  the  young  marquis,  his  son,  from  school,  in  order  to

introduce him to the polite world at Paris.

  Colin,  whose  heart  was  replete  with  tenderness,  wrote  a  letter  of

compliments  to  his  old  companion,  and  congratulated  him  on  his  good

fortune. The little marquis did not reply. Colin was so much affected at this

neglect that he was taken ill.

  The father and mother immediately consigned the young marquis to the

care of a governor. This governor, who was a man of fashion, and who knew

nothing, was not able to teach his pupil anything.

  The marquis would have had his son learn Latin; this his lady opposed.

They then referred the matter to the judgment of an author, who had at that

time acquired great reputation by his entertaining writings. This author was

invited to dinner. The master of the house immediately addressed him thus:

  "Sir, as you understand Latin, and are a man acquainted with the court,-"

  "I understand Latin! I don't know one word of it," answered the wit, "and I

think myself the better for being unacquainted with it. It is very evident that a

man speaks his own language in greater perfection when he does not divide

his application between it and foreign languages. Only consider our ladies;

they have a much more agreeable turn of wit than the men, their letters are

written with a hundred times the grace of ours. This superiority they owe to

nothing else but their not understanding Latin."

  "Well, was I not in the right?" said the lady. "I would have my son prove a

notable man, I would have him succeed in the world; and you see that if he

was  to  understand  Latin  he  would  be  ruined.  Pray,  are  plays  and  operas

performed in Latin? Do lawyers plead in Latin? Do men court a mistress in

Latin?"

  The  marquis,  dazzled  by  these  reasons,  gave  up  the  point,  and  it  was

resolved,  that  the  young  marquis  should  not  misspend  his  time  in

endeavoring to become acquainted with Cicero, Horace and Virgil.

  "Then,"  said  the  father,  "what  shall  he  learn?  For  he  must  knowsomething. Might not one teach him a little geography?"

  "Of what use will that be?" answered the governor. "When the marquis

goes to his estate, won't the postillion know the roads? They certainly will not

carry him out of his way. There is no occasion for a quadrant to travel thither;

and one can go very commodiously from Paris to Auvergne without knowing

what latitude one is in."

  "You are in the right," replied the father; "but I have heard of a science,

called astronomy, if I am not mistaken."

  "Bless me!" said the governor, "do people regulate their conduct by the

influence of the stars in this world? And must the young gentleman perplex

himself with the calculation of an eclipse, when he finds it ready calculated to

his hand in an almanac, which, at the same time, shows him the movable

feasts, the age of the moon, and also that of all the princesses in Europe?"

  The  lady  agreed  perfectly  with  the  governor;  the  little  marquis  was

transported with joy; the father remained undetermined. "What then is my

son to learn?" said he.

  "To become amiable," answered the friend who was consulted, "and if he

knows how to please, he will know all that need be known. This art he will

learn in the company of his mother, without either he or she being at any

trouble."

  The lady, upon hearing this, embraced the ignorant flatterer, and said: "It

is easy to see, sir, that you are the wisest man in the world. My son will be

entirely indebted to you for his education. I think, however, it would not be

amiss if he was to know something of history."

  "Alas, madam, what is that good for," answered he; "there certainly is no

useful or entertaining history but the history of the day; all ancient histories,

as one of our wits has observed, are only fables that men have agreed to

admit as true. With regard to modern history, it is a mere chaos, a confusion

which it is impossible to make anything of. Of what consequence is it to the

young marquis, your son, to know that Charlemagne instituted the twelve

peers of France, and that his successor stammered?"

  "Admirably  said,"  cried  the  governor;  "the  genius  of  young  persons  is

smothered under a heap of useless knowledge; but of all sciences, the mostabsurd, and that which, in my opinion, is most calculated to stifle genius of

every kind, is geometry. The objects about which this ridiculous science is

conversant, are surfaces, lines, and points, that have no existence in nature.

By  the  force  of  imagination,  the  geometrician  makes  a  hundred  thousand

curved lines pass between a circle and a right line that touches it, when, in

reality, there is not room for a straw to pass there. Geometry, if we consider it

in its true light, is a mere jest, and nothing more."

  The marquis and his lady did not well understand the governor's meaning,

yet they were entirely of his opinion.

  "A man of quality, like the young marquis," continued he, "should not

rack his brains with useless sciences. If he should ever have occasion for a

plan of the lands of his estate, he may have them correctly surveyed without

studying geometry. If he has a mind to trace the antiquity of his noble family,

which leads the inquirer back to the most remote ages, he will send for a

Benedictine. It will be the same thing with regard to all other wants. A young

man of quality, endowed with a happy genius, is neither a painter, a musician,

an architect, nor a graver; but he makes all these arts flourish by generously

encouraging them. It is, doubtless, better to patronize than to practice them. It

is enough for the young marquis to have a taste; it is the business of artists to

exert themselves for him; and it is in this sense that it is said very justly of

people of quality, (I mean those who are very rich), that they know all things

without having learnt anything; for they, in fact, come at last to know how to

judge concerning whatever they order or pay for."

  The ignorant man of fashion then spoke to this purpose:

  "You have very justly observed, madam, that the grand end which a man

should have in view is to succeed in the world. Can it possibly be said that

this success is to be obtained by cultivating the sciences? Did anybody ever

so much as think of talking of geometry in good company? Does anyone ever

inquire of a man of the world, what star rises with the sun? Who enquires at

supper, whether the long-haired Clodio passed the Rhine?"

  "No, doubtless," cried the marchioness, whom her charms had in some

measure initiated into the customs of the polite world; "and my son should

not extinguish his genius by the study of all this stuff. But what is he, after

all, to learn? for it is proper that a young person of quality should know howto shine upon an occasion, as my husband observes. I remember to have

heard an abbé say, that the most delightful of all the sciences, is something

that begins with a B."

  "With a B, madam? Is it not botany you mean?"

  "No, it was not botany he spoke of; the name of the science he mentioned

began with B, and ended with on."

  "Oh, I comprehend you, madam," said the man of fashion; "it is Blason

you mean. It is indeed a profound science; but it is no longer in fashion, since

the people of quality have ceased to cause their arms to be painted upon the

doors of their coaches. It was once the most useful thing in the world, in a

well regulated state. Besides, this study would be endless. Now-a-days there

is hardly a barber that has not his coat of arms; and you know that whatever

becomes common is but little esteemed."

  In fine, after they had examined the excellencies and defects of all the

sciences, it was determined that the young marquis should learn to dance.

  Nature, which does all, had given him a talent that quickly displayed itself

surprisingly; it was that of singing ballads agreeably. The graces of youth,

joined to this superior gift, caused him to be looked upon as a young man of

the brightest hopes. He was admired by the women; and having his head full

of  songs,  he  composed  some  for  his  mistress.  He  stole  from  the  song

"Bacchus and Love" in one ballad; from that of "Night and Day" in another;

from that of "Charms and Alarms" in a third. But as there were always in his

verses  some  superfluous  feet,  or  not  enough,  he  had  them  corrected  for

twenty louis-d'ors a song; and in the annals of literature he was put upon a

level with the La Fares, Chaulieus, Hamiltons, Sarrazins, and Voitures.

  The marchioness then looked upon herself as the mother of a wit, and gave

a supper to the wits of Paris. The young man's brain was soon turned; he

acquired  the  art  of  speaking  without  knowing  his  own  meaning,  and  he

became perfect in the habit of being good for nothing. When his father found

he was so eloquent, he very much regretted that his son had not learned Latin;

for he would have bought him a lucrative place among the gentry of the long

robe. The mother, who had more elevated sentiments, undertook to procure a

regiment for her son; and in the meantime, courtship was his occupation.

Love  is  sometimes  more  expensive  than  a  regiment.  He  was  veryimprovident,  whilst  his  parents  exhausted  their  finances  still  more,  by

expensive living.

  A  young  widow  of  fashion,  their  neighbor,  who  had  but  a  moderate

fortune,  had  an  inclination  to  secure  the  great  wealth  of  Monsieur  and

Madame de la Jeannotière, and appropriating it to herself, by a marriage with

the young marquis. She allured him to visit her; she admitted his addresses;

she showed that she was not indifferent to him; she led him on by degrees;

she enchanted and captivated him without much difficulty. Sometimes she

lavished praises upon him, sometimes she gave him advice. She became the

most intimate friend of both the father and mother.

  An elderly lady, who was their neighbor, proposed the match. The parents,

dazzled by the glory of such an alliance, accepted the proposal with joy. They

gave their only son to their intimate friend.

  The young marquis was now on the point of marrying a woman whom he

adored, and by whom he was beloved; the friends of the family congratulated

them; the marriage articles were just going to be drawn up, whilst wedding

clothes  were  being  made  for  the  young  couple,  and  their  epithalamium

composed.

  The  young  marquis  was  one  day  upon  his  knees  before  his  charming

mistress, whom love, esteem, and friendship were going to make all his own.

In a tender and spirited conversation, they enjoyed a foretaste of their coming

happiness,  they  concerted  measures  to  lead  a  happy  life.  When  all  on  a

sudden a valet-de-chambre belonging to the old marchioness, arrived in a

great fright.

  "Here is sad news," said he, "officers have removed the effects of my

master  and  mistress;  the  creditors  have  seized  upon  all  by  virtue  of  an

execution; and I am obliged to make the best shift I can to have my wages

paid."

  "Let's  see,"  said  the  marquis,  "what  is  this?  What  can  this  adventure

mean?"

  "Go," said the widow, "go quickly, and punish those villains."

  He runs, he arrives at the house; his father is already in prison; all the

servants have fled in different ways, each carrying off whatever he could layhis hands upon. His mother is alone, without assistance, without comfort,

drowned in tears. She has nothing left but the remembrance of her fortune, of

her beauty, her faults, and her extravagant living.

  After the son had wept a long time with his mother, he at length said to

her:

  "Let us not give ourselves up to despair. This young widow loves me to

excess; she is more generous than rich, I can answer for her; I will go and

bring her to you."

  He returns to his mistress, and finds her in company with a very amiable

young officer.

  "What, is it you, M. de la Jeannotière," said she; "what brings you here? Is

it proper to forsake your unhappy mother in such a crisis? Go to that poor,

unfortunate woman, and tell her that I still wish her well. I have occasion for

a chamber-maid, and will give her the preference."

  "My lad," said the officer, "you are well shaped. Enlist in my company;

you may depend on good usage."

  The marquis, thunderstruck, and with a heart enraged, went in quest of his

old  governor,  made  him  acquainted  with  his  misfortune,  and  asked  his

advice. The governor proposed that he should become a tutor, like himself.

  "Alas!" said the marquis, "I know nothing; you have taught me nothing,

and you are the first cause of my misfortunes." He sobbed when he spoke

thus.

  "Write romances," said a wit who was present; "it is an admirable resource

at Paris."

  The young man, in greater despair than ever, ran to his mother's confessor.

This  confessor  was  a  Theatin  of  great  reputation,  who  directed  the

consciences only of women of the first rank. As soon as he saw Jeannot, he

ran up to him:

  "My God, Mr. Marquis," said he, "where is your coach? How is the good

lady your mother?"

  The  poor  unfortunate  young  man  gave  him  an  account  of  what  had

befallen  his  family.  In  proportion  as  he  explained  himself  the  Theatinassumed an air more grave, more indifferent, and more defiant.

  "My son," said he, "it is the will of God that you should be reduced to this

condition; riches serve only to corrupt the heart. God, in his great mercy, has

then reduced your mother to beggary?"

  Jeannot and Colin.

  "Yes, sir," answered the marquis.

  "So much the better," said the confessor, "her election is the more certain."

  "But father," said the marquis, "is there in the mean time no hopes of some

assistance in this world?"

  "Farewell, my son," said the confessor; "a court lady is waiting for me."

  The  marquis  was  almost  ready  to  faint.  He  met  with  much  the  same

treatment from all; and acquired more knowledge of the world in half a day

than he had previously learned in all the rest of his life.

  Being quite overwhelmed with despair, he saw an old-fashioned chaise

advance,  which  resembled  an  open  wagon  with  leather  curtains;  it  was

followed by four enormous carts which were loaded. In the chaise there was a

young  man,  dressed  in  the  rustic  manner,  whose  fresh  countenance  was

replete  with  sweetness  and  gaiety.  His  wife,  a  little  woman  of  a  brown

complexion and an agreeable figure, though somewhat stout, sat close by

him. As the carriage did not move on like the chaise of a petit-maître, the

traveler had sufficient time to contemplate the marquis, who was motionless

and immersed in sorrow.

  "Good God," cried he, "I think that is Jeannot." Upon hearing this name,

the marquis lifts up his eyes, the carriage stops, and Colin cries out, "'Tis

Jeannot, 'tis Jeannot himself."

  The little fat bumpkin gave but one spring from the chaise and ran to

embrace his old companion. Jeannot recollected his friend Colin, while his

eyes were blinded with tears of shame.

  "You have abandoned me," said Colin; "but, though you are a great man, I

will love you forever."

  Jeannot, confused and affected, related to him with emotion a great part of

his history.  "Come to the inn where I lodge, and tell me the rest of it," said Colin;

"embrace my wife here, and let us go and dine together." They then went on

foot, followed by their baggage.

  "What is all this train," said Jeannot; "is it yours?"

  "Yes," answered Colin, "it all belongs to me and to my wife. We have just

come in from the country. I am now at the head of a large manufactory of tin

and copper. I have married the daughter of a merchant well provided with all

things necessary for the great as well as the little. We work a great deal; God

blesses us; we have not changed our condition; we are happy; we will assist

our friend Jeannot. Be no longer a marquis; all the grandeur in the world is

not to be compared to a good friend. You shall return with me to the country.

I will teach you the trade; it is not very difficult; I will make you my partner,

and we will live merrily in the remote corner where we were born."

  Jeannot, quite transported, felt emotions of grief and joy, tenderness and

shame; and he said within himself: "My fashionable friends have betrayed

me, and Colin, whom I despised, is the only one who comes to relieve me."

What instruction does not this narrative afford!

  Colin's goodness of heart caused the seeds of a virtuous disposition, which

the world had not quite stifled in Jeannot, to revive. He was sensible that he

could not forsake his father and mother.

  "We will take care of your mother," said Colin; "and as to the good man

your father, who is now in jail, his creditors, seeing he has nothing, will

compromise matters for a trifle. I know something of business, and will take

the whole affair upon myself."

  Colin found means to procure the father's enlargement. Jeannot returned to

the country with his relatives, who resumed their former way of life. He

married a sister of Colin, and she, being of the same temper with her brother,

made him completely happy.

  Jeannot the father, Jeannote the mother, and Jeannot the son, were thus

convinced that happiness is not the result of vanity.


  THE HISTORY OF THE TRAVELS OF SCARMENTADO. [1]  I was born in Candia, in the year 1600. My father was governor of the

city; and I remember that a poet of middling parts, and of a most unmusical

ear, whose name was Iro, composed some verses in my praise, in which he

made  me  to  descend  from  Minos  in  a  direct  line;  but  my  father  being

afterwards disgraced, he wrote some other verses, in which he derived my

pedigree  from  no  nobler  an  origin  than  the  amours  of  Pasiphæ  and  her

gallant.  This  Iro  was  a  most  mischievous  rogue,  and  one  of  the  most

troublesome fellows in the island.

  My father sent me at fifteen years of age to prosecute my studies at Rome.

There I arrived in full hopes of learning all kinds of truth; for I had hitherto

been taught quite the reverse, according to the custom of this lower world

from China to the Alps. Monsignor Profondo, to whom I was recommended,

was a man of a very singular character, and one of the most terrible scholars

in the world. He was for teaching me the categories of Aristotle; and was just

on the point of placing me in the category of his minions; a fate which I

narrowly escaped. I saw processions, exorcisms, and some robberies.

  It  was  commonly  said,  but  without  any  foundation,  that  la  Signora

Olympia, a lady of great prudence, had deceived many lovers, she being both

inconstant  and  mercenary.  I  was  then  of  an  age  to  relish  such  comical

anecdotes.

  A  young  lady  of  great  sweetness  of  temper,  called  la  Signora  Fatelo,

thought proper to fall in love with me. She was courted by the reverend father

Poignardini, and by the reverend father Aconiti,[2] young monks of an order

now extinct; and she reconciled the two rivals by declaring her preference for

me;  but  at  the  same  time  I  ran  the  risk  of  being  excommunicated  and

poisoned. I left Rome highly pleased with the architecture of St. Peter.

  I traveled to France. It was during the reign of Louis the Just. The first

question put to me was, whether I chose to breakfast on a slice of the Marshal

D'Ancre,[3] whose flesh the people had roasted and distributed with great

liberality to such as chose to taste it.

  This kingdom was continually involved in civil wars, sometimes for a

place at court, sometimes for two pages of theological controversy. This fire,

which one while lay concealed under the ashes, and at another burst forth

with great violence, had desolated these beautiful provinces for upwards ofsixty years. The pretext was, defending the liberties of the Gallican church.

"Alas!" said I, "these people are nevertheless born with a gentle disposition.

What can have drawn them so far from their natural character? They joke and

keep holy days.[4] Happy the time when they shall do nothing but joke!"

  I went over to England, where the same disputes occasioned the same

barbarities. Some pious Catholics had resolved, for the good of the church, to

blow up into the air with gunpowder the king, the royal family, and the whole

parliament, and thus to deliver England from all these heretics at once. They

showed me the place where Queen Mary of blessed memory, the daughter of

Henry VIII., had caused more than five hundred, of her subjects to be burnt.

An Irish priest assured me that it was a very good action; first, because those

who were burnt were Englishmen; and secondly, because they did not make

use of holy water, nor believe in St. Patrick. He was greatly surprised that

Queen Mary was not yet canonized; but he hoped she would receive that

honor as soon as the cardinal should be a little more at leisure.

  From thence I went to Holland, where I hoped to find more tranquillity

among a people of a more cold and phlegmatic temperament. Just as I arrived

at the Hague, the people were cutting off the head of a venerable old man. It

was the bald head of the prime minister Barnevelt; a man who deserved better

treatment from the republic. Touched with pity at this affecting scene, I asked

what was his crime, and whether he had betrayed the state.

  "He  has  done  much  worse,"  replied  a  preacher  in  a  black  cloak;  "he

believed that men may be saved by good works as well as by faith. You must

be sensible," adds he, "that if such opinions were to gain ground, a republic

could  not  subsist;  and  that  there  must  be  severe  laws  to  suppress  such

scandalous and horrid blasphemies."

  A profound politician said to me with a sigh: "Alas! sir, this happy time

will not last long; it is only by chance that the people are so zealous. They are

naturally  inclined  to  the  abominable  doctrine  of  toleration,  and  they  will

certainly at last grant it." This reflection set him a groaning. For my own part,

in expectation of that fatal period when moderation and indulgence should

take place, I instantly quitted a country where severity was not softened by

any lenitive, and embarked for Spain.

  The court was then at Seville, the galleons had just arrived; and everythingbreathed  plenty  and  gladness,  in  the  most  beautiful  season  of  the  year.  I

observed at the end of an alley of orange and citron trees, a kind of large ring,

surrounded  with  steps  covered  with  rich  and  costly  cloth.  The  king,  the

queen,  the  infants,  and  the  infantas,  were  seated  under  a  superb  canopy.

Opposite to the royal family was another throne, raised higher than that on

which  his  majesty  sat.  I  said  to  a  fellow-traveler:  "Unless  this  throne  be

reserved for God, I don't see what purpose it can serve."

  This unguarded expression was overheard by a grave Spaniard, and cost

me dear. Meanwhile, I imagined we were going to a carousal, or a match of

bull-baiting, when the grand inquisitor appeared in that elevated throne, from

whence he blessed the king and the people.

  Then came an army of monks, who led off in pairs, white, black, grey,

shod,  unshod,  bearded,  beardless,  with  pointed  cowls,  and  without  cowls.

Next followed the hangman; and last of all were seen, in the midst of the

guards and grandees, about forty persons clad in sackcloth, on which were

painted the figures of flames and devils. Some of these were Jews, who could

not be prevailed upon to renounce Moses entirely; others were Christians,

who had married women with whom they had stood sponsors to a child; who

had not adored our Lady of Atocha; or who had refused to part with their

ready money in favor of the Hieronymite brothers. Some pretty prayers were

sung with much devotion, and then the criminals were burnt at a slow fire; a

ceremony with which the royal family seemed to be greatly edified.

  As I was going to bed in the evening, two members of the inquisition

came to my lodging with a figure of St. Hermandad. They embraced me with

great tenderness, and conducted me in solemn silence to a well-aired prison,

furnished with a bed of mat, and a beautiful crucifix. There I remained for six

weeks; at the end of which time the reverend father, the Inquisitor, sent for

me.  He  pressed  me  in  his  arms  for  some  time  with  the  most  paternal

affection, and told me that he was sorry to hear that I had been so ill lodged;

but that all the apartments of the house were full, and hoped I should be

better accommodated the next time. He then asked me with great cordiality if

I knew for what reason I was imprisoned.

  I told the reverend father that it was evidently for my sins.

  "Very well," said he, "my dear child; but for what particular sin? Speakfreely."

  I racked my brain with conjectures, but could not possibly guess. He then

charitably dismissed me. At last I remembered my unguarded expression. I

escaped with a little bodily correction, and a fine of thirty thousand reals. I

was led to make my obeisance to the grand Inquisitor, who was a man of

great politeness. He asked me how I liked his little feast. I told him it was a

most  delicious  one;  and  then  went  to  press  my  companions  to  quit  the

country, beautiful as it was.

  They had, during my imprisonment, found time to inform themselves of

all the great things which the Spaniards had done for the interest of religion.

They had read the memoirs of the famous bishop of Chiapa, by which it

appears that they had massacred, or burnt, or drowned, about ten millions of

infidels in America, in order to convert them. I believe the accounts of the

bishop are a little exaggerated; but suppose we reduce the number of victims

to five millions, it will still be a most glorious achievement.

  The impulse for traveling still possessed me. I had proposed to finish the

tour of Europe with Turkey, and thither we now directed our course. I made a

firm resolution not to give my opinion of any public feasts I might see in the

future. "These Turks," said I to my companions, "are a set of miscreants that

have not been baptized, and therefore will be more cruel than the reverend

fathers the inquisitors. Let us observe a profound silence while we are among

the Mahometans." When we arrived there, I was greatly surprised to see more

Christian churches in Turkey than in Candia. I saw also numerous troops of

monks, who were allowed to pray to the virgin Mary with great freedom, and

to curse Mahomet-some in Greek, some in Latin, and others in Armenian.

"What good-natured people are these Turks," cried I.

  The  Greek  christians,  and  the  Latin  christians  in  Constantinople  were

mortal enemies. These sectarians persecuted each other in much the same

manner as dogs fight in the streets, till their masters part them with a cudgel.

  The grand vizier was at that time the protector of the Greeks. The Greek

patriarch accused me of having supped with the Latin patriarch; and I was

condemned in full divan to receive an hundred blows on the soles of my feet,

redeemable  for  five  hundred  sequins.  Next  day  the  grand  vizier  was

strangled. The day following his successor, who was for the Latin party, andwho was not strangled till a month after, condemned me to suffer the same

punishment, for having supped with the Greek patriarch. Thus was I reduced

to the sad necessity of absenting myself entirely from the Greek and Latin

churches.

  In  order  to  console  myself  for  this  loss,  I  frequently  visited  a  very

handsome Circassian. She was the most entertaining lady I ever knew in a

private conversation, and the most devout at the mosque. One evening she

received me with tenderness and sweetly cried, "Alla, Illa, Alla."

  These are the sacramental words of the Turks. I imagined they were the

expressions of love, and therefore cried in my turn, and with a very tender

accent, "Alla, Illa, Alla."

  "Ah!" said she, "God be praised, thou art then a Turk?"

  I told her that I was blessing God for having given me so much enjoyment,

and that I thought myself extremely happy.

  In the morning the inman came to enroll me among the circumcised, and

as I made some objection to the initiation, the cadi of that district, a man of

great  loyalty,  proposed  to  have  me  impaled.  I  preserved  my  freedom  by

paying a thousand sequins, and then fled directly into Persia, resolved for the

future never to hear Greek or Latin mass, nor to cry "Alla, Illa, Alla," in a

love encounter.

  On my arrival at Ispahan, the people asked me whether I was for white or

black mutton? I told them that it was a matter of indifference to me, provided

it was tender. It must be observed that the Persian empire was at that time

split into two factions, that of the white mutton and that of the black. The two

parties imagined that I had made a jest of them both; so that I found myself

engaged in a very troublesome affair at the gates of the city, and it cost me a

great number of sequins to get rid of the white and the black mutton.

  I proceeded as far as China, in company with an interpreter, who assured

me that this country was the seat of gaiety and freedom. The Tartars had

made themselves masters of it, after having destroyed everything with fire

and sword.

  The  reverend  fathers,  the  Jesuits,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  reverend

fathers, the Dominicans, on the other, alleged that they had gained manysouls to God in that country, without any one knowing aught of the matter.

Never were seen such zealous converters. They alternately persecuted one

another;  they  transmitted  to  Rome  whole  volumes  of  slander;  and  treated

each other as infidels and prevaricators for the sake of one soul. But the most

violent dispute between them was with regard to the manner of making a

bow. The Jesuits would have the Chinese to salute their parents after the

fashion of China, and the Dominicans would have them to do it after the

fashion of Rome.

  I happened unluckily to be taken by the Jesuits for a Dominican. They

represented me to his Tartarian majesty as a spy of the pope. The supreme

council charged a prime mandarin, who ordered a sergeant, who commanded

four shires of the country, to seize me and bind me with great ceremony. In

this manner I was conducted before his majesty, after having made about an

hundred and forty genuflections. He asked me if I was a spy of the pope's,

and if it was true that that prince was to come in person to dethrone him. I

told him that the pope was a priest of seventy years of age; that he lived at the

distance of four thousand leagues from his sacred Tartaro-Chinese majesty;

that he had about two thousand soldiers, who mounted guard with umbrellas;

that he never dethroned anybody; and that his majesty might sleep in perfect

security.

  Of all the adventures of my life this was the least fatal. I was sent to

Macao, and there I took shipping for Europe.

  My ship required to be refitted on the coast of Golconda. I embraced this

opportunity  to  visit  the  court  of  the  great  Aureng-Zeb,  of  whom  such

wonderful things have been told, and which was then in Delphi. I had the

pleasure  to  see  him  on  the  day  of  that  pompous  ceremony  in  which  he

receives the celestial present sent him by the Sherif of Mecca. This was the

besom with which they had swept the holy house, the Caaba, and the Beth

Alla. It is a symbol that sweeps away all the pollutions of the soul.

  Aureng-Zeb seemed to have no need of it. He was the most pious man in

all  Indostan.  It  is  true,  he  had  cut  the  throat  of  one  of  his  brothers,  and

poisoned his father. Twenty Rayas, and as many Omras, had been put to

death; but that was a trifle. Nothing was talked of but his devotion. No king

was thought comparable to him, except his sacred majesty Muley Ismael, themost  serene  emperor  of  Morocco,  who  always  cut  off  some  heads  every

Friday after prayers.

  I spoke not a word. My travels had taught me wisdom. I was sensible that

it did not belong to me to decide between these august sovereigns. A young

Frenchman,  a  fellow-lodger  of  mine,  was,  however,  greatly  wanting  in

respect  to  both  the  emperor  of  the  Indies  and  to  that  of  Morocco.  He

happened to say very imprudently, that there were sovereigns in Europe who

governed their dominions with great equity, and even went to church without

killing their fathers or brothers, or cutting off the heads of their subjects.

  This  indiscreet  discourse  of  my  young  friend,  the  interpreter  at  once

translated. Instructed by former experience, I instantly caused my camels to

be saddled, and set out with my Frenchman. I was afterwards informed that

the officers of the great Aureng-Zeb came that very night to seize me, but

finding only the interpreter, they publicly executed him; and the courtiers all

claimed, very justly, that his punishment was well deserved.

  I had now only Africa to visit in order to enjoy all the pleasures of our

continent; and thither I went to complete my voyage. The ship in which I

embarked  was  taken  by  the  Negro  corsairs.  The  master  of  the  vessel

complained loudly, and asked why they thus violated the laws of nations. The

captain of the Negroes thus replied:

  "You have a long nose and we have a short one. Your hair is straight and

ours is curled; your skin is ash-colored and ours is of the color of ebon; and

therefore we ought, by the sacred laws of nature, to be always at enmity. You

buy us in the public markets on the coast of Guinea like beasts of burden, to

make  us  labor  in  I  don't  know  what  kind  of  drudgery,  equally  hard  and

ridiculous. With the whip held over our heads, you make us dig in mines for a

kind  of  yellow  earth,  which  in  itself  is  good  for  nothing,  and  is  not  so

valuable as an Egyptian onion. In like manner wherever we meet you, and are

superior to you in strength, we make you slaves, and oblige you to cultivate

our fields, or in case of refusal we cut off your nose and ears."

  To  such  a  learned  discourse  it  was  impossible  to  make  any  answer.  I

submitted to labor in the garden of an old negress, in order to save my nose

and ears. After continuing in slavery for a whole year, I was at length happily

ransomed.  As I had now seen all that was rare, good, or beautiful on earth, I resolved

for the future to see nothing but my own home. I took a wife, and soon

suspected that she deceived me; but, notwithstanding this doubt, I still found

that of all conditions of life this was much the happiest.

  [1] The reader will perceive that this is a spirited satire on mankind in

general, and particularly on persecution for conscience sake.-Trans.

  [2] Alluding to the infamous practice of poisoning and assassination at

that time prevalent in Rome.-Trans.

  [3] This was the famous Concini, who was murdered on the draw-bridge

of the Louvre, by the intrigues of De Luines, not without the knowledge of

the king, Louis XIII. His body, which had been secretly interred in the church

of St. Germain de l'Auxerrois, was next day dug up by the populace, who

dragged it through the streets, then burned the flesh, and threw the bones into

the river. The marshal's greatest crime was his being a foreigner.-Tr.

  [4]  Referring  to  the  massacre  of  Protestants,  on  the  eve  of  St.

Bartholomew.-Tr.

  Brahma, the Creator.-Vishnu, the Preserver. -Siva, the Destroyer.

  THE GOOD BRAMIN.

  DOES  HAPPINESS  RESULT  FROM  IGNORANCE  OR  FROM

KNOWLEDGE?

  In my travels I once happened to meet with an aged Bramin. This man had

a great share of understanding and prudence, and was very learned. He was

also very rich, and his riches added greatly to his popularity; for, wanting

nothing that wealth could procure, he had no desire to defraud any one. His

family  was  admirably  managed  by  three  handsome  wives,  who  always

studied  to  please  him;  and  when  he  was  weary  of  their  society,  he  had

recourse to the study of philosophy.

  Not  far  from  his  house,  which  was  handsome,  well-furnished  and

embellished with delightful gardens, dwelt an old Indian woman who was a

great bigot, ignorant, and withall very poor.

  "I wish," said the Bramin to me one day, "I had never been born!"

  "Why so?" said I.  "Because," replied he, "I have been studying these forty years, and I find it

has been so much time lost. While I teach others I know nothing myself. The

sense of my condition is so humiliating, it makes all things so distasteful to

me, that life has become a burden. I have been born, and I exist in time,

without knowing what time is. I am placed, as our wise men say, in the

confines between two eternities, and yet I have no idea of eternity. I am

composed of matter, I think, but have never been able to satisfy myself what

it is that produces thought. I even am ignorant whether my understanding is a

simple faculty I possess, like that of walking and digesting, or if I think with

my head in the same manner as I take hold of a thing with my hands. I am not

only  thus  in  the  dark  with  relation  to  the  principles  of  thought,  but  the

principles of my motions are entirely unknown to me. I do not know why I

exist, and yet I am applied to every day for a solution of the enigma. I must

return an answer, but can say nothing satisfactory on the the subject. I talk a

great deal, and when I have done speaking remain confounded and ashamed

of what I have said."

  "I am in still greater perplexity when I am asked if Brama was produced

by Vishnu, or if they have both existed from eternity. God is my judge that I

know nothing of the matter, as plainly appears by my answers. 'Reverend

father,' says one, 'be pleased to inform me how evil is spread over the face of

the earth.' I am as much at a loss as those who ask the question. Sometimes I

tell them that every thing is for the best; but those who have the gout or the

stone-those who have lost their fortunes or their limbs in the wars-believe as

little  of  this  assertion  as  I  do  myself.  I  retire  to  my  own  house  full  of

curiosity, and endeavor to enlighten my ignorance by consulting the writings

of our ancient sages, but they only serve to bewilder me the more. When I

talk with my brethren upon this subject, some tell me we ought to make the

most of life and laugh at the world. Others think they know something, and

lose themselves in vain and chimerical hypotheses. Every effort I make to

solve the mystery adds to the load I feel. Sometimes I am ready to fall into

despair  when  I  reflect  that,  after  all  my  researches,  I  neither  know  from

whence I came, what I am, whither I shall go, or what is to become of me."

  The condition in which I saw this good man gave me real concern. No one

could be more rational, no one more open and honest. It appeared to me that

the force of his understanding and the sensibility of his heart were the causesof his misery.

  The same day I had a conversation with the old woman, his neighbor. I

asked her if she had ever been unhappy for not understanding how her soul

was made? She did not even comprehend my question. She had not, for the

briefest moment in her life, had a thought about these subjects with which the

good Bramin had so tormented himself. She believed from the bottom of her

heart in the metamorphoses of her god Vishnu, and, provided she could get

some of the sacred water of the Ganges in which to make her ablutions, she

thought herself the happiest of women.

  Struck  with  the  happiness  of  this  poor  creature,  I  returned  to  my

philosopher, whom I thus addressed:

  "Are you not ashamed to be thus miserable when, not fifty yards from you,

there is an old automaton who thinks of nothing and lives contented?"

  "You are right," he replied. "I have said to myself a thousand times that I

should be happy if I were but as ignorant as my old neighbor, and yet it is a

happiness I do not desire."

  This reply of the Bramin made a greater impression on me than any thing

that had passed. I consulted my own heart and found that I myself should not

wish to be happy on condition of being ignorant.

  I submitted this matter to some philosophers, and they were all of my

opinion: and yet, said I, there is something very contradictory in this manner

of thinking; for, after all, what is the question? Is it not to be happy? What

signifies it then whether we have understandings or whether we are fools?

Besides, there is this to be said: those who are contented with their condition

are sure of that content; while those who have the faculty of reasoning are not

always sure of reasoning right. It is evident then, I continued, that we ought

rather to wish not to have common sense, if that common sense contributes to

our being either miserable or wicked.

  They were all of my opinion, and yet not one of them could be found, to

accept of happiness on the terms of being ignorant. From hence I concluded,

that although we may set a great value upon happiness, we set a still greater

upon reason.

  But after mature reflection upon this subject I still thought there was greatmadness in preferring reason to happiness. How is this contradiction to be

explained? Like all other questions, a great deal may be said about it.


  THE TWO COMFORTERS.

  The  great  philosopher  Citosile  once  said  to  a  woman  who  was

disconsolate, and who had good reason to be so: "Madame, the queen of

England, daughter to Henry IV., was as wretched as you. She was banished

from her kingdom, was in great danger of losing her life at sea, and saw her

royal spouse expire on a scaffold."

  "I am sorry for her," said the lady, and began again to lament her own

misfortunes.

  "But," said Citosile, "remember the fate of Mary Stuart. She loved, (but

with a most chaste and virtuous affection,) an excellent musician, who played

admirably on the bass-viol. Her husband killed her musician before her face;

and in the sequel, her good friend and relative, queen Elizabeth, who called

herself a virgin, caused her head to be cut off on a scaffold covered with

black, after having confined her in prison for the space of eighteen years."

  "That was very cruel," replied the lady, and presently relapsed into her

former melancholy.

  "Perhaps," said the comforter, "you have heard of the beautiful Joan of

Naples, who was taken prisoner and strangled."

  "I have a dim remembrance of her," said the afflicted lady.

  "I must relate to you," continued the other, "the adventure of a sovereign

princess who, within my recollection, was dethroned after supper, and who

died in a desert island."

  "I know her whole history," replied the lady.

  "Well, then," said Citosile, "I will tell you what happened to another great

princess whom I instructed in philosophy. She had a lover as all great and

beautiful princesses have. Her father surprised this lover in her company, and

was  so  displeased  with  the  young  man's  confused  manner  and  excited

countenance, that he gave him one of the most terrible blows that had ever

been given in his province. The lover seized a pair of tongs and broke thehead of the angry parent, who was cured with great difficulty, and who still

bears the marks of the wound. The lady in a fright leaped out of the window

and dislocated her foot, in consequence of which she habitually halts, though

still possessed in other respects of a very handsome person. The lover was

condemned to death for having broken the head of a great prince. You can

imagine in what a deplorable condition the princess must have been when her

lover was led to the gallows. I have seen her long ago when she was in

prison, and she always spoke to me of her own misfortunes."

  "And why will you not allow me to think of mine?" said the lady.

  "Because," said the philosopher, "you ought not to think of them; and

since so many great ladies have been so unfortunate, it ill becomes you to

despair. Think of Hecuba, -think of Niobe."

  "Ah!"  said  the  lady,  "had  I  lived  in  their  time,  or  in  that  of  so  many

beautiful princesses, and had you endeavored to console them by a relation of

my misfortunes, would they have listened to you, do you imagine?"

  Next day the philosopher lost his only son, and was entirely prostrated

with grief. The lady caused a catalogue to be drawn up of all the kings who

had lost their children, and carried it to the philosopher. He read it-found it

very exact-and wept nevertheless.

  Three months afterwards they chanced to renew their acquaintance, and

were mutually surprised to find each other in such a gay and sprightly humor.

To commemorate this event, they caused to be erected a beautiful statue to

Time, with this inscription: "TO HIM WHO COMFORTS."

  The winged dragon. [1]

  ANCIENT FAITH AND FABLE.

  In order to be successful in their efforts to govern the multitude, rulers

have endeavored to instill all the visionary notions possible into the minds of

their subjects.

  The good people who read Virgil, or the Provincial Letters, do not know

that there are twenty times more copies of the Almanac of Liège and of the

Courier Boiteux printed, than of all the ancient and modern books together.

No one can have a greater admiration than myself for the illustrious authors

of these Almanacs and their brethren. I know that ever since the time of theancient Chaldeans there have been fixed and stated days for taking physic,

paring our nails, giving battle, and cleaving wood. I know that the best part of

the revenue of an illustrious academy consists in the sale of these Almanacs.

May  I  presume  to  ask,  with  all  possible  submission,  and  a  becoming

diffidence of my own judgment, what harm it would do to the world if some

powerful astrologer were to assure the peasants and the good inhabitants of

little  villages  that  they  might  safely  pare  their  nails  when  they  please,

provided it be done with a good intention? The people, I shall be told, would

not buy the Almanacs of this new astrologer. On the contrary, I will venture

to affirm, that there would be found among your great geniuses many who

would make a merit in following this novelty. Should it be alleged, however,

that these geniuses, in their new born zeal, would form factions and kindle a

civil war, I would have nothing farther to say on the subject, but readily give

up for the sake of peace my too radical and dangerous opinion.

  Every body knows the king of Boutan. He is one of the greatest princes in

the universe. He tramples under his feet the thrones of the earth; and his

shoes (if he has any) are provided with sceptres instead of buckles. He adores

the devil, as is well known, and his example is followed by all his courtiers.

He one day sent for a famous sculptor of my country, and ordered him to

make  a  beautiful  statue  of  Beelzebub.  The  sculptor  succeeded  admirably.

Never before was there seen such an interesting and handsome devil. But,

unhappily, our Praxiteles had only given five clutches to his statue, whereas

the devout Boutaniers always gave him six. This serious blunder of the artist

was aggravated by the grand master of ceremonies to the devil with all the

zeal of a man justly jealous of his master's acknowledged rights, and also of

the established and sacred customs of the kingdom of Boutan. He insisted

that the sculptor should be punished for his thoughtless innovation by the loss

of  his  head.  The  anxious  sculptor  explained  that  his  five  clutches  were

exactly equal in weight to six ordinary clutches; and the king of Boutan, who

was a prince of great clemency, granted him a pardon. From that time the

people of Boutan no longer believed the dogma relating to the devil's six

clutches.

  The same day it was thought necessary that his majesty should be bled,

and a surgeon of Gascony, who had come to his court in a ship belonging to

our East India Company, was appointed to take from him five ounces of hisprecious blood. The astrologer of that quarter cried out that the king would be

in danger of losing his life if the surgeon opened a vein while the heavens

were in their present state. The Gascon might have told him that the only

question was about the king's health; but he prudently waited a few moments

and then, taking an Almanac in his hand, thus addressed the astrologer.

  "You was in the right, great man! The king would have died held he been

bled at the instant you mentioned; but the heavens have since changed their

aspect, and now is the favorable moment."

  The astrologer assented to the surgeon's observation. The king was cured;

and by degrees it became an established custom among the Boutaniers to

bleed their kings whenever it was considered necessary.

  Although  the  Indian  astronomers  understood  the  method  of  calculating

eclipses, yet the common people obstinately held to the old belief that the

sun, when obscured, had fallen into the throat of a great dragon, and that the

only way to free him from thence was by standing naked in the water and

making  a  hideous  noise  to  frighten  away  the  monster,  and  oblige  him  to

release his hold.[2] This notion, which is quite prevalent among the orientals,

is an evident proof how much the symbols of religion and natural philosophy

have at all times been perverted by the common people. The astronomers of

all ages have been wont to distinguish the two points of intersection, upon

which  every  eclipse  happens,  and  which  are  called  the  Lunar  Nodes,  by

marking them with a dragon's head and tail. Now the vulgar, who are equally

ignorant in every part of the world, took the symbol or sign for the thing

itself. Thus, when the astronomers said the sun is in the dragon's head, the

common people said the dragon is going to swallow up the sun; and yet these

people were remarkable for their fondness for astrology. But while we laugh

at the ignorance and credulity of the Indians, we do not reflect that there are

no less than 300,000 Almanacs sold yearly in Europe, all of them filled with

observations and predictions equally as false and absurd as any to be met

with among the Indians. It is surely as reasonable to say that the sun is in the

mouth or the claws of a dragon, as to tell people every year in print that they

must not sow, nor plant, nor take physic, nor be bled, but on certain days of

the moon. It is high time, in an age like ours, that some men of learning

should think it worth their while to compose a calendar that might be of use

to the industrious classes by instructing instead of deceiving them.  A  blustering  Dominican  at  Rome  said  to  an  English  philosopher  with

whom he was disputing:

  "You  are  a  dog;  you  say  that  it  is  the  earth  that  turns  round,  never

reflecting that Joshua made the sun to stand still!"

  "Well! my reverend father," replied the philosopher, "ever since that time

hath not the sun been immovable?"

  The dog and the Dominican embraced each other, and even the devout

Italians were at length convinced that the earth turns round.

  An augur and a senator lamented, in the time of Cæsar, the declining state

of the republic.

  "The times, indeed, are very bad," said the senator, "we have reason to

tremble for the liberty of Rome."

  "Ah!" said the augur, "that is not the greatest evil; the people now begin to

lose the respect which they formerly had for our order. We seem barely to be

tolerated-we cease to be necessary. Some generals have the assurance to give

battle without consulting us. And, to complete our misfortunes, even those

who sell us the sacred pullets begin to reason."

  "Well, and why don't you reason likewise?" replied the senator, "and since

the dealers in pullets in the time of Cæsar are more knowing than they were

in the time of Numa, ought not you modern augurs to be better philosophers

than those who lived in former ages?"


  FOOTNOTES:


  [1] This dragon was of the same species, Draco Volans, as the savage

reptile  slain  by  St.  George,  the  patron  saint  of  England,  or  the  sleepless

dragon at Colchis, from which Jason rescued the golden fleece. The bible

history  abounds  with  allusions  to  dragons,  and  with  prophecies  of  their

coming  exploits  in  the  stellar  spheres.  These  marvels  may  be  considered,

however, as more strange than credible, and more ancient than authentic-E.

  [2] In Rev. XII: 3, 4, the Dragon is represented as deftly seizing one-third

of  the  stars  of  heaven  with  his  tail,  and  rudely  wresting  them  in  direconfusion from the celestial spheres.-E.Zadig or the Book of Fate

 

  Voltaire

  Zadig or the Book of Fate

  Published in 1749


    LONDON:Printed for Iohn Brindley,

  Bookseller to His Royal Highness the Prince of

  Wales, in New Bond-Street.

    MDCCXLIX.


  Quo fata trahunt, retrahuntque sequamur.

  Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum,

  Tendimus in Latium.

  Virg.


  THE DEDICATION

  TO THE Sultana SHERAA, BY SADI.


  The 18th of the Month Scheval, in the Year of the Hegira, 837.

  Thou Joy of ev’ry Eye! Thou Torment of every Heart! Thou Intellectual

Light! I do not kiss the Dust of thy Feet; because thou seldom art seen out of

the Seraglio, and when thou art, thou walkest only on the Carpets of Iran, or

on Beds of Roses.

  I here present you with a Translation of the Work of an ancient Sage, who

having the Happiness of living free from all Avocations, thought proper, by

Way  of  Amusement,  to  write  the  History  of  Zadig;  a  Performance,  that

comprehends in it more Instruction than, ’tis possible, you may at first be

aware of. I beg you would indulge me so far as to read it over, and then pass

your impartial Judgment upon it: For notwithstanding you are in the Bloomof your Life; tho’ ev’ry Pleasure courts you; tho’ you are Nature’s Darling,

and  have  internal  Qualities  in  proportion  to  your  Beauty;  tho’  the  World

resounds your Praises from Morning till Night, and consequently you must

have a just Title to a superior Degree of Understanding than the rest of your

Sex; Yet your Wit is no ways flashy; Your Taste is refin’d, and I have had the

Honour to hear you talk more learnedly than the wisest Dervise, with his

venerable  Beard,  and  pointed  Bonnet:  You  are  discreet,  and  yet  not

mistrustful; you are easy, but not weak; you are beneficent with Discretion;

you love your Friends, and create yourself no Enemies. Your most sprightly

Flights borrow no Graces from Detraction; you never speak a misbecoming

Word,  nor  do  an  ill-natur’d  Action,  tho’  ’tis  always  in  your  Power.  In  a

Word, your Soul is as spotless as your Person. You have, moreover, a little

Fund of Philosophy, which gives me just Grounds to hope that you’ll relish

this Historical Performance better than any other Lady of your Quality would

do.

  It was originally compos’d in the Chaldean Language, to which both you

and my self are perfect Strangers. It was translated, however, into Arabic, for

the  Amusement  of  the  celebrated  Sultan  Ouloug-beg.  It  first  appear’d  in

Public,  when  the  Arabian  and  Persian  Tales  of  One  Thousand  and  One

Nights,  and  One  Thousand  and  One  Days,  were  most  in  Vogue:  Ouloug

chose rather to entertain himself with the Adventures of Zadig. The Sultanas

indeed  were  more  fond  of  the  former.  How  can  you,  said  the  judicious

Ouloug, be so partial, as to prefer a Set of Tales, that are no ways interesting

or instructive, to a Work, that has a Variety of Beauties to recommend it? Oh!

replied the Sultanas, the less Sense there is in them, the more they are in

Taste; and the less their Merit, the greater their Commendation.

  I flatter my self, thou Patroness of Wisdom, that thou wilt not copy after

those thoughtless Sultanas, but give into the Sentiments of Ouloug. I am in

hopes likewise, when you are tir’d with the Conversation of such as make

those senseless Romances abovemention’d their favourite Amusements, you

will vouchsafe to listen for one Minute or two, to the Dictates of solid Sense.

Had you been Thalestris in the Days of Scander, the Son of Philip; had you

been  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  in  the  Reign  of  Solomon,  those  Kings  would

[viii]have been proud to have taken a Tour to visit you.

  May the Celestial Virtues grant, that your Pleasures may meet with noInterruption;  your  Charms  know  no  Decay;  and  may  your  Felicity  be

everlasting!

  SADI.


  THE Approbation.


  I, Who have subscrib’d my Name hereto, ambitious of being thought a

Man of Wit and Learning, have perus’d this Manuscript, which I find, to my

great Mortification, amusing, moral, philosophical, and fit to be read, even by

those who have an utter Aversion to Romances; for which Reason, I have

depretiated it, as it deserves, and have in direct Terms told the Cadi-Lesquier,

that ’tis a most detestable Performance.


  TABLE

  CHAPTER. I.

  The blind Eye page

  CHAPTER. II.

  The Nose

  CHAPTER. III.

  The Dog and the Horse, &c.

  CHAPTER. IV.

  The Envious Man

  CHAPTER. V.

  The Force of Generosity

  CHAPTER. VI.

  The Just Judge

  CHAPTER. VII.

  The Force of Jealousy

  CHAPTER. VIII.  The Thresh’d Wife

  CHAPTER. IX.

  The Captive

  CHAPTER. X.

  The Funeral Pile

  CHAPTER. XI.

  The Evening’s Entertainment

  CHAPTER. XII.

  The Rendezvous

  CHAPTER. XIII.

  The Free-booter

  CHAPTER. XIV.

  The Fisherman

  CHAPTER. XV.

  The Basilisk

  CHAPTER. XVI.

  The Tournaments

  CHAPTER. XVII.

  The Hermit

  CHAPTER. XVIII.

  The Riddles, or Ænigmas


  CHAPTER. I.

  The Blind Eye.


  In  the  Reign  of  King  Moabdar,  there  was  a  young  Man,  a  Native  of

Babylon, by name Zadig; who was not only endowed by Nature with an

uncommon Genius, but born of illustrious Parents, who bestowed on him anEducation no ways inferior to his Birth. Tho’ rich and young, he knew how to

give a Check to his Passions; he was no ways self-conceited; he didn’t always

act up to the strictest Rules of Reason himself, and knew how to look on the

Foibles of others, with an Eye of Indulgence. Every one was surpriz’d to find,

that notwithstanding he had such a Fund of Wit, he never insulted; nay, never

so much as rallied any of his Companions, for that Tittle Tattle, which was so

vague and empty, so noisy and confus’d; for those rash Reflections, those

illiterate Conclusions, and those insipid Jokes; and, in short, for that Flow of

unmeaning Words, which was call’d polite Conversation in Babylon. He had

learned from the first Book of Zoroaster, that Self-love is like a Bladder full

blown, which when once prick’d, discharges a kind of petty Tempest. Zadig,

in particular, never boasted of his Contempt of the Fair Sex, or of his Facility

to make Conquests amongst them. He was of a generous Spirit; insomuch,

that he was not afraid of obliging even an ungrateful Man; strictly adhering to

that wise Maxim of Zoroaster. When you are eating, throw an Offal to the

Dogs that are under the Table, lest they should be tempted to bite you. He

was as wise as he could well be wish’d; since he was fond of no Company,

but such as were distinguish’d for Men of Sense. As he was well-grounded,

in all the Sciences of the antient Chaldeans, he was no Stranger to those

Principles of Natural Philosophy, which were then known: And understood as

much of Metaphysics as any one in all Ages after him; that is to say, he knew

little  or  nothing  of  the  Matter.  He  was  firmly  convinc’d,  that  the  Year

consisted  of  365  Days  and  an  half,  tho’  directly  repugnant  to  the  new

Philosophy of the Age he liv’d in; and that the Sun was situated in the Center

of the Earth; And when the Chief Magi told him, with an imperious Air, that

he maintain’d erroneous Principles; and that it was an Indignity offered to the

Government under which he liv’d, to imagine the Sun should roll round its

own Axis, and that the Year consisted of twelve Months, he knew how to sit

still and quiet, without shewing the least Tokens of Resentment or Contempt.


  As  Zadig  was  immensely  rich,  and  had  consequently  Friends  without

Number; and as he was a Gentleman of a robust Constitution, and remarkably

handsome; as he was endowed with a plentiful Share of ready and inoffensive

Wit:  And,  in  a  Word,  as  his  Heart  was  perfectly  sincere  and  open,  he

imagin’d  himself,  in  some  Measure,  qualified  to  be  perfectly  happy.  Forwhich Purpose he determin’d to marry a gay young Lady (one Semira by

name)  whose  Beauty,  Birth  and  Fortune,  render’d  her  the  most  desirable

Person  in  all  Babylon.  He  had  a  sincere  Affection  for  her,  grounded  on

Honour, and Semira conceiv’d as tender a Passion for him. They were just

upon the critical Minute of a mutual Conjunction in the Bands of Matrimony,

when, as they were walking Hand in Hand together towards one of the Gates

of Babylon, under the Shade of a Row of Palm-trees, that grew on the Banks

of the River Euphrates, they were beset by a Band of Ruffians, arm’d with

Sabres, Bows and Arrows. They were the Guards, it seems, of young Orcan

(Nephew  of  a  certain  Minister  of  State)  whom  the  Parasites,  kept  by  his

Uncle, had buoy’d up with a Permission to do, with Impunity, whatever he

thought proper. This young Rival, tho’ he had none of those internal Qualities

to boast of that Zadig had, yet he imagin’d himself a Man of more Power;

and  for  that  Reason,  was  perfectly  outrageous  to  see  the  other  preferr’d

before him. This Fit of Jealousy, the Result of mere Vanity, prompted him to

think that he was deeply in Love with the fair Semira; and fir’d with that

amorous Notion, he was determin’d to take her away from Zadig, by Dint of

Arms. The Ravishers rush’d rudely upon her, and in the Transport of their

Rage, drew the Blood of a Beauty, the Sight of whose Charms would have

soften’d the very Tigers of Mount Imaüs. The injur’d Lady rent the very

Heavens with her Exclamations. Where’s my dear Husband, she cried? They

have  torn  me  from  the  Arms  of  the  only  Man  whom  I  adore.  She  never

reflected on the Danger to which she was expos’d; her sole Concern was for

her beloved Zadig. At the same Time, he defended her, like a Lover, and a

Man of Integrity and Courage. With the Assistance only of two domestic

Servants, he put those Sons of Violence to Flight, and conducted Semira,

bloody as she was, and in fainting Fits, to her own House. No sooner was she

come to her self, but she fix’d her lovely Eyes on her Dear Deliverer. O

Zadig, said she, I love thee as affectionately, as if I were actually thy Bride: I

love thee, as the Man, to whom I owe my Life, and what is dearer to me, the

Preservation of my Honour. No Heart sure could be more deeply smitten than

that of Semira. Never did the Lips of the fairest Creature living utter softer

Sounds; never did the most enamoured Lady breathe such tender Sentiments

of Love and Gratitude for his signal Service; never, in short, did the most

affectionate Bride express such Transports of Joy for the fondest Husband.

Her  Wounds,  however,  were  but  very  superficial,  and  she  was  soonrecover’d.  Zadig  receiv’d  a  Wound  that  was  much  more  dangerous:  An

unlucky Arrow had graz’d one of his Eyes, and the Orifice was deep. Semira

was incessant in her Prayers to the Gods that they might restore her Zadig.

Her Eyes were Night and Day overwhelm’d with Tears. She waited with

Impatience for the happy Moment, when those of Zadig might dart their Fires

upon her; but alas! the wounded Eye grew so inflam’d and swell’d, that she

was terrified to the last Degree. She sent as far as Memphis for Hermes, the

celebrated  Physician  there,  who  instantly  attended  his  new  Patient  with  a

numerous Retinue. Upon his first Visit, he peremptorily declared that Zadig

would lose his Eye; and foretold not only the Day, but the very Hour when

that woful Disaster would befal him. Had it been, said that Great Man, his

right Eye, I could have administred an infallible Specific; but as it is, his

Misfortune is beyond the Art of Man to cure. Tho’ all Babylon pitied the hard

Case of Zadig, they equally stood astonish’d at the profound Penetration of

Hermes. Two Days after the Imposthume broke, without any Application,

and Zadig soon after was perfectly recover’d. Hermes thereupon wrote a very

long and elaborate Treatise, to prove that his Wound ought not to have been

heal’d. Zadig, however, never thought it worth his while to peruse his learned

Lucubrations; but, as soon as ever he could get abroad, determin’d to pay the

Lady a Visit, who had testified such uncommon Concern for his Welfare, and

for whose Sake alone he wish’d for the Restoration of his Sight. Semira he

found had been out of Town for three Days; but was inform’d, by the bye,

that his intended Spouse, having conceived an implacable Aversion to a one-

ey’d Man, was that very Night to be married to Orcan. At this unexpected ill

News, poor Zadig was perfectly thunder-struck: He laid his Disappointment

so far to Heart, that in a short Time he was become a mere Skeleton, and was

sick almost to death for some Months afterwards. At last, however, by Dint

of Reflection, he got the better of his Distemper; and the Acuteness of the

Pain he underwent, in some Measure, contributed towards his Consolation.


  Since  I  have  met  with  such  an  unexpected  Repulse,  said  he,  from  a

capricious Court-Lady, I am determin’d to marry some substantial Citizen’s

Daughter.  He  pitch’d  accordingly  upon  Azora,  a  young  Gentlewoman

extremely well-bred, an excellent Oeconomist, and one, whose Parents were

very rich.  Their Nuptials accordingly were soon after solemniz’d, and for a whole

Month successively, no two Turtles were ever more fond of each other. In

Process of Time, however, he perceiv’d she was a little Coquettish, and too

much inclin’d to think, that the handsomest young Fellows were always the

most virtuous and the greatest Wits.


  CHAPTER. II.

  The Nose.


  One  Day  Azora,  as  she  was  just  return’d  home  from  taking  a  short

Country  airing,  threw  herself  into  a  violent  Passion,  and  swell’d  with

Invectives. What, in God’s Name, my Dear, said Zadig, has thus ruffled your

Temper? What can be the Meaning of all these warm Exclamations? Alas!

said she, you would have been disgusted as much as I am, had you been an

Eye-witness of that Scene of Female Falshood, as I was Yesterday. I went,

you must know, to visit the disconsolate Widow Cosrou, who has been these

two  Days  erecting  a  Monument  to  the  Memory  of  her  young  deceased

Husband, near the Brook that runs on one side of her Meadow. She made the

most solemn Vow, in the Height of her Affliction, never to stir from that

Tomb, as long as ever that Rivulet took its usual Course.-Well! and wherein,

pray,  said  Zadig,  is  the  good  Woman  so  much  to  blame?  Is  it  not  an

incontestable  Mark  of  her  superior  Merit  and  Conjugal-Affection?  But,

Zadig, said Azora, was you to know how her Thoughts were employ’d when

I made my Visit, you’d never forget or forgive her. Pray, my dearest Azora,

what then was she about? Why, the Creature, said Azora, was studying, to be

sure, to find out Ways and Means to turn the Current of the River.

  Azora, in short, harangu’d so long, and, was so big with her Invectives

against the young Widow, that her too affected, vain Shew of Virtue, gave

Zadig a secret Disgust.

  Zadig had an intimate Friend, one Cador by Name, whose Spouse was

perfectly  honest,  and  had  in  reality  a  greater  Regard  for  him,  than  all

Mankind besides: This Friend Zadig made his Confident, and bound him to

keep a Project of his entirely a Secret, by a Promise of some valuable Token

of his Respect. Azora had been visiting a Female Companion for two Daystogether in the Country, and on the third was returning home: No sooner,

however, was she in Sight of the House, but the Servants ran to meet her with

Tears in their Eyes, and told her, that their Master dy’d suddenly the Night

before; that they durstn’t carry her the doleful Tidings, but were going to

bury Zadig in the Sepulchre of his Ancestors, at the Bottom of the Garden.

She burst into a Flood of Tears; tore her Hair; and vow’d to die by his Side.

As soon as it was dark, young Cador came, and begg’d the Favour of being

introduc’d to the Widow. He was so, and they wept together very cordially.

Next Day the Storm was somewhat abated, and they din’d together; Cador

inform’d her, that his Friend had left him the much greater Part of his Effects,

and gave her to understand, that he should think himself the happiest Creature

in the World, if she would condescend to be his Partner in that Demise. The

Widow wept, sobb’d, and began to melt. More Time was spent in Supper

than at Dinner. They discoursed together with a little more Freedom. Azora

was lavish of her Encomiums on Zadig; but then, ’twas true, she said, he had

some secret Infirmities to which Cador was a Stranger. In the Midst of their

Midnight Entertainment, Cador all on a sudden complain’d that he was taken

with a most violent pleuretic Fit, and was ready to swoon away. Our Lady

being extremely concern’d, and over-officious, flew to her Closet of Cordials,

and brought down every Thing she could think of that might be of Service on

this emergent Occasion. She was extremely sorry that the famous Hermes

was gone from Babylon, and condescended to lay her warm Hand upon the

Part affected, in which he felt such an agonizing Pain. Pray Sir, said she, in a

soft,  languishing  Tone,  are  you  subject  to  this  tormenting  Malady?

Sometimes,  Madam,  said  Cador,  so  strong,  that  they  bring  me  almost  to

Death’s Door; and there is but one Thing can infallibly cure me; and that is,

the Application of a dead Man’s Nose to the part affected. An odd Remedy

truly, said Azora. Not stranger, Madam, said he, than the Great *Arnon’s*

There was at this Time in Babylon, a famous Doctor, nam’d Arnon, who both

cur’d Apoplectic Fits, and prevented them from affecting his Patients, as was

frequently advertiz’d in the Gazettes, by a little never-failing Purse that he

hung round their Necks. infallible Apoplectic Necklaces.

  This  Assurance  of  Success,  together  with  Cador’s  personal  Merit,

determin’d Azora in his Favour. After all, said she, when my Husband shall

be about to cross the Bridge Tchimavar, from this World of Yesterday, to theother, of To-morrow, will the Angel Asrael, think you, make any Scruple

about his Passage, should his Nose prove something shorter in the next Life

than ’twas in this? She would venture, however, and taking up a sharp Razor,

repair’d to her Husband’s Tomb; water’d it first with her Tears, and then

intended to perform the innocent Operation, as he lay extended breathless, as

she thought, in his Coffin. Zadig mounted in a Moment; secur’d his Nose

with one Hand, and the Incision-Knife with the other. Madam, said he, never

more exclaim against the Widow Cosrou. The Scheme for cutting my Nose

off was much closer laid than hers of throwing the River into a new Channel.


  CHAPTER. III.

  The Dog and the Horse.


  Zadig found, by Experience, that the first thirty Days of Matrimony (as ’tis

written  in  the  Book  of  Zend)  is  Honey-Moon;  but  the  second  is  all

Wormwood. He was oblig’d, in short, as Azora grew such a Termagant, to

sue out a Bill of Divorce, and to seek his Consolation for the future, in the

Study of Nature. Who is happier, said he, than the Philosopher, who peruses

with Understanding that spacious Book, which the supreme Being has laid

open before his Eyes? The Truths he discovers there, are of infinite Service to

him. He thereby cultivates and improves his Mind. He lives in Peace and

Tranquility  all  his  Days;  he  is  afraid  of  Nobody,  and  he  has  no  tender,

indulgent Wife to shorten his Nose for him.

  Wrapped up in these Contemplations, he retir’d to a little Country House

on the Banks of the Euphrates; there he never spent his Time in calculating

how many Inches of Water run thro’ the Arch of a Bridge in a second of

Time, or in enquiring if a Cube Line of Rain falls more in the Mouse-Month,

than in that of the Ram. He form’d no Projects for making Silk Gloves and

Stockings out of Spiders Webbs, nor of China-Ware out of broken Glass-

Bottles; but he pry’d into the Nature and Properties of Animals and Plants,

and soon, by his strict and repeated Enquiries, he was capable of discerning a

Thousand Variations in visible Objects, that others, less curious, imagin’d

were all alike.

  One Day, as he was taking a solitary Walk by the Side of a Thicket, heespy’d one of the Queen’s Eunuchs, with several of his Attendants, coming

towards  him,  hunting  about,  in  deep  Concern,  both  here  and  there,  like

Persons almost in Despair, and seeking, with Impatience, for something lost

of the utmost Importance. Young Man, said the Queen’s chief Eunuch, have

not you seen, pray, her Majesty’s Dog? Zadig very cooly replied, you mean

her Bitch, I presume. You say very right Sir, said the Eunuch, ’tis a Spaniel-

Bitch indeed.-And very small said Zadig: She has had Puppies too lately;

she’s a little lame with her left Fore-foot, and has long Ears. By your exact

Description, Sir, you must doubtless have seen her, said the Eunuch, almost

out of Breath. But I have not Sir, notwithstanding, neither did I know, but by

you, that the Queen ever had such a favourite Bitch.

  Just at this critical Juncture, so various are the Turns of Fortune’s Wheel!

the best Palfrey in all the King’s Stable had broke loose from the Groom, and

got upon the Plains of Babylon. The Head Huntsman with all his inferior

Officers, were in Pursuit after him, with as much Concern, as the Eunuch

about the Bitch. The Head Huntsman address’d himself to Zadig, and ask’d

him, whether he hadn’t seen the King’s Palfrey run by him. No Horse, said

Zadig, ever gallop’d smoother; he is about five Foot high, his Hoofs are very

small; his Tail is about three Foot six Inches long; the studs of his Bit are of

pure Gold, about 23 Carats; and his Shoes are of Silver, about Eleven penny

Weight a-piece. What Course did he take, pray, Sir? Whereabouts is he, said

the Huntsman? I never sat Eyes on him, reply’d Zadig, not I, neither did I

ever hear before now, that his Majesty had such a Palfrey.

  The Head Huntsman, as well as the Head Eunuch, upon his answering

their Interrogatories so very exactly, not doubting in the least, but that Zadig

had clandestinely convey’d both the Bitch and the Horse away, secur’d him,

and  carried  him  before  the  grand  Desterham,  who  condemn’d  him  to  the

Knout, and to be confin’d for Life in some remote and lonely Part of Siberia.

No sooner had the Sentence been pronounc’d, but the Horse and Bitch were

both found. The Judges were in some Perplexity in this odd Affair, and yet

thought  it  absolutely  necessary,  as  the  Man  was  innocent,  to  recal  their

Decree. However, they laid a Fine upon him of Four Hundred Ounces of

Gold, for his false Declaration of his not having seen, what doubtless he did:

And  the  Fine  was  order’d  to  be  deposited  in  Court  accordingly:  On  the

Payment whereof, he was permitted to bring his Cause on to a Hearing beforethe grand Desterham.

  On the Day appointed for that Purpose he open’d the Cause himself, in

Terms to this or the like Effect.

  Ye bright Stars of Justice, ye profound Abyss of universal Knowledge, ye

Mirrors of Equity, who have in you the Solidity of Lead, the Hardness of

Steel, the Lustre of a Diamond, and the Resemblance of the purest Gold!

Since ye have condescended so far, as to admit of my Address to this August

Assembly, I here, in the most solemn Manner, swear to you by Orosmades,

that I never saw the Queen’s illustrious Bitch, nor the sacred Palfrey of the

King  of  Kings.  I’ll  be  ingenuous,  however,  and  declare  the  Truth,  and

nothing but the Truth. As I was walking by the Thicket’s Side, where I met

with  her  Majesty’s  most  venerable  chief  Eunuch,  and  the  King’s  most

illustrious chief Huntsman, I perceiv’d upon the Sand the Footsteps of an

Animal, and I easily inferr’d that it must be a little one. The several small,

tho’ long Ridges of Land between the Footsteps of the Creature, gave me just

Grounds to imagine it was a Bitch whose Teats hung down; and for that

Reason, I concluded she had but lately pupp’d. As I observ’d likewise some

other Traces, in some Degree different, which seem’d to have graz’d all the

Way upon the Surface of the Sand, on the Side of the fore-Feet, I knew well

enough she must have had long Ears. And forasmuch as I discern’d; with

some Degree of Curiosity, that the Sand was every where less hollow’d by

one Foot in particular, than by the other three, I conceiv’d that the Bitch of

our most august Queen was somewhat lamish, if I may presume to say so.


  As to the Palfrey of the King of Kings, give me leave to inform you, that

as I was walking down the Lane by the Thicket-side, I took particular Notice

of the Prints made upon the Sand by a Horse’s Shoes; and found that their

Distances were in exact Proportion; from that Observation, I concluded the

Palfrey gallop’d well. In the next Place, the Dust of some Trees in a narrow

Lane, which was but seven Foot broad, was here and there swept off, both on

the Right and on the Left, about three Feet and six Inches from the Middle of

the Road. For which Reason I pronounc’d the Tail of the Palfrey to be three

Foot and a half long, with which he had whisk’d off the Dust on both Sides as

he ran along. Again, I perceiv’d under the Trees, which form’d a Kind of

Bower  of  five  Feet  high,  some  Leaves  that  had  been  lately  fallen  on  theGround,  and  I  was  sensible  the  Horse  must  have  shook  them  off;  from

whence I conjectur’d he was five Foot high. As to the Bits of his Bridle, I

knew they must be of Gold, and of the Value I mention’d; for he had rubb’d

the Studs upon a certain Stone, which I knew to be a Touch-stone, by an

Experiment that I had made of it. To conclude, by the Prints which his Shoes

had left of some Flint-Stones of another Nature, I concluded his Shoes were

Silver, and of eleven penny Weight Fineness, as I before mention’d.

  The whole Bench of Judges stood astonish’d at the Profundity of Zadig’s

nice Discernment. The News was soon carried to the King and the Queen.

Zadig was not only the whole Subject of the Court’s Conversation; but his

Name was mention’d with the utmost Veneration in the King’s Chambers,

and his Privy-Council. And notwithstanding several of their Magi declar’d he

ought to be burnt for a Sorcerer; yet the King thought proper, that the Fine he

had deposited in Court, should be peremptorily restor’d. The Clerk of the

Court, the Tipstaffs, and other petty Officers, waited on him in their proper

Habit, in order to refund the four Hundred Ounces of Gold, pursuant to the

King’s  express  Order;  modestly  reserving  only  three  Hundred  and  ninety

Ounces, part thereof, to defray the Fees of the Court. And the Domesticks

swarm’d about him likewise, in Hopes of some small Consideration.

  Zadig, upon winding up of the Bottom, was fully convinc’d, that it was

very dangerous to be over-wise; and was determin’d to set a Watch before the

Door of his Lips for the future.

  An Opportunity soon offer’d for the Trial of his Resolution. A Prisoner of

State had just made his Escape, and pass’d under the Window of Zadig’s

House. Zadig was examin’d thereupon, but was absolutely dumb. However,

as it was plainly prov’d upon him, that he did look out of the Window at the

same Time, he was sentenc’d to pay five Hundred Ounces of Gold for that

Misdemeanor;  and  moreover,  was  oblig’d  to  thank  the  Court  for  their

Indulgence; a Compliment which the Magistrates of Babylon expect to be

paid them. Good God! said he, to himself, have I not substantial Reason to

complain, that my impropitious Stars should direct me to walk by a Wood’s-

Side, where the Queen’s Bitch and the King’s Palfrey should happen to pass

by? How dangerous is it to pop one’s Head out of one’s Window? And, in a

Word, how difficult is it for a Man to be happy on this Side the Grave?  CHAPTER. IV.

  The envious Man.


  As Zadig had met with such a Series of Misfortunes, he was determin’d to

ease the Weight of them by the Study of Philosophy, and the Conversation of

select Friends. He was still possess’d of a little pretty Box in the Out-parts of

Babylon,  which  was  furnish’d  in  a  good  Taste;  where  every  Artist  was

welcome, and wherein he enjoy’d all the rational Pleasures that a virtuous

Man could well wish for. In the Morning, his Library was always open for

the Use of the Learned; at Night his Table was fill’d with the most agreeable

Companions; but he was soon sensible, by Experience, how dangerous it was

to keep learned Men Company. A warm Dispute arose about a certain Law of

Zoroaster; which prohibited the Eating of Griffins: But to what Purpose said

some of the Company, was that Prohibition, since there is no such Animal in

Nature? Some again insisted that there must; for otherwise Zoroaster could

never have been so weak as to give his Pupils such a Caution. Zadig, in order

to compromize the Matter, said; Gentlemen, If there are such Creatures in

Being, let us never touch them; and if there are not, we are well assur’d we

can’t touch them; so in either Case we shall comply with the Commandment.

  A learned Man at the upper End of the Table, who had compos’d thirteen

Volumes, expatiating on every Property of the Griffin, took this Affair in a

very serious Light, which would greatly have embarrass’d Zadig, but for the

Credit of a Magus, who was Brother to his Friend Cador. From that Day

forward,  Zadig  ever  distinguish’d  and  preferr’d  good,  before  learned

Company:  He  associated  with  the  most  conversible  Men,  and  the  most

amiable Ladies in all Babylon; he made elegant Entertainments, which were

frequently  preceded  by  a  Concert  of  Musick,  and  enliven’d  by  the  most

facetious Conversation, in which, as he had felt the Smart of it, he had laid

aside all Thoughts of shewing his Wit, which is not only the surest Proof that

a Man has none, but the most infallible Means to spoil all good Company.

  Neither the Choice of his Friends, nor that of his Dishes, was the Result of

Pride or Ostentation. He took Delight in appearing to be, what he actually

was, and not in seeming to be what he was not; and by that Means, got a

greater real Character than he actually aim’d at.  Directly opposite to his House liv’d Arimazes, one puff’d up with Pride,

who not meeting with Success in the World, sought his Revenge in railing

against  all  Mankind.  Rich  as  he  was,  it  was  almost  more  than  he  could

accomplish, to procure ev’n any Parasites about him. Tho’ the rattling of the

Chariots which stopp’d at Zadig’s Door was a perfect Nuisance to him; yet

the  good  Character  which  every  Body  gave  him  was  still  a  higher

Provocation. He would sometimes intrude himself upon Zadig, and set down

at  his  Table  without  any  Invitation;  when  there,  he  would  most  certainly

interrupt the Mirth of the Company, as Harpies, they say, infect the very

Carrion that they eat.

  Arimazes  took  it  in  his  Head  one  Day  to  invite  a  young  Lady  to  an

Entertainment; but she, instead of accepting of his Offer, spent the Evening at

Zadig’s. Another Time, as Zadig and he were chatting together at Court, a

Minister of State came up to them, and invited Zadig to Supper, but took no

Notice  of  Arimazes.  The  most  implacable  Aversions  have  frequently  no

better Foundations. This Gentleman, who was call’d the envious Man, would

have  taken  away  the  Life  of  Zadig  if  he  could  because  most  People

distinguish’d him by the Title of the Happy Man. “An Opportunity of doing

Mischief, says Zoroaster, offers itself a hundred Times a Day; but that of

doing a Friend a good Office but once a Year.”


  Arimazes went one Day to Zadig’s House, when he was walking in his

Garden with two Friends, and a young Lady, to whom he said Abundance of

fine Things, with no other Design but the innocent Pleasure of saying them.

Their Conversation turn’d on a War that the King had happily put an End to,

between him and his Vassal, the Prince of Hyrcania. Zadig having signaliz’d

himself in that short War, commended his Majesty very highly, but was more

lavish of his Compliments on the Lady. He took out his Pocket Book, and

wrote four extempore Verses on that Occasion, and gave them the Lady to

read. The Gentlemen then present begg’d to be oblig’d with a Sight of them,

as well as the Lady, But either thro’ Modesty, or rather a self-Consciousness

that  he  hadn’t  happily  succeeded,  he  gave  them  a  flat  Denial.  He  was

sensible, that a sudden poetic Flight must prove insipid to every one but the

Person in whose Favour it is written, whereupon he snapt the Table in two

whereon  the  Lines  were  wrote,  and  threw  both  Pieces  into  a  Rose-bush,where they were hunted for, but to no Purpose. Soon after it happened to rain,

and all the Company flew into the House, but Arimazes. Notwithstanding the

Shower, he continued in the Garden, and never quitted it, till he had found

one Moiety of the Tablet, which was unfortunately broke in such a Manner,

that even the half Lines were good sense, and good Metre, tho’ very short.

But what was still more remarkably unfortunate, they appear’d at first View,

to be a severe satyr upon the King: The Words were these:


  To flagrant Crimes


  His Crown he owes;


  To peaceful Times


  The worst of Foes.


  This was the first Moment that ever Arimazes was happy. He had it now

in his Power to ruin the most virtuous and innocent of Men. Big with his

execrable  Joy,  he  flew  to  his  Majesty  with  this  virulent  Satyr  of  Zadig’s

under his own Hand. Not only Zadig, but his two Friends and the Lady were

immediately close confin’d. His Cause was soon over; for the Judges turn’d a

deaf Ear to what he had to say. When Sentence of Condemnation was pass’d

upon him, Arimazes, still spiteful, was heard to say, as he went out of Court,

with  an  Air  of  Contempt,  that  Zadig’s  Lines  were  Treason  indeed,  but

nothing more. Tho’ Zadig didn’t value himself on Account of his Genius for

Poetry; yet he was almost distracted to find himself condemn’d for the worst

of Traitors, and his two Friends and the Lady lock’d up in a Dungeon for a

Crime, of which he was no ways guilty. He wasn’t permitted to speak one

Word for himself. His Pocket-Book was sufficient Evidence against him. So

strict were the Laws of Babylon! He was carried to the Place of Execution,

through  a  Croud  of  Spectators,  who  durstn’t  condole  with  him,  and  who

flock’d about him, to observe whether his Countenance chang’d, or whether

he died with a good Grace. His Relations were the only real Mourners; for

there was no Estate in Reversion for them; three Parts of his Effects wereconfiscated for the King’s Use, and the fourth was devoted, as a Reward, to

the use of the Informer.

  Just at the Time that he was preparing himself for Death, the King’s Parrot

flew from her Balcony, into Zadig’s Garden, and alighted on a Rose-bush. A

Peach, that had been blown down, and drove by the Wind from an adjacent

Tree, just under the Bush, was glew’d, as it were, to the other Moiety of the

Tablet. Away flew the Parrot with her Booty, and return’d to the King’s Lap.

The Monarch, being somewhat curious, read the Words on the broken Tablet,

which had no Meaning in them as he could perceive, but seem’d to be the

broken Parts of a Tetrastick. He was a great Admirer of Poetry; and the odd

Adventure of his Parrot, put him upon Reflection. The Queen who recollected

full well the Lines that were wrote on the Fragment of Zadig’s Tablet, order’d

that Part of it to be produc’d: Both the broken Pieces being put together, they

answered  exactly  the  Indentures;  and  then  the  Verses  which  Zadig  had

written, in a Flight of Loyalty, ran thus,


  Tyrants are prone to flagrant Crimes;


  To Clemency his Crown he owes;


  To Concord and to peaceful Times,


  Love only is the worst of Foes.


  Upon this the King order’d Zadig to be instantly brought before him; and

his two Friends and the Lady to be that Moment discharg’d. Zadig, as he

stood  before  the  King  and  Queen,  fix’d  his  Eyes  upon  the  Ground,  and

begg’d their Majesty’s Pardon for his little worthless, poetical Attempt. He

spoke, however, with such a becoming Grace, and with so much Modesty and

good Sense, that the King and the Queen, ordered him to be brought before

them once again. He was brought accordingly, and he pleas’d them still more

and more. In short, they gave him all the immense Estate of Arimazes, who

had  so  unjustly  accus’d  him;  but  Zadig  generously  return’d  the  wicked

Informer the Whole to a Farthing. The envious Man, however, was no waysaffected, but with the Restoration of his Effects. Zadig every Day grew more

and  more  in  Favour  at  Court.  He  was  made  a  Party  in  all  the  King’s

Pleasures,  and  nothing  was  done  in  the  Privy-Council  without  him.  The

Queen, from that very Hour, shew’d him so much Respect, and spoke to him

in such soft and endearing Terms, that in Process of Time, it prov’d of fatal

Consequence  to  herself,  her  Royal  Consort,  to  Zadig,  and  the  whole

Kingdom. Zadig now began to think it was not so difficult a Thing to be

happy as at first he imagin’d.


  CHAPTER. V.

  The Force of Generosity.


  The Time now drew near for the Celebration of a grand Festival, which

was kept but once in five Years. ’Twas a constant Custom in Babylon at the

Expiration of the Term above-mention’d, to distinguish that Citizen from all

the  Rest,  in  the  most  solemn  Manner,  who  had  done  the  most  generous

Action;  and  the  Grandees  and  Magi  always  sat  as  Judges.  The  Satrap

inform’d them of every praise-worthy Deed that occurr’d within his District.

All were put to the Vote, and the King himself pronounc’d the Definitive

Sentence. People of all Ranks and Degrees came from the remotest Part of

the Kingdom to be present at this Solemnity. The Victor, whoever he was,

receiv’d from the King’s own Hand a golden Cup, enrich’d with precious

Stones,  and  upon  the  Delivery,  the  King  made  use  of  the  following

Salutation. Receive this Reward of your Generosity, and may the Gods grant

me Thousands of such valuable Subjects!

  Upon this memorable Day, the King appear’d in all the Pomp imaginable

on  his  Throne  of  State,  surrounded  by  his  Grandees,  the  Magi,  and  the

Deputies, from all the surrounding Nations, of every Province that attended

these public Sports, where Honour was to be acquir’d, not by the Velocity of

the  best  Race-Horse,  or  by  bodily  Strength,  but  by  intrinsic  Merit.  The

principal Satrap proclaim’d, with an audible Voice, such Actions as would

entitle the Victor to the inestimable Prize; but never mention’d one Word of

Zadig’s Greatness of Soul, in returning his invidious Neighbour all his Estate,

notwithstanding he would have taken away his Life: That was but a Trifle,and not worth speaking of.

  The first that was set up for the Prize, was a Judge, that had occasion’d a

Citizen to lose a very considerable Cause, through some Mistake, for which

he was no ways responsible, and made him Restitution out of his private

Purse.

  The next Candidate was a Youth, that tho’ violently in Love with one that

he intended shortly to make his Spouse, yet resign’d her to his Friend, who

was just expiring at her Feet; and moreover, gave her a Portion at the same

Time.

  After this appear’d a Soldier, who, in the Hyrcanian War, had done a

much more glorious Action than the Lover. A Gang of Hyrcanians having

taken his Mistress from him, he fought them bravely, and rescued her out of

their Hands: Soon after, he was inform’d, that another Band of the same Party

had hurried away his Mother to a Place not far distant; he left his Mistress, all

drown’d in Tears, and ran to his Mother’s Assistance: After that Skirmish

was over, he returned to his Sweet-heart, and found her just expiring. He

would fain have plung’d a Dagger into his Heart that Moment; but his Mother

remonstrated to him, that, should he die, she should be entirely helpless, and

upon that Account only he had Courage to live a little longer.

  The Judges seem’d very much inclin’d to give their Votes for the Soldier;

but the King prevented them, by saying, that the Soldier’s Action was praise-

worthy enough, and so were those of the rest, but none of them give me any

Surprize. What Zadig did Yesterday perfectly struck me with Astonishment.

I’ll mention another Instance. I had some few Days ago, as a Testimony of

my Resentment, banish’d my Prime-Minister, and Favourite Coreb from the

Court.  I  complain’d  of  his  Conduct  in  the  warmest  Terms;  and  all  my

Sycophants about me, told me that I was too merciful; and loaded him with

the sharpest Invectives. I ask’d Zadig what his Opinion was of Coreb; and he

dar’d to give him the best of Characters. I must confess, I have read in our

publick Records, indeed, of Instances where Restitution have been generally

made,  for  Injuries  committed  by  Mistake;  where  a  Mistress  has  been

resign’d; and where a Mother has been preferr’d to a Mistress; but I never

read  of  a  Courtier,  that  would  speak  to  the  Advantage  of  a  Minister  in

Disgrace,  and  against  whom  the  Sovereign  was  highly  incens’d.  I’ll  give20,000 Pieces of Gold to every Candidate that has been this Day proclaim’d,

but I’ll give the Cup to no one but Zadig.


  Sire, said Zadig, ’tis your Majesty alone, that deserves the Cup; ’tis you

alone who have done an Action of Generosity, never heard of before; since

you, who are King of Kings, wasn’t exasperated against your Slave, when he

contradicted you in the Heat of your Passion. Every Body gaz’d with Eyes of

Admiration on the King and Zadig. The Judge, who had generously made

Restitution  for  his  Error;  the  Lover,  who  had  married  his  Mistress  to  his

Friend; the Soldier, who had preferr’d the Welfare of his Mother to that of his

Mistress; received the promis’d Donation from the Monarch, and saw their

Names register’d in the Book of Fame: But Zadig had the Cup. The King got

the universal Character of a good Prince, which he did not long preserve.

This joyful Day was solemniz’d with Festivals beyond the Time by Law

establish’d. Tragedies were acted there that drew Tears from the Spectators;

and Comedies that made them laugh; Entertainments, that the Babylonians

were perfect Strangers to: The Commemoration of it is still preserv’d in Asia.

Now, said Zadig, I am happy at last; but he was grosly mistaken.


  CHAPTER. VI.

  The Judgments.


  Young as Zadig was, he was constituted chief Judge of all the Tribunals

throughout the Empire. He fill’d the Place, like one, whom the Gods had

endow’d with the strictest Justice, and the most solid Wisdom. It was to him,

the Nations round about were indebted for that generous Maxim; that ’tis

much more Prudence to acquit two Persons, tho’ actually guilty, than to pass

Sentence of Condemnation in one that is virtuous and innocent. It was his

firm Opinion, that the Laws were intended to be a Praise to those who did

well, as much as to be a Terror to Evildoers. It was his peculiar Talent to

render Truth as obvious as possible: Whereas most Men study to render it

intricate and obscure. On the very first Day of his Entrance into his High

Office, he exerted this peculiar Talent. A rich Merchant, and a Native of

Babylon, died in the Indies. He had made his Will, and appointed his twoSons Joint-Heirs of his Estate, as soon as they had settled their Sister, and

married  her  with  their  mutual  Approbation.  Moreover,  he  left  a  specific

Legacy of 30,000 Pieces of Gold to that Son, who should, after his Decease,

be prov’d to love him best. The Eldest erected to his Memory a very costly

Monument: The Youngest appropriated a considerable Part of his Bequest to

the  Augmentation  of  his  Sister’s  Fortune:  Every  one,  without  Hesitation,

gave the Preference to the Elder, allowing the Younger to have the greatest

Affection  for  his  Sister.  The  Legacy  therefore  was  doubtless  due  to  the

Eldest.

  Their  Cause  came  before  Zadig,  and  he  examin’d  them  apart.  To  the

former, said Zadig, Your Father, Sir, is not dead, as is reported, but being

happily  recover’d,  is  on  his  Return  to  Babylon.  God  be  praised,  said  the

young Man! but I hope the Expence I have been at in raising this superb

Monument will be consider’d. After this, Zadig repeated the same Story to

the Younger. God be praised, said he! I will immediately restore all that he

has left me; but I hope my Father will not recal the little Present I have made

my Sister. You have nothing to restore, Sir; you shall have the Legacy of the

thirty thousand Pieces; for ’tis you that have the greatest Veneration for your

deceased Father.

  A young Lady that was very rich, had entred into a Marriage-Contract

with two Magis; and having receiv’d Instructions from both Parties for some

Months, she prov’d with Child. They were both ready and willing to marry

her. But, said she, he shall be my Husband, that has put me into a Capacity of

serving my Country, by adding one to it. ’Tis I, Madam, that have answered

that valuable End, said one; but the other insisted ’twas his Operation. Well!

said she, since this is a Moot-point, I’ll acknowledge him for the Father of the

Child, that will give him the most liberal Education. In a short Time after, my

Lady was brought to Bed of a hopeful Boy. Each of them insisted on being

Tutor, and the Cause was brought before Zadig. The two Magi were order’d

to  appear  in  Court.  Pray  Sir,  said  Zadig  to  the  first,  what  Method  of

Instruction do you propose to pursue for the Improvement of your young

Pupil? He shall first be grounded, said this learned Pedagogue, in the Eight

Parts  of  Speech;  then  I’ll  teach  him  Logic,  Astrology,  Magick,  the  wide

Difference  between  the  Terms  Substance  and  Accident,  Abstract  and

Concrete, &c. &c. As for my Part, Sir, I shall take another Course, said thesecond; I’ll do my utmost to make him an honest Man, and acceptable to his

Friends. Upon this, Zadig said, you, Sir, shall marry the Mother, let who will

be the Father.


  There came daily Complaints to Court against the Itimadoulet of Media,

whose Name was Irax. He was a Person of Quality, who was possess’d of a

very considerable Estate, notwithstanding he had squander’d away a great

Part of it, by indulging himself in all Manner of expensive Pleasures. It was

but seldom that an Inferior was suffer’d to speak to him; but not a Soul durst

contradict him: No Peacock was more gay; no Turtle more amorous; and no

Tortoise more indolent and inactive. He made false Glory and false Pleasures

his sole Pursuit.

  Zadig, undertaking to cure him, sent him forthwith, as by express Order

from the King, a Musick-Master with twelve Voices, and 24 Violins, as his

Attendants; a Head Steward, with six Men Cooks, and 4 Chamberlains, who

were  never  to  be  out  of  his  Sight.  The  King  issued  out  his  Writ  for  the

punctual Observance of his Royal Will; and thus the Affair proceeded.

  The first Morning, as soon as the voluptuous Irax had open’d his Eyes, his

Musick-Master,  with  the  Voices  and  Violins,  entred  his  Apartment.  They

sang a Cantata, that lasted two Hours and three Minutes. Every three Minutes

the Chorus, or Burthen of the Song, was to this Effect.


  Tisn’t in Words to speak your Praise;


  What mighty Honours are your Due!


  To worth like yours we Altars raise,


  No Monarch’s happier, Sir, than you.


  After the Cantata was over, the Chamberlain address’d him in a formal

Harangue for three Quarters of an Hour without ceasing; wherein he took

Occasion to extol every Virtue to which he was a perfect Stranger; when theOration was over, he was conducted to Dinner, where the Musicians were all

in waiting, and play’d, as soon as he was seated at his Table. Dinner lasted

three Hours before he condescended to speak a Word. When he did; you say

Right,  Sir,  said  the  chief  Chamberlain;  scarce  had  he  utter’d  four  Words

more, but Right, Sir, said the second. The other two Chamberlain’s Time was

taken up in laughing with Admiration at Irax’s Smart Repartees, or at least

such as he ought to have made. After the Cloth was taken away, the adulating

Chorus was repeated.

  This first Day Irax was all in Raptures; he imagin’d, that this Honour done

him by the King of Kings, was the sole Result of his exalted Merit. The

second  wasn’t  altogether  so  agreeable;  The  third  prov’d  somewhat

troublesome; the fourth insupportable; the fifth was tormenting; and at last,

he was perfectly outrageous at the continual Peal in his Ears of No Monarch’s

happier Sir, than you, You say right, &c. and at being daily harangu’d at the

same Hour. Whereupon he wrote to Court, and begg’d of his Majesty to recal

his Chamberlain, his Musick-Master, and all his Retinue, his Head Steward

and his Cooks, and promis’d, in the most submissive Manner, to be less vain,

and  more  industrious  for  the  future.  Tho’  he  didn’t  require  so  much

Adulations, nor such grand Entertainments, he was much more happy; for, as

Sadder has it, One continued Scene of Pleasure, is no Pleasure at all.


  Zadig every Day gave incontestable Proofs of his wondrous Penetration,

and the Goodness of his Heart; he was ador’d by the People, and was the

Darling of the King. The little Difficulties that he met with in the first Stage

of  his  Life,  serv’d  only  to  augment  his  present  Felicity.  Every  Night,

however,  he  had  some  unlucky  Dream  or  another,  that  gave  him  some

Disturbance. One while, he imagin’d himself extended on a Bed of wither’d

Plants, amongst which there were some that were sharp pointed, and made

him very restless and uneasy; another Time, he fancied himself repos’d on a

Bed of Roses, out of which rush’d a Serpent, that stung him to the Heart with

his envenom’d Tongue. Alas! said he, waking, I was one while upon a Bed of

hard and nauseous Plants, and just this Moment repos’d on a Bed of Roses.

But then the Serpent.-


  CHAPTER. VII.  The Force of Jealousy.


  The Misfortunes that attended Zadig proceeded, in a great Measure, from

his Preferment; but more from his intrinsic Merit. Every Day he had familiar

Converse with the King, his Royal Master, and his august Consort, Astarte.

And the Pleasure arising from thence was greatly enhanc’d from an innate

Ambition of pleasing, which, in regard to Wit, is the same, as Dress is to

Beauty.  His  Youth,  and  graceful  Deportment,  had  a  greater  Influence  on

Astarte, than she was at first aware of. Tho’ her Affection for him daily

encreas’d; yet she was perfectly innocent. Astarte would say, without the

least Reserve or Apprehension of Fear, that she was extreamly pleas’d with

the Company of one, who was, not only a Favourite of her Husband, but the

Darling  of  the  whole  Empire.  She  was  continually  speaking  in  his

Commendation before the King: He was the Subject of her whole Discourse

amongst her Ladies of Honour, who were as lavish of their Praises as herself.

Such repeated Discourses, however innocent, made a deeper Impression on

her Heart, than she at that Time apprehended. She would every now and then

send Zadig some little Present or another; which he construed as the Result of

a greater Value for him than she intended. She said no more of him, as she

thought, than a Queen might innocently do, who was perfectly assur’d of his

Attachment to her Husband; sometimes, indeed, she would express her self

with an Air of Tenderness and Affection.

  Astarte was much handsomer than either his Mistress Semira, who had

such  a  natural  Antipathy  to  a  one-eyed  Lord,  or  Azora,  his  late  loving

Spouse, that would innocently have cut his Nose off. The Freedoms which

Astarte  took,  her  tender  Expressions,  at  which  she  began  to  blush,  the

Glances of her Eye, which she would turn away, if perceiv’d, and which she

fix’d upon his, kindled in the Heart of Zadig a Fire, which struck him with

Amazement. He did all he could to smother it; he call’d up all the Philosophy

he was Master of to his Aid; but all in vain, for no Consolation arose from

those Reflections.

  Duty, Gratitude, and an injur’d Monarch, presented themselves before his

Eyes, as avenging Deities: He bravely struggled; he triumph’d indeed; but

this  Conquest  over  his  Passions,  which  he  was  oblig’d  to  check  everyMoment, cost him many a deep Sigh and Tear. He durst not talk with the

Queen any more, with that Freedom which was too engaging on both Sides;

his Eyes were obnubilated; his Discourse was forc’d and unconnected; he

turn’d his Eyes another Way; and when, against his Inclination, they met with

those of the Queen, he found, that tho’ drown’d in Tears, they darted Flames

of Fire: They seem’d in Silence to intimate, that they were afraid of being in

love with each other; and that both burn’d with a Fire which both condemn’d.

  Zadig flew from her Presence, like one beside himself, and in Despair; his

Heart was over-charg’d with a Burthen, too great for him to bear: In the Heat

of his Conflicts, he disclos’d the Secrets of his Heart to his trusty Friend

Cador,  as  one,  who,  having  long  groan’d  under  the  Weight  of  an

inexpressible  Anguish  of  Mind,  at  once  makes  known  the  Cause  of  his

Torments by the Groans, as it were, extorted from him, and by the Drops of a

cold Sweat, that trickled down his Cheeks.

  Cador  said  to  him;  ’tis  now  some  considerable  Time  since,  I  have

discover’d that secret Passion which you have foster’d in your Bosom, and

yet endeavour’d to conceal even from your self. The Passions carry along

with them such strong Impressions, that they cannot be conceal’d. Tell me

ingenuously Zadig; and be your own Accuser, whether or no, since I have

made  this  Discovery,  the  King  has  not  shewn  some  visible  Marks  of  his

Resentment. He has no other Foible, but that of being the most jealous Mortal

breathing. You take more Pains to check the Violence of your Passion, than

the Queen herself does; because you are a Philosopher; because, in short, you

are Zadig; Astarte is but a weak Woman; and tho’ her Eyes speak too visibly,

and with too much Imprudence; yet she does not think her self blame-worthy.

Being conscious of her Innocence, to her own Misfortune, as well as yours,

she is too unguarded. I tremble for her; because I am sensible her Conscience

acquits her. Were you both agreed, you might conceal your Regard for each

other from all the World: A rising Passion, that is smother’d, breaks out into

a Flame; Love, when once gratified, knows how to conceal itself with Art.

Zadig shudder’d at the Proposition of ungratefully violating the Bed of his

Royal Benefactor; and never was there a more loyal Subject to a Prince, tho’

guilty of an involuntary Crime. The Queen, however, repeated the Name of

Zadig so often, and her Cheeks glow’d with such a red, when ever she utter’d

it; she was one while so transported, and at another, so dejected, when theDiscourse turn’d upon him in the King’s Presence; she was in such a Reverie,

so  confus’d  and  stupid,  when  he  went  out  of  the  Presence,  that  her

Deportment made the King extremely uneasy. He was convinc’d of every

Thing he saw, and form’d in his Mind an Idea of a thousand Things he did

not  see.  He  observ’d,  particularly,  that  Astarte’s  Sandals  were  blue;  so

Zadig’s were blue likewise; that as the Queen wore yellow Ribbands, Zadig’s

Turbet was of the same Colour: These were shocking Circumstances for a

Monarch  of  his  Cast  of  Mind  to  reflect  on!  To  a  Mind,  in  short,  so

distemper’d as his was, Suspicions were converted into real Facts.


  All  Court  Slaves,  and  Sycophants,  are  so  many  Spies  on  Kings  and

Queens: They soon discover’d that Astarte was fond, and Moabdar jealous.

Arimazius, his envious Foe, who was as incorrigible as ever; for Flints will

never soften; and Creatures, that are by Nature venemous, forever retain their

Poison.  Arimazius,  I  say,  wrote  an  anonymous  Letter  to  Moabdar,  the

infamous  Recourse  of  sordid  Spirits,  who  are  the  Objects  of  universal

Contempt; but in this Case, an Affair of the last Importance; because this

Letter tallied with the baneful Suggestions that Monarch had conceiv’d. In

short, his Thoughts were now wholly bent upon Revenge. He determin’d to

poison Astarte on a certain Night, and to have Zadig strangled by Break of

Day. Orders for that Purpose were expressly given to a merciless, inhuman

Eunuch,  the  ready  Executioner  of  his  Vengeance.  At  that  critical

Conjuncture, there happen’d to be a Dwarf, who was dumb, but not deaf, in

the King’s Apartment. Nobody regarded him: He was an Eye and Ear-witness

of all that pass’d, and yet no more suspected than any irrational Domestic

Animal. This little Dwarf had conceiv’d a peculiar Regard for Astarte and

Zadig:  He  heard,  with  equal  Horror  and  Surprize,  the  King’s  Orders  to

destroy  them  both.  But  how  to  prevent  those  Orders  from  being  put  into

Execution, as the Time was so short, was all his Concern. He could not write,

’tis true, but he had luckily learnt to draw, and take a Likeness. He spent a

good Part of the Night in delineating with Crayons, on a Piece of Paper, the

imminent Danger that thus attended the Queen. In one Corner, he represented

the King highly incens’d, and giving his cruel Eunuch the fatal Orders; in

another, a Bowl and a Cord upon a Table; in the Center was the Queen,

expiring in the Arms of her Maids of Honour, with Zadig strangled, and laiddead  at  her  Feet.  In  the  Horizon  was  the  rising  Sun,  to  denote,  that  this

execrable Scene was to be exhibited by Break of Day. No sooner was his

Design finish’d, but he ran with it to one of Astarte’s Female Favourites, then

in waiting, call’d her up, and gave her to understand, that she must carry the

Draught to Astarte that very Moment.

  In the mean Time, the Queen’s Attendants, tho’ it was Dead of Night,

knock’d at the Door of Zadig’s Apartment, wak’d him, and deliver’d into his

Hands a Billet from the Queen. At first he could not well tell whether he was

only in a Dream or not, but soon read the Letter, with a trembling Hand, and

a heavy Heart: Words can’t express his Surprise, and the Agonies of Despair

which he was in upon his perusal of the Contents. Fly, said she, Dear Zadig,

this very Moment; for your Life’s in the utmost Danger: Fly, Dear Zadig, I

conjure  you,  in  the  Name  of  that  fatal  Passion,  with  which  I  have  long

struggled, and which I now venture to discover, as I am to make Atonement

for it, in a few Moments, by the Loss of my Life. Tho’ I am conscious to

myself of my Innocence, I find I am to feel the Weight of my Husband’s

Resentment, and die the Death of a Traitor.


  Zadig  was  scarce  able  to  speak.  He  order’d  his  Friend  Cador  to  be

instantly  call’d,  and  gave  him  the  Letter  the  Moment  he  came,  without

opening his Lips. Cador press’d him to regard the Contents, and to make the

best of his Way to Memphis. If you presume, said he, to have an Interview

with her Majesty first, you inevitably hasten her Execution; or if you wait

upon  the  King,  the  fatal  Consequence  will  be  the  same:  I’ll  prevent  her

unhappy Fate, if possible; you follow but your own: I’ll give it out, that you

are gone to the Indies: I’ll wait on you as soon as the Hurricane is blown

over, and I’ll let you know all that occurs material in Babylon.


  Cador, that Instant, order’d two of the fleetest Dromedaries that could be

got, to be in readiness at a private Back-Door belonging to the Court; he

help’d Zadig to mount his Beast, tho’ ready to drop into the Earth. He had but

one trusty Servant to attend him, and Cador, overwhelm’d with Grief, soon

lost Sight of his dearly beloved Friend.

  This  illustrious  Fugitive  soon  reach’d  the  Summit  of  a  little  Hill,  thatafforded him a fair Prospect of the whole City of Babylon: But turning his

Eyes back towards the Queen’s Palace, he fainted away; and when he had

recover’d his Senses, he drown’d his Eyes in a Flood of Tears, and with

Impatience  wish’d  for  Death.  To  conclude,  after  he  had  reflected,  with

Horror, on the deplorable Fate of the most amiable Creature in the Universe,

and  of  the  most  meritorious  Queen  that  ever  liv’d;  he  for  a  Moment

commanded his Passion, and with a Sigh, made the following Exclamations:

What is this mortal Life! O Virtue, Virtue, of what Service hast thou been to

me! Two young Ladies, a Mistress, and a Wife, have prov’d false to me; a

third,  who  is  perfectly  innocent,  and  ten  thousand  Times  handsomer  than

either of them, has suffer’d Death, ’tis probable, before this, on my Account!

All the Acts of Benevolence which I have shewn, have been the Foundation

of my Sorrows, and I have been only rais’d to the highest Spoke of Fortune’s

Wheel, for no other Purpose than to be tumbled down with the greater Force.

Had I been as abandon’d as some Miscreants are, I had like them been happy.

His Head thus overwhelm’d with these melancholy Reflections, his Eyes thus

sunk in his Head, and his meagre Cheeks all pale and languid; and, in a

Word, his very Soul thus plung’d in the Abyss of deep Despair, he pursu’d

his Journey towards Egypt.


  CHAPTER. VIII.

  The Thrash’d Wife.


  Zadig  steer’d  his  Course  by  the  Stars  that  shone  over  his  Head.  The

Constellation of Orion, and the radiant Dog-star directed him towards the

Pole of Canope. He reflected with Admiration on those immense Globes of

Light, which appear’d to the naked Eye no more than little twinkling Lights;

whereas the Earth he was then traversing, which, in Reality, is no more than

an imperceptible Point in Nature, seem’d, according to the selfish Idea we

generally entertain of it, something very immense, and very magnificent. He

then reflected on the whole Race of Mankind, and look’d upon them, as they

are in Fact, a Parcel of Insects, or Reptiles, devouring one another on a small

Atom  of  Clay.  This  just  Idea  of  them  greatly  alleviated  his  Misfortunes,

recollecting the Nothingness, if we may be allow’d the Expression, of his

own Being, and even of Babylon itself. His capacious Soul now soar’d intoInfinity,  and  he  contemplated,  with  the  same  Freedom,  as  if  she  was

disencumber’d  from  her  earthly  Partner,  on  the  immutable  Order  of  the

Universe. But as soon as she cower’d her Wings, and resumed her native

Seat, he began to consider that Astarte might possibly have lost her Life for

his Sake; upon which, his Thoughts of the Universe vanish’d all at once, and

no other Objects appear’d before his distemper’d Eyes, but his Astarte giving

up the Ghost, and himself overwhelm’d with a Sea of Troubles: As he gave

himself up to this Flux and Reflux of sublime Philosophy and Anxiety of

Mind, he was insensibly arriv’d on the Frontiers of Egypt: And his trusty

Attendant had, unknown to him, stept into the first Village, and sought out

for a proper Apartment for his Master and himself. Zadig in the mean Time

made the best of his Way to the adjacent Gardens; where he saw, not far

distant from the High-way, a young Lady, all drown’d in Tears, calling upon

Heaven and Earth for Succour in her Distress, and a Man, fir’d with Rage and

Resentment, in pursuit after her. He had now just overtaken her, and she fell

prostrate  at  his  Feet  imploring  his  Forgiveness.  He  loaded  her  with  a

thousand Reproaches; nor did he spare to chastise her in the most outrageous

Manner. By the Egyptian’s cruel Deportment towards her, he concluded that

the Man was a jealous Husband, and that the Lady was an Inconstant, and

had defil’d his Bed: But when he reflected, that the Woman was a perfect

Beauty,  and  to  his  thinking  something  like  the  unfortunate  Astarte,  he

perceiv’d his Heart yearn with Compassion towards the Lady, and swell with

Indignation against her Tyrant. For Heaven’s sake, Sir, assist me, said she, to

Zadig, sobbing as if her Heart would break, Oh! deliver me out of the Hands

of  this  Barbarian:  Save,  Sir,  O  save  my  Life.  Upon  these  her  shocking

Outcries, Zadig threw himself between the injur’d Lady and the inexorable

Brute.  And  as  he  had  some  smattering  of  the  Egyptian  Tongue,  he

expostulated  with  him  in  his  own  Dialect,  and  said:  Dear  Sir,  if  you  are

endow’d with the least Spark of Humanity, let me conjure you to have some

Pity and Remorse for so beautiful a Creature; have some Regard, Sir, to the

Weakness of her Sex. How can you treat a Lady, who is one of Nature’s

Master-pieces, in such a rude and outrageous Manner, one who lies weeping

at your Feet for Forgiveness, and one who has no other Recourse than her

Tears for her Defence? Oh! Oh! said the jealous-pated Fellow in a Fury to

Zadig, What! You are one of her Gallants, I suppose. I’ll be reveng’d of thee,

thou Villain, this Moment. No sooner were the Words out of his Mouth, buthe quits hold of the Lady, in whose Hair he had twisted his Fingers before,

takes up his Lance in a Fury, and endeavours to the utmost of his Pow’r to

plunge it in the Stranger’s Heart: Zadig, however, being cool, warded the

intended Blow with Ease. He laid fast hold of his Lance towards the Point.

One strove to recover it, and the other to snatch it away by Force. They broke

it between them. Whereupon the Egyptian drew his Sword. Zadig drew his:

They  fought:  The  former  made  a  hundred  rash  Passes  one  after  another,

which the latter parried with the utmost Dexterity. The Lady sat herself upon

a Grass-plat, adjusting her Head-dress, and looking on the Combatants. The

Egyptian was too strong for Zadig, but Zadig was more nimble and active.

The latter fought as a Man whose Hand was guided by his Head; the former

as  a  Mad-man  who  dealt  about  his  Blows  at  random.  Zadig  took  the

Advantage, made a Plunge at him, and disarm’d him. And forasmuch as he

found that the Egyptian was hotter than ever, and endeavour’d all he could to

throw him down by Dint of Strength, Zadig laid fast hold of him, flew upon

him, and tripp’d up his Heels: After that, holding the Point of his Sword to

his Breast, like a Man of Honour, gave him his Life. The Egyptian, fir’d with

Rage,  and  having  no  Command  of  his  Passion,  drew  his  Dagger,  and

wounded Zadig like a Coward, whilst the Victor generously forgave him.

Upon  that  unexpected  Action,  Zadig,  being  incens’d  to  the  last  Degree,

plung’d  his  Sword  deep  into  his  Bosom.  The  Egyptian  fetch’d  a  hideous

Groan, and died upon the Spot. Zadig then approach’d the Lady, and with a

kind of Concern, in the softest Terms told her, that he was oblig’d to kill her

Insulter,  tho’  against  his  Inclinations.  I  have  aveng’d  your  Cause,  and

deliver’d you out of the merciless Hands of the most outrageous Man I ever

saw. Now, Madam, let me know your farther Will and Pleasure with me. You

shall die, you Villain! You have murder’d my Love. Oh! I could tear your

Heart out. Indeed, Madam, said Zadig, you had one of the most hot-headed,

oddest Lovers I ever saw. He beat you most unmercifully, and would have

taken away my Life because you call’d me in to your Assistance. Would to

God he was but alive to beat me again, said she, blubbering and roaring; I

deserv’d to be beat. I gave him too just Occasion to be jealous of me. Would

to God that he had beat me, and you had died in his Stead! Zadig more

astonish’d, and more exasperated than ever he was in all his Life, said to her:

Really, Madam, you put on such extravagant Airs, that you tempt me, pretty

as you are, to thresh you most cordially in my Turn; but I scorn to concernmy self any more about you. Upon this, he remounted his Dromedary, and

made the best of his Way towards the Village: But before he had got near a

hundred Yards, he return’d upon an Out-cry that was made by four Couriers

from Babylon. They rode full Speed. One of them, spying the young Widow,

cried  out.  There  she  is,  That’s  she.  She  answers  in  every  Respect  to  the

Description we had of her. They never took the least Notice of her dead

Gallant, but secur’d her directly. Oh! Sir, cried she to Zadig, again and again,

dear  Sir,  most  generous  Stranger,  once  more  deliver  me  from  a  Pack  of

Villains. I most humbly beg your Pardon for my late Conduct and unjust

Complaint of you. Do but stand my Friend, at this critical Conjuncture, and

I’ll be your most obedient Vassal till Death. Zadig had now no Inclination to

fight for one so undeserving any more. Find some other to be your Fool now,

Madam; you shan’t impose upon me a second Time. I’ll assure you, Madam,

I know better Things. Besides he was wounded; and bled so fast that he

wanted  Assistance  himself:  And  ’tis  very  probable,  that  the  Sight  of  the

Babylonian  Couriers,  who  were  dispatch’d  from  King  Moabdar,  might

discompose him very much. He made all the Haste he could towards the

Village, not being able to conceive what should be the real Cause of the

young Lady’s being secur’d by those Babylonish Officers, and as much at a

Loss, at the same Time, what to think of such a Termagant and a Coquet.


  CHAPTER. IX.

  The Captive.


  No sooner was Zadig arriv’d at the Egyptian Village before-mention’d,

but he found himself surrounded by a Croud. The People one and all cried

out!  See!  See!  there’s  the  Man  that  ran  away  with  the  beauteous  Lady

Missouf, and murder’d Cletofis. Gentlemen, said he, God forbid that I should

ever entertain a Thought of running away with the Lady you speak of: She is

too much of a Coquet: And as to Cletofis, I did not murder him, but kill’d

him in my own Defence. He endeavour’d all he could to take my Life away,

because I entreated him to take some Pity and Compassion on the beauteous

Missouf, whom he beat most unmercifully. I am a Stranger, who am fled

hither for Shelter, and ’tis highly improbable, that upon my first Entrance into

a Country, where I came for Safety and Protection, I should be guilty of twosuch enormous Crimes, as that of running away with another Man’s Partner,

and that of clandestinely murdering him on her Account.


  The Egyptians at that Time were just and humane. The Populace, tis true,

hurried Zadig to the Town-Goal; but they took care in the first Place to stop

the  Bleeding  of  his  Wounds,  and  afterwards  examin’d  the  suppos’d

Delinquents  apart,  in  order  to  discover,  if  possible,  the  real  Truth.  They

acquitted Zadig of the Charge of wilful and premeditated Murder; but as he

had taken a Subject’s Life away, tho’ in his own Defence, he was sentenc’d

to be a Slave, as the Law directed. His two Beasts were sold in open Market,

for the Service of the Hamlet; What Money he had was distributed amongst

the Inhabitants; and he and his Attendant were expos’d in the Market-place to

public Sale. An Arabian Merchant, Setoc by Name, purcha’d them both; but

as the Valet, or Attendant, was a robust Man, and better cut out for hard

Labour  than  the  Master,  he  fetch’d  the  most  Money.  There  was  no

Comparison  to  be  made  between  them.  Zadig  therefore  was  a  Slave

subordinate to his Valet; they secur’d them both, however, by a Chain upon

their Legs; and so link’d they accompanied their Master home. Zadig, as they

were on the Road, comforted his Fellow-Slave, and exhorted him to bear his

Misfortunes  with  Patience:  But,  according  to  Custom,  he  made  several

Reflections on the Vicissitudes of human Life. I am now sensible, said he,

that my impropitious Fortune has some malignant Influence over thine; every

Occurrence of my Life hitherto has prov’d strangely odd and unaccountable.

In  the  first  Place,  I  was  sentenc’d  to  die  at  Babylon,  for  writing  a  short

Panegyrick on the King, my Master. In the next, I narrowly escap’d being

strangled, for the Queen his Royal Consort’s speaking a little too much in my

Favour; and here I am a joint-Slave with thy self; because a turbulent Fellow

of a Gallant would beat his Lady. However, Comrade, let us march on boldly;

let not our Courage be cast down; all this may possibly have a happier Issue

than  we  expect.  ’Tis  absolutely  necessary  that  these  Arabian  Merchants

should have Slaves, and why should not you and I, as we are but Men, be

Slaves  as  Thousands  of  others  are?  This  Master  of  ours  may  not  prove

inexorable. He must treat his Slaves with some Thought and Consideration, if

he expects them to do his Work. This was his Discourse to his Comrade; but

his Mind was more attentive to the Misfortunes of the Queen of Babylon.  Two Days afterwards Setoc set out with his two Slaves and his Camels,

for Arabia Deserta. His Tribe liv’d near the Desert of Horeb. The Way was

long and tedious. Setoc, during the Journey, paid a much greater Regard to

Zadig’s Valet, than to himself; because the former was the most able to load

the Camels; and therefore what little Distinctions were made, they were in his

Favour. It so happen’d that one of the Camels died upon the Road: The Load

which  the  Beast  carried  was  immediately  divided,  and  thrown  upon  the

Shoulders of the two Slaves; Zadig had his Share. Setoc, couldn’t forbear

laughing to see his two Slaves crouching under their Burthen. Zadig took the

Liberty to explain the Reason thereof; and convinc’d him of the Laws of the

Equilibrium.  The  Merchant  was  a  little  startled  at  his  philosophical

Discourse, and look’d upon him with a more favourable Eye than at first.

Zadig, perceiving he had rais’d his Curiosity, redoubled it, by instructing him

in several material Points, which were in some Measure, advantageous to him

in his Way of Business: Such as, the specific Weight of Metals, and other

Commodities of various Kinds, of an equal Bulk; the Properties of several

useful Animals, and the best Ways and Means to make Such as were wild,

tame by Degrees, and fit for Service: In short, Zadig was look’d upon by his

Master, as a perfect Oracle. Setoc now thought the Master the much better

Man of the two. He us’d him courteously, and had no Room to repent of his

Indulgence towards him.


  Being got to their Journey’s End, the first Step that Setoc took was to

claim a Debt of five hundred Ounces of Silver of a Jew, who had borrow’d it

in the Presence of two Witnesses; but both of them were dead; and as the Jew

was conscious he couldn’t be cast for Want of Evidence, appropriated the

Merchant’s Money to his own Use, and thank’d God that it lay in his Power

for once to bite an Arabian with Impunity. Setoc discover’d to Zadig the

unhappy Situation of his Case, as he was now become his Confident. Where

was  it,  pray,  said  Zadig,  that  you  lent  this  large  Sum  to  that  ungrateful

Infidel? Upon a large Stone, said the Merchant, at the Foot of Mount Horeb.

What sort of a Man is your Debtor, said Zadig? Oh! he is as errand a Rogue

as ever breath’d, reply’d Setoc. That I take for granted; but, says Zadig, is he

a lively, active Man, or is he a dull heavy-headed Fellow? He is one of the

worst of Pay-masters in the World, but the merriest, most sprightly Fellow Iever met with. Very well! said Zadig, let me be one of your Council when

your Cause comes to be heard. In short, he summon’d the Jew to attend the

Court;  where,  when  the  Judge  was  sat,  Zadig  open’d  the  Cause:  Thou

impartial Judge of this Court of Equity, I am come here, in behalf of my

Master, to demand of the Defendant five hundred Ounces of Silver, which he

refuses to pay, and would fain traverse the Debt. Have you, Friend, your

Witnesses ready to prove the Loan, said the Judge? No, they are dead; but

there is a large Stone still subsisting, on which the Money was deposited; and

if your Excellence, will be pleas’d to order the Stone to be brought in Court, I

don’t doubt but the Evidence it will give, will be Proof sufficient of the Fact.

I hope your Excellence will order, that the Jew and myself shall be oblig’d to

attend the Court, till the Stone comes, and I’ll dispatch a special Messenger to

fetch it, at my Master’s Expence. Your Request is very reasonable, said the

Judge. Do as you propose; and so call’d another Cause.


  When the Court was ready to break up, Well! said the Judge to Zadig, is

your Stone come yet? The Jew, with a Sneer, replied, your Excellence may

wait here till this Time To-morrow, before the Stone will appear in Court; for

’tis above six Mile off, and it will require fifteen Men to remove it from its

Place. ’Tis well! replied Zadig. I told your Excellence that the Stone would

be a very material Evidence. Since the Defendant can point out the Place

where the Stone lies, he tacitly confesses, that it was upon that Stone the

Money was deposited. The Jew thus unexpectedly confuted, was soon oblig’d

to acknowledge the Debt. The Judge order’d that the Jew should be tied fast

to  the  Stone,  without  Victuals  or  Drink,  till  he  should  advance  the  five

hundred Ounces of Silver, which were soon paid accordingly, and the Jew

releas’d. The Slave Zadig, and this remarkable Stone-Witness, were in great

Repute all over Arabia.


  CHAPTER. X.

  The Funeral Pile.


  Setoc,  transported  with  his  good  Success,  of  a  Slave  made  Zadig  his

Favourite  Companion  and  Confident;  he  found  him  as  necessary  in  theConduct  of  his  Affairs,  as  the  King  of  Babylon  had  before  done  in  the

Administration of his Government; and lucky it was for Zadig that Setoc had

no Wife.

  He  discover’d,  that  his  Master  was  in  his  Temper  benevolent,  strictly

honest, and a Man of good natural Parts. Zadig was very much concern’d,

that One of so much Sense should pay divine Adoration to a whole Host of

created,  tho’  Celestial  Beings,  that  is  to  say,  the  Sun,  Moon,  and  Stars,

according to the antient Custom of the Arabians. He talk’d, at first, to his

Master, with great Precaution on so important a Topick. But at last told him,

in direct Terms, that they were created Bodies, as others, tho’ of less Lustre,

and that there was no more Adoration due to them, than to a Stock or a Stone.

But, said Setoc, they are eternal Beings to whom we are indebted for all the

Blessings we enjoy; they animate Nature; they regulate the Seasons; they are,

in a Word, at such an infinite Distance from us, that it would be downright

impious not to adore them. You are more indebted, said Zadig, to the Waters

of  the  Red  Sea,  which  transport  so  many  valuable  Commodities  into  the

Indies. Why, pray, may not they be deem’d as antient as the Stars? And if

you are so fond of paying your Adoration on Account of their vast Distance;

why don’t you adore the Land of the Gangarides, which lies in the utmost

Extremities of the Earth. No, said Setoc, there is something so surprisingly

more brilliant in the Stars than what you speak of; that a Man must adore

them whether he will or not.


  At the Close of the Evening, Zadig planted a long Range of Candles in the

Front of his Tent, where Setoc and he were to sup that Night: And as soon as

he perceiv’d his Patron to be at the Door, he fell prostrate on his Knees

before the Wax-Lights. O ye everlasting, ever-shining Luminaries, be always

propitious to your Votary, said Zadig. Having repeated these Words so loud

as Setoc might hear them, he sat down to Table, without taking the least

Notice of Setoc. What! said Setoc, somewhat startled at his Conduct, art thou

at thy Prayers before Supper? I act just as inconsistently, Sir, as you do; I

worship these Candles; without reflecting on their Makers, or yourself, who

are my most beneficent Patron.

  Setoc took the Hint, and was conscious of the Reproof that was conceal’d

so genteely under a Vail. The superior Wisdom of his Slave enlightned hisMind; and from that Hour he was less lavish than ever he had been, of his

Incense to those created Beings, and for the future, paid his Adoration to the

eternal God who made them.

  At that Time there was a most hideous Custom in high Repute all over

Arabia,  which  came  originally  from  Scythia;  but  having  met  with  the

Sanction of the bigotted Brachmans, threatn’d to spread its Infection all over

the East. When a married Man happen’d to die, if his dearly beloved Widow

ever expected to be esteem’d a Saint, she must throw herself headlong upon

her Husband’s Funeral-Pile. This was look’d upon as a solemn Festival, and

was  call’d  the  Widow’s  Sacrifice.  That  Tribe  which  could  boast  of  the

greatest Number of burnt-Widows, was look’d upon as the most meritorious.

An Arabian, who was of the Tribe of Setoc, happen’d just at that Juncture, to

be  dead,  and  his  Widow  (Almona  by  Name)  who  was  a  noted  Devotee,

publish’d  the  Day,  nay,  the  Hour,  that  she  propos’d  to  throw  herself

(according  to  Custom)  on  her  deceased  Husband’s  Funeral  Pile,  and  be

attended by a Concert of Drums and Trumpets. Zadig remonstrated to Setoc,

what  a  shocking  Custom  this  was,  and  how  directly  repugnant  to  human

Nature; by permitting young Widows, almost every Day, to become wilful

Self-Murderers; when they might be of Service to their Country, either by the

Addition of new Subjects, or by the Education of such as demanded their

Maternal Indulgence. And, by arguing seriously with Setoc for some Time,

he  forc’d  from  him  at  last,  an  ingenuous  Confession,  that  the  barbarous

Custom then subsisting, ought, if possible, to be abolish’d. ’Tis now, replied

Setoc,  above  a  thousand  Years  since  the  Widows  of  Arabia  have  been

indulg’d with this Privilege of dying with their Husbands; and how shall any

one dare to abrogate a Law that has been establish’d Time out of Mind? Is

there  any  Thing  more  inviolable  than  even  an  antient  Error?  But,  replied

Zadig, Reason is of more antient Date than the Custom you plead for. Do you

communicate these Sentiments to the Sovereigns of your Tribes, and in the

mean while I’ll go, and sound the Widow’s Inclinations.


  Accordingly he paid her a Visit, and having insinuated himself into her

Favour, by a few Compliments on her Beauty, after urging what a pity it was,

that a young Widow, Mistress of so many Charms, should make away with

herself for no other reason but to mingle her Ashes with a Husband that wasdead;  he,  notwithstanding,  applauded  her  for  her  heroic  Constancy  and

Courage.  I  perceive,  Madam,  said  he,  you  was  excessively  fond  of  your

deceased Spouse. Not I truly, reply’d the young Arabian Devotee. He was a

Brute, infected with a groundless Jealousy of my Virtue; and, in short, a

perfect Tyrant. But, notwithstanding all this, I am determin’d to comply with

our Custom. Surely then, Madam, there’s a Sort of secret Pleasure in being

burnt alive. Alas! with a Sigh, cried Almona, ’tis a Shock indeed to Nature;

but must be complied with for all that. I am a profess’d Devotee, and should I

shew  the  least  Reluctance,  my  Reputation  would  be  lost  for  ever;  all  the

World would laugh at me, should I not burn myself on this Occasion: Zadig

having forc’d her ingenuously to confess, that she parted with her Life more

out of Regard to what the World would say of her, and out of Pride and

Ostentation, than any real Love for the deceas’d, he talk’d to her for some

considerable Time so rationally, and us’d so many prevailing Arguments with

her to justify her due Regard for the Life which she was going to throw away,

that she began to wave the Thought, and entertain a secret Affection for her

friendly Monitor. Pray, Madam, tell me, said Zadig, how would you dispose

of yourself, upon the Supposition, that you could shake off this vain and

barbarous Notion? Why, said Dame, with an amorous Glance, I think verily I

should accept of yourself for a second Bed-fellow.

  The Memory of Astarte had made too strong an Impression on his Mind,

to  close  with  this  warm  Declaration:  He  took  his  leave,  however,  that

Moment, and waited on the Chiefs. He communicated to them the Substance

of their private Conversation, and prevailed with them to make it a Law for

the future, that no Widow should be allow’d to fall a Victim to a deceased

Husband, till after she had admitted some young Man to converse with her in

private for a whole Hour together. The Law was pass’d accordingly, and not

one Widow in all Arabia, from that Day to this, ever observ’d the Custom.

’Twas  to  Zadig  alone  that  the  Arabian  Dames  were  indebted  for  the

Abolition, in one Hour, of a Custom so very inhuman, that had been practis’d

for such a Number of Ages. Zadig, therefore, with the strictest Justice, was

look’d upon by all the Fair Sex in Arabia, as their most bountiful Benefactor.


  CHAPTER. XI.

  The Evening’s Entertainment.  Setoc,  who  would  never  stir  out  without  his  Bosom-Friend  (in  whom

alone, as he thought, all Wisdom center’d) resolv’d to take him with him to

Balzora Fair, whither the richest Merchants round the whole habitable Globe,

us’d  annually  to  resort.  Zadig  was  delighted  to  see  such  a  Concourse  of

substantial Tradesmen from all Countries, assembled together in one Place. It

appear’d to him, as if the whole Universe was but one large Family, and all

happily met together at Balzora. On the second Day of the Fair, he sat down

to Table with an Egyptian, an Indian, that liv’d on the Banks of the River

Ganges,  an  Inhabitant  of  Cathay,  a  Grecian,  a  Celt,  and  several  other

Foreigners, who by their frequent Voyages towards the Arabian Gulf, were so

far conversant with the Arabic Language, as to be able to discourse freely,

and be mutually understood. The Egyptian began to fly into a Passion; what a

scandalous Place is this Balzora, said he, where they refuse to lend me a

thousand Ounces of Gold, upon the best Security that can possibly be offer’d.

Pray, said Setoc, what may the Commodity be that you would deposit as a

Pledge for the Sum you mention. Why, the Corpse of my deceased Aunt, said

he, who was one of the finest Women in all Egypt. She was my constant

Companion; but unhappily died upon the Road. I have taken so much Care,

that no Mummy whatever can equal it: And was I in my own Country, I

could  be  furnish’d  with  what  Sum  soever  I  pleas’d,  were  I  dispos’d  to

mortgage it. ’Tis a strange Thing that Nobody here will advance so small a

Sum  upon  so  valuable  a  Commodity.  No  sooner  had  he  express’d  his

Resentment, but he was going to cut up a fine boil’d Pullet, in order to make

a Meal on’t, when an Indian laid hold of his Hand, and with deep Concern,

cried out, For God’s Sake what are you about? Why, said the Egyptian, I

design to make a Wing of this Fowl one Part of my Supper. Pray, good Sir,

consider what you are doing, said the Indian. ’Tis very possible, that the Soul

of the deceas’d Lady may have taken its Residence in that Fowl. And you

wouldn’t surely run the Risque of eating up your Aunt? To boil a Fowl is,

doubtless, a most shameful Outrage done to Nature. Pshaw! What a Pother

you make about the boiling of a Fowl, and flying in the Face of Nature,

replied the Egyptian in a Pet; tho’ we Egyptians pay divine Adoration to the

Ox; yet we can make a hearty Meal of a Piece of roast Beef for all that. Is it

possible, Sir, that your Country-men should act so absurdly, as to pay an Oxthe Tribute of divine Worship, said the Indian? Absurd as you think it, said

the other, the Ox has been the principal Object of Adoration all over Egypt,

for these hundred and thirty five thousand Years, and the most abandon’d

Egyptian  has  never  been  as  yet  so  impious  as  to  gain-say  it.  Ay,  Sir,  an

hundred thirty five thousand Years, say you, surely you must be out a little in

your Calculation. ’Tis but about fourscore thousand Years, since India was

first inhabited. Sure I am, we are a more antient People than you are, and our

Brama prohibited the eating of Beef long before your Nation ever erected an

Altar in Honour of the Ox, or ever put one upon a Spit. What a Racket you

make about your Brama! Is he able to stand the least in Competition with our

Apis, said the Egyptian? Let us hear, pray, what mighty Feats have been done

by your boasted Brama? Why, replied the Bramin, he first taught his Votaries

to write and read; and ’tis to him alone, all the World is indebted for the

Invention of the noble Game of Chess. You are quite out, Sir, in your Notion,

said a Chaldean, who sat within Hearing: All these invaluable Blessings were

deriv’d from the Fish Oannés; and ’tis that alone to which the Tribute of

divine Adoration is justly due. All the World will tell you, that ’twas a divine

Being whose Tail was pure Gold, whose Head resembled that of a Man, tho’

indeed the Features were much more beautiful; and that he condescended to

visit the Earth three Hours every Day, for the Instruction of Mankind. He had

a numerous Issue, as is very well known, and all of them were powerful

Monarchs. I have a Picture of it at Home, to which, as in Duty I ought, I Say

my Prayers at Night before I go to Bed, and every Morning that I rise. There

is no Harm, Sir, as I can conceive, in partaking of a Piece of roast Beef; but,

doubtless, ’tis a mortal Sin, a Crime of the blackest Dye, to touch a Piece of

Fish. Besides, you cannot justly boast of so illustrious an Origin, and you are

both of you mere Moderns, in Comparison to us Chaldeans, You Egyptians

lay claim to no more than 135,000 Years, and you Indians, but of 80,000.

Whereas we have Almanacks that are dated 4000 Centuries backwards. Take

my Word for it; I speak nothing but Truth; renounce your Errors, and I’ll

make each of you a Present of a fine Portrait of our Oannés.


  A Native of Cambalu, entring into the Debate, said, I have a very great

Veneration, not only for the Egyptians, Chaldeans, Greeks, and Celtæ; but for

Brama, Apis, and the Oannés, but in my humble Opinion, the *Li, * TheChinese Term, Li, signifies, properly speaking, natural Light, or Reason; and

Tien, the Heavens, or the supreme Being. or as ’tis by some call’d, the *Tien,

is an Object more deserving of divine Adoration than any Ox, or Fish, how

much soever you may boast of their respective Perfections. All I shall say, in

regard to my native Country, ’tis of much greater Extent, than all Egypt,

Chaldea, and the Indies put together. I shall lay no Stress on the Antiquity of

my Country; for I imagine ’tis of much greater Importance to be the happiest

People, than the most antient under the Sun. However, since you were talking

of the Almanacks, I must beg the Liberty to tell you, that ours are look’d

upon to be the best all over Asia; and that we had several very correct ones

before the Art of Arithmetick was ever heard of in Chaldea.


  You are all of you a Parcel of illiterate, ignorant Bigots, cry’d a Grecian:

’Tis plain, you know nothing of the Chaos, and that the World, as it now

stands,  is  owing  wholly  to  Matter  and  Form.  The  Greek  ran  on  for  a

considerable Time; but was at last interrupted by a Celt, who having drank

deep, during the whole Time of this Debate, thought himself ten Times wiser

than any of his Antagonists; and wrapping out a great Oath, insisted, that all

their  Gods  were  nothing,  if  set  in  Competition  with  the  Teutath  or  the

Misletoe on the Oak. As for my part, said he, I carry some of it always in my

Pocket: As to my Ancestors, they were Scythians, and the only Men worth

talking of in the whole World: ’Tis true, indeed, they would now and then

make a Meal of their Country-men, but that ought not to be urg’d as any

Objection to his Country; and, in short, if any one of you, or all of you, shall

dare to say any thing disrespectful of Teutath, I’ll defend its Cause to the last

Drop  of  my  Blood.  The  Quarrel  grew  warmer  and  warmer,  and  Setoc

expected that the Table would be overset, and that Blood-shed would ensue.

Zadig, who hadn’t once open’d his Lips during the whole Controversy, at last

rose up, and address’d himself to the Celt, in the first Place, as being the most

noisy and outrageous. Sir, said he, Your Notions in this Affair are very just:

Good Sir, oblige me with a Bit of your Misletoe. Then turning about, he

expatiated on the Eloquence of the Grecian, and in a Word, soften’d in the

most artful Manner all the contending Parties. He said but little indeed to the

Cathayian; because he was more cool, and sedate than any of the others. To

conclude, he address’d them all in general Terms, to this or the like Effect:My dear Friends, You have been contesting all this while about an important

Topick,  in  which  ’tis  evident,  you  are  all  unanimously  agreed.  Agreed,

quotha! they all cried, in an angry Tone, How so, pray? Why said he to the

hot, testy Celt, is it not true, that you do not in effect adore this Misletoe, but

that Being who created that Misletoe and the Oak, to which it is so closely

united?  Doubtless,  Sir,  reply’d  the  Celt.  And  you,  Sir,  said  he,  to  the

Egyptian, You revere, thro’ your venerable Apis, the great Author of every

Ox’s  Being.  We  do  so,  said  the  Egyptian.  The  mighty  Oannés,  tho’  the

Sovereign of the Sea, continued he, must give Precedence to that Power, who

made both the Sea, and every Fish that dwells therein. We allow it, said the

Chaldean. The Indian, adds he, and the Cathayan, acknowledge one supreme

Being,  or  first  Cause,  as  well  as  you.  As  to  what  that  profound  worthy

Gentleman the Grecian has advanc’d, is, I must own, a little above my weak

Comprehension,  but  I  am  fully  persuaded,  that  he  will  allow  there  is  a

supreme  Being  on  whom  his  favourite  Matter  and  Form  are  entirely

dependent. The Grecian, who was look’d upon as a Sage amongst them, said,

with Abundance of Gravity, that Zadig, had made a very just Construction of

his Meaning. Now, Gentlemen, I appeal to you all, said Zadig, whether you

are not unanimous to a Man, in the Debate upon the Carpet, and whether

there are any just Grounds for the least Divisions or Animosities amongst

you. The whole Company, cool at once, caress’d him; and Setoc, after he had

sold off all his Goods and Merchandize at a round Price, took his Friend

Zadig Home with him to the Land of Horeb. Zadig, upon his first Arrival was

inform’d,  that  a  Prosecution  had  been  carried  on  against  him  during  his

Absence, and that the Sentence pronounc’d against him was, that he should

be burnt alive before a slow Fire.


  CHAPTER. XII.

  The Rendezvous.


  Whilst Zadig attended his Friend Setoc to Balzora, the Priests of the Stars

were determin’d to punish him. As all the costly Jewels, and other valuable

Decorations, in which every young Widow that sacrificed her self on her

Husband’s Funeral-pile, were their customary Fees, ’tis no great Wonder,

indeed, that they were inclin’d to burn poor Zadig, for playing them such ascurvy Trick. Zadig therefore, was accus’d of holding heretical and damnable

Tenets, in regard to the Celestial Host: They depos’d, and swore point-blank,

that he had been heard to aver, that the Stars never sat in the Sea. This horrid

blasphemous Declaration thunder-struck all the Judges, and they were ready

to rend their Mantles at the Sound of such an impious Assertion; and they

would have made Zadig, had he been a Man of Substance, paid very severely

for his heretical Notions. But in the Height of their Pity and Compassion for

even  such  an  Infidel,  they  would  lay  no  Fine  upon  him;  but  content

themselves  with  seeing  him  roasted  alive  before  a  slow  Fire.  Setoc,  tho’

without Hopes of Success, us’d all the Interest he had to save his bosom

Friend  from  so  shocking  a  Death;  but  they  turn’d  a  deaf  Ear  to  all  his

Remonstrances,  and  oblig’d  him  to  hold  his  Tongue.  The  young  Widow

Almona, who by this Time was not only reconcil’d to living a little longer,

but had some Taste for the Pleasures of Life, and knew that she was entirely

indebted to Zadig for it, resolv’d, if possible, to free her Benefactor from

being burnt, as he had before convinc’d her of the Folly of it in her Case. She

ponder’d upon this weighty Affair very seriously; but said nothing to any one

whomsoever. Zadig was to be executed the next Day; and she had only a few

Hours left to carry her Project into Execution. Now the Reader shall hear with

how much Benevolence and Discretion this amiable Widow behav’d on this

emergent Occasion.


  In the first Place, she made use of the most costly Perfumes; and drest

herself  to  the  utmost  Advantage  to  render  her  Charms  as  conspicuous  as

possible; And thus gaily attir’d, demanded a private Audience of the High

Priest of the Stars. Upon her first Admittance into his august and venerable

Presence, she address’d herself in the following Terms. O thou first-born and

well-beloved Son of the Great Bear, Brother of the Bull, and first Cousin to

the Dog, (these you must know were the Pontiff’s high Titles) I come to

confess myself before you: My Conscience is my Accuser, and I am terribly

afraid I have been guilty of a mortal Sin, by declining the stated Custom of

burning my self on my Husband’s Funeral-pile? What could tempt me, in

short, to a Prolongation of my Life, I can’t imagine, I, who am grown a

perfect Skeleton, all wrinkled and deform’d. She paus’d, and pulling off, with

a negligent but artful Air, her long silk Gloves; She display’d a soft, plump,naked Arm, and white as Snow: You see, Sir, said she, that all my Charms

are blasted. Blasted, Madam, said the luscious Pontiff; No! Your Charms are

still  resistless:  His  Eyes,  and  his  Mouth,  with  which  he  kiss’d  her  Hand,

confirm’d their Power: Such an Arm, Madam, by the Great Orasmades, I

never saw before. Alas! said the Widow, with a modest Blush; my Arm Sir,

’tis probable, may have the Advantage of any hidden Part; but see, good

Father,  what  a  Neck  is  here;  as  yellow  as  Saffron,  an  Object  not  worth

regarding.  Then  she  display’d  such  a  snowy,  panting  Bosom,  that  Nature

could  not  mend  it.  A  Rose-Bud  on  an  Ivory  Apple,  would,  if  set  in

Competition with her spotless Whiteness, make no better Appearance than

common Madder upon a Shrub; and the whitest Wool, just out of the Laver,

were she but by, would seem but of a light-brown Hue.

  Her Neck, her large black, sparkling Eyes, that languishingly roll’d, and

seem’d as ’twere, on Fire; her lovely Cheeks, glowing with White and Red,

her Nose, that was not unlike the Tower of Mount Lebanon, her Lips, which

were like two Borders of Coral, inclosing two Rows of the best Pearls in the

Arabian Sea; such a Combination, I say, of Charms, made the old Pontiff

judge she was scarce twenty Years of Age; and in a kind of Flutter, to make

her  a  Declaration  of  his  tender  Regard  for  her.  Almona,  perceiving  him

enamour’d, begg’d his Interest in Favour of Zadig. Alas! my dear Charmer,

my  Interest  alone,  when  you  request  the  Favour,  would  be  but  a  poor

Compliment; I’ll take care his Acquittance shall be signed by three more of

my Brother Priests. Do you sign first, however, said Almona. With all my

Soul, said the amorous Pontiff, provided you’ll be kind, my dearest. You do

me  too  much  Honour,  said  Almona;  but  should  you  give  your  self  the

Trouble to pay me a Visit after Sunset, and as soon as the Star Sheat twinkles

on the Horizon, you shall find me, most venerable Father, repos’d upon a

rosy-colour’d  silver  Sopha,  where  you  shall  use  your  Pleasure  with  your

humble Servant. With that she made him a low Courtesy; took up Zadig’s

general Release as soon as duely sign’d, and left the old Doatard all over

Love, tho’ somewhat diffident of his own Abilities. The Residue of the Day

he  spent  in  his  Bagnio;  he  drank  large  enlivening  Draughts  of  a  Water

distill’d from the Cinnamon of Ceilan, and the costly Spices of Tidor and

Ternate,  and  waited  with  the  utmost  Impatience  for  the  up-rising  of  the

brilliant Sheat.  In the mean time Almona went to the second Pontiff. He assur’d her that

the Sun, Moon, and all the starry Host of Heav’n, were but languid Fires to

her bright Eyes. He put the Question to her, in short, at once, and agreed to

sign upon her Compliance. She suffer’d herself to be over-persuaded, and

made  an  Assignation  to  meet  him  at  a  certain  Place,  as  soon  as  the  Star

Algenib should make its Appearance. From him she repair’d to the third and

fourth Pontiff, taking care, wherever she went, to see Zadig’s Acquittance

duely sign’d, and made fresh Appointments at the Rising of Star after Star.


  When she had carried her Point thus far, she sent a proper Message to the

Judges of the Court, who had condemn’d Zadig, requesting that they would

come to her House, that she might advise with them upon an Affair of the last

Importance. They waited on her accordingly; she produc’d Zadig’s Discharge

duly  sign’d  by  four  several  Hands,  and  told  them  the  Definitive  Treaty

between all the contracting Parties. Each of the pontifical Gallants observ’d

their Summons to a Moment. Each was startled at the Sight of his Rival; but

perfectly thunderstruck to see the Judges, before whom the Widow had laid

open her Case. Zadig procur’d an absolute Pardon, and Setoc was so charm’d

with the artful Address of Almona, that he married her the next Day. Zadig

went afterwards to throw himself at the Feet of his fair Benefactress. Setoc

and he took their Leave of each other with Tears in their Eyes, and vowing

that an eternal mutual Friendship should be preserv’d between them; and, in

short,  should  Fortune  at  any  Time  afterwards  prove  more  propitious  than

could well be expected to either Party; the other should partake of an equal

Share of his Success.


  Zadig steer’d his Course towards Syria; forever pondering on the hard

Fate of the justly-admir’d Astarte, and reflecting on his own Stars that so

obstinately darted down their malignant Rays, and continu’d daily to torment

him. What, said he! to pay four hundred Ounces of Gold for only seeing a

Bitch pass by me; to be condemn’d to be beheaded for four witless Verses in

Praise of the King; to be strangled to Death, because a Queen was pleas’d to

look upon me; to be made a Prisoner, and sold as a Slave for saving a young

Lady from being sorely abus’d by a Brute rather than a Man; and to be uponthe Brink of being roasted alive, for no other Offence than saving for the

future all the Widows in Arabia from becoming idle Burnt-Offerings, and

mingling their Ashes with those of their deceased worthless Husbands.


  CHAPTER. XIII.

  The Free-booter.


  Zadig, arriving at the Frontiers which separate Arabia Petræa from Syria,

and passing by a very strong Castle, several arm’d Arabians rush’d out upon

him, and surrounding him, cried out: Whatever you have belonging to you is

our  Property,  but  as  for  your  Person,  that  is  entirely  at  our  Sovereign’s

Disposal. Zadig, instead of making any Reply, drew his Sword, and as his

Attendant was a very couragious Fellow, he drew likewise. Those who laid

hold on them, first fell a Sacrifice to their Fury: Their Numbers redoubled:

Yet still, Both dauntless, determin’d to conquer or to die. When two Men

defend themselves against a whole Gang, the Contest, doubtless, cannot last

long. The Master of the Castle, one Arbogad by Name, having been an Eye-

Witness  from  his  Window,  of  the  Intrepidity  and  surprising  Exploits  of

Zadig, took a Fancy to him. He ran down therefore in Haste, and giving

Orders himself to his Vassals to desist, deliver’d the two Travellers out of

their Hands. Whatever Goods or Chattels, said he, come upon my Territories,

are  my  Effects;  and  whatever  I  find  likewise  that  is  valuable  upon  the

Premises of others, is my free Booty; but, as you appear, Sir, to me to be a

Gentleman  of  uncommon  Courage,  you  shall  prove  an  Exception  to  my

general  Rule.  Upon  this,  he  invited  Zadig  into  his  magnificent  Mansion,

giving his inferior Officers strict Orders to use him with all due Respect; and

at  Night  Arbogad  was  desirous  of  supping  with  Zadig.  The  Lord  of  the

Mansion was one of those Arabians, that are call’d Free-booters; but a Man

who  now  and  then  did  good  Actions  amongst  a  Thousand  bad  ones.  He

plunder’d  without  Mercy;  but  was  liberal  in  his  Benefactions.  When  in

Action, intrepid; but in Traffick, easy enough; a perfect Epicure in his Eating

and Drinking, an absolute Debauchee, but very frank and open. Zadig pleas’d

him extremely; his Conversation being very lively, prolong’d their Repast: At

last, Arbogad said to him; I would advise you, Sir, to enlist yourself in my

Troop; you cannot possibly do a better Thing: My Profession is none of theworst; and in Time, you may become perhaps as great a Man as myself. May

I presume, Sir, to ask you one Question; how long may you have follow’d

this honourable Calling? From my Youth upwards, replied his Host, I was

only a Valet at first to an Arabian, who indeed was courteous enough; but

Servitude was a State of Life I could not brook. It made me stark-mad to see,

in a wide World, which ought to be divided fairly between Mankind, that

Fate had reserv’d for me so scanty a Portion. I communicated my Grievance

to an old Sage Arabian. Son, said he, never despair; once upon a Time, there

was a Grain of Sand, that bemoan’d itself, as being nothing more than a

worthless Atom of the Deserts. At the Expiration, however, of a few Years, it

became that inestimable Diamond, which at this very Hour, is the richest, and

most admir’d Ornament of the Indian Crown. The old Man’s Discourse fir’d

me with some Ambition; I was conscious to myself that I was at that Time

the  Atom  he  mention’d,  but  was  determin’d,  if  possible,  to  become  the

Diamond. At my first setting out, I stole two Horses; then I got into a Gang;

where  we  play’d  at  small  Game,  and  stopp’d  the  small  Caravans;  thus  I

gradually lessen’d the wide Disproportion, which there was at first between

me and the rest of Mankind: I enjoy’d not only my full Share of the good

Things of this Life, but enjoy’d them with Usury. I was look’d upon as a Man

of Consequence, and I procur’d this Castle by my military Atchievements.

The Satrap of Syria had Thoughts of dispossessing me; but I was then too

rich to be any Ways afraid of him; I gave the Satrap a certain Sum of Money,

upon Condition that I kept quiet Possession of my Castle. And, moreover, I

aggrandiz’d my Domains; for he constituted me, at the same Time, Treasurer

of the Imports that Arabia Petræa paid to the King of Kings. I executed my

Trust, in every Respect, as I ought, in the Capacity of a Collector; but I never

did, nor never intended to balance my Accounts.

  The grand Desterham of Babylon sent hither, in the Name of the King

Moabdar,  a  petty  Satrap,  with  a  Commission  to  strangle  me.  He  and  his

Attendants arriv’d here with his Royal Warrant. I was appriz’d of the whole

Affair,  and,  accordingly,  order’d  his  whole  Retinue,  consisting  of  four

inferior Officers, to be strangled before his Face, after the same Manner as

was intended for my Execution. After this, I ask’d him what he thought the

Commission with which he was entrusted, might reasonably be valued at; he

answer’d,  that  he  presum’d  his  Premium  (had  he  succeeded)  might  haveamounted to about three Hundred Pieces of Gold. I made him sensible, that it

would be for his Interest to be a commission’d Officer under me; I made him

accordingly Deputy Free-booter. He is at this very Day not only the best

Officer, but the richest I have in all my Court. If my Word may be credited,

I’ll raise your Fortune as I have done his. Never was Trade brisker in our

Way; for Moabdar, is knock’d on the Head, and all Babylon in the utmost

Confusion.  Moabdar  kill’d,  said  you!  cry’d  Zadig,  and  pray,  Sir,  what  is

become of his Royal Consort, Astarte? I know nothing at all of that Affair,

replied Arbogad, all that I have to say, is, that Moabdar became a perfect

Madman, and had his Brains beat out; that all the People in Babylon are

cutting one another’s Throats, and that the whole Empire is laid waste; that

there is still an Opportunity for making several bold Pushes; and let me tell

you, Sir, I have done my Part, and made the most on’t. But the Queen, Sir,

said Zadig; pray favour me so far, as to inform me, if you know any Thing of

the Queen. I have heard great Talk, said he, of a certain Prince of Hyrcania;

’tis very possible, she may have listed herself amongst his Concubines, if she

had the good Fortune to escape the Resentment of those popular Tumults; but

my Head, Sir, is better turn’d for the Highway than for News; I have taken

several Ladies Prisoners in the Course of my Excursions; I keep none of them

for my Part; and as to such as are handsomer than ordinary, I make the best

Market I can of them, without enquiring who they are. Their Quality or Titles

will fetch no Price at all; a Queen, if she be homely, is worth nothing. ’Tis

probable, Sir, I have dispos’d of the Lady myself; and ’tis possible, likewise,

she may be dead; ’tis no Concern of mine; and to my thinking, it should be an

Affair of no Manner of Importance to you. After this Declaration, he drank so

hard, and confounded his Ideas in such a Manner, that Zadig was not one

whit the wiser. Upon which he was struck dumb, confounded, and stood as

motionless  as  a  Statue.  Arbogad,  in  the  mean  while,  swill’d  down  whole

Bumpers, told a Hundred merry Tales, and swore a thousand Times over, that

he was the happiest Creature upon God’s Earth; persuading Zadig to be as

merry, and thoughtless as himself. At last, being gradually overcome by the

Fumes of his Liquor, he fell fast asleep. Zadig spent the Remainder of the

Night in deep Contemplation, and in all the Uneasiness of Mind imaginable.

What, said he, the King first became crazy, and then was murder’d. I think I

have just Grounds for Complaint. The whole Empire is in Confusion, and

torn to Pieces, and this Free-booter is as happy as a King. O Fortune! O Fate!a Highwayman as happy as a Monarch! and the most amiable Creature that

Nature ever fram’d has suffer’d perhaps, an ignominious Death, or perhaps,

is in a State of Life a thousand Times worse than Death itself! O Astarte!

Astarte! What art thou become?


  As soon as it was Break of Day he went out, and ask’d every one he saw if

they knew any Thing of her: But the whole Gang were too intent upon other

Matters, to return him any Answer. By Virtue of their Night’s Excursions,

they had brought in some fresh Booty, and were busy in dividing the Spoil.

All the Favour he could procure, in their Hurry and Tumult, was, to go away

without the least Examination. He took the Advantage of their Remissness,

and  mov’d  off  the  Premises,  but  more  overwhelm’d  with  Grief  and  deep

Reflection than ever.


  Zadig, in his March, was very restless and uneasy. His Thoughts were

forever rolling on the unfortunate Astarte, the King of Babylon, his Bosom-

Friend  Cador,  the  happy  Free-booter,  Arbogad,  the  fair  Coquet,  that  was

taken Prisoner on the Confines of Egypt, by the Babylonish Courier; in a

Word, on the various Scenes of Misfortunes and Disappointments, which he

had successively met with.


  CHAPTER. XIV.

  The Fisherman.


  When Zadig had travelled some few Leagues from Arbogad’s Castle, he

found himself arriv’d at the Banks of a little River; incessantly deploring, as

he  went  along,  his  unhappy  Fate,  and  looking  upon  himself  as  the  very

Picture of ill Luck. He perceiv’d at a little Distance a Fisherman, reclin’d on a

verdant Bank by the River-side, trembling, scarce able to hold his Net in his

Hand, (which he seem’d but little to regard) and with uplift Eyes, imploring

Heaven’s  Assistance.  I  am,  doubtless,  said  the  poor  Fisherman,  the  most

unhappy Wretch that ever liv’d! No Merchant in all Babylon, it is very well

known, was ever so noted for selling Cream-Cheeses as myself; and yet I am

ruin’d  to  all  Intents  and  Purposes.  No  Man  of  my  Profession  ever  had  ahandsomer, more compleat Housewife, than my Dame was; but I have been

treacherously depriv’d of her. I had still left a poor, pitiful Cottage, but that I

saw plunder’d and destroy’d. I am cubb’d up here in a Cell; I have nothing to

depend upon but my Fishery, and not one single Fish have I caught. Thou

unfortunate Net! I’ll never throw thee into the Water more: Much sooner will

I throw myself in. No sooner were the Words out of his Mouth, but he started

up, and ran to the River-side, like one that was resolutely bent to plunge in,

and get rid of a miserable Life at once. Is it possible, said Zadig? Is there then

the Man in Being more wretched than myself? His Benevolence, and good

Will to save the poor Man’s Life, was as quick as the Reflection he had just

made! He ran to his Assistance; he laid hold of him; and ask’d him, with an

Air of Pity and Concern, the Cause of his rash Intention. ’Tis an old saying,

that  a  Person  is  less  unhappy  when  he  sees  himself  not  singular  in

Misfortune. But if we will credit Zoroaster, this is not from a Principle of

Malignity, but the Effect of a fatal Necessity. He was attracted, as it were, to

any Person in Distress, as being One in the same unhappy Circumstances.

The Transport of a happy Man, would be a Kind of Insult; but two Persons in

bad Circumstances, are like two weak Shrubs, which, by propping up each

other, are fenc’d against a Storm. Why are you thus cast down, said Zadig to

the Fisherman? Never sink Man, under the Weight of your Burden. I can’t

help it, said the poor Fisherman; I have not the least Prospect of Redress. I

was  once,  Sir,  the  tip-top  Man  of  the  whole  Village  of  Derlbach,  near

Babylon, where I liv’d, and with the Help of my Wife, made the best Cream-

Cheeses that were ever eaten in the Persian Empire. Her Majesty, the Queen

Astarte,  and  the  famous  Prime-Minister  Zadig  were  very  fond  of  them.  I

serv’d the Court with about six Hundred of them, I went the other Day in

Hopes of being paid; but before I had well got into the Suburbs of Babylon, I

was inform’d, that not only the Queen, but Zadig too had privately left the

Court: Whereupon I ran directly to Zadig’s House, tho’ I never sat Eye on the

Man  in  all  my  Life.  There  I  found  the  Court-Marshals  of  the  grand

Desterham, plundering, by Virtue of his Majesty’s Mandate, all his Effects, in

the  most  loyal  Manner.  From  thence  I  made  the  best  of  my  Way  to  the

Queen’s Kitchin; where, applying my self to the Steward of her Household,

and his inferior Officers; one of them told me she was dead; another, that she

was confin’d in Prison; a third, indeed, said that she had made her Escape by

Flight; all in general, however, assur’d me for my Comfort, that my Cheeseswould never be paid for. From thence I went, with my Wife in my Hand, to

Lord Orcan’s; who was another of my Court-Customers; of whom we begg’d

for Shelter and Protection: The Favour, I confess, was readily granted to my

Wife; but as for my own Part, I was absolutely rejected. She was fairer, Sir,

than the fairest Cheese I ever sold; from whence I date all my Misfortunes;

and the red that adorn’d her blushing Cheeks was ten Times more lively than

any Tyrian Scarlet. And between you and I, Sir, that was the main Cause of

my Wife’s Reception, and my Disgrace. Whereupon I wrote a doleful Letter

to my Wife, in all the Agonies of one in the deepest Despair: ’Tis very well,

said she, to the Messenger; I have some little Knowledge of the Man; I have

heard say no one sells better Cream-Cheeses than he does; desire him, next

Time he comes, to bring a small Parcel with him, and let him know, I’ll take

care he shall be punctually paid.


  In the Height of my Misfortunes, I determin’d to seek Redress in a Court

of Equity: I had but six Ounces of Gold left: Two whereof went for a Fee to

my Counsellor; two to my Lawyer, who took my Cause in Hand, and the

other two to the Judge’s Clerk. Notwithstanding what I had done, my Cause

was not so much as commenc’d; and I had already disburs’d more Money

than all my Cheeses and my Wife with them were worth. I return’d therefore

to my Native Habitation, with a full Resolution to sell it for the Ransom of

my Wife.

  My  little  Cot,  with  the  Appurtenances,  were  worth  about  threescore

Ounces of Gold: But as the Purchasers found I was necessitous, and drove to

my last Shifts; the first whom I apply’d to, offer’d me thirty Ounces; the

second,  twenty;  and  the  third,  but  ten:  Just  as  I  had  come  to  Terms  of

Accommodation with one of them, the Prince of Hyrcania came to Babylon,

and swept all before him. My little Cottage, with all its Furniture, was first

plunder’d of all that was valuable, and at last reduc’d to Ashes.


  Having thus lost my Money, my Wife, and my House, I withdrew to this

Desart, where you see me. I have since endeavour’d to get my Bread by

Fishing; but the Fish, as well as all Mankind, desert me. I scarce catch one in

a  Day;  I  am  half  starv’d;  and  had  it  not  been  for  your  unexpected

Benevolence and Generosity, I had been at the Bottom of the River beforethis.

  This long Detail of Particulars, however, was not deliver’d without several

Interruptions; for, said Zadig, with Abundance of Warmth and Confusion,

Have you never heard, Sir, of what is become of the Queen Astarte? No Sir,

not I, said the disconsolate Fisherman; but this I know, to my Sorrow, that

neither the Queen, nor Zadig, ever paid me the least Consideration in the

World for my Cream Cheeses; that my dear Spouse is taken from me; and

that I am drove to the very Brink of Despair. I am verily persuaded, said

Zadig, that you will not lose all your Money. I have heard much talk of that

same Zadig; they say he is very honest, and that if ever he returns to Babylon,

as ’tis to be hop’d he will, he’ll discharge his Debts with Interest, like a Man

of Honour. But, as for your Wife, who appears to me, to be no better than a

Wag-tail, never take the Trouble, if you’ll take my Advice, to hunt after her

any more. Be rul’d, and make the best of your Way to Babylon. I shall be

there  before  you,  as  I  shall  ride,  and  you  will  be  on  Foot.  Make  your

Applications to the illustrious Cador; tell him you met his Friend upon the

Road; and stay there still I come. Observe my Orders, and ’tis very probable

it may turn out to your Advantage.


  O  puissant  Orosmades,  continu’d  he,  you  have  made  me,  ’tis  true,  an

Instrument of Comfort to this poor Man; but what Friend will you raise for

me, to alleviate my Sorrows? Having utter’d this short Expostulation, he gave

the distrest Fisherman one full Moiety of all the Money he brought with him

out of Arabia. The Fisherman, thunder-struck, and transported with Joy at so

unexpected a Benefaction, kiss’d the Feet of Cador’s Friend, and cried out,

sure you are a Messenger of Heaven, sent down to be my Saviour!

  In the mean Time, Zadig every now and then ask’d him Questions, and

wept as he ask’d them. What! Sir, said the Fisherman, can you, who are so

bountiful a Benefactor, be in Distress yourself? Alas! said he, Friend, I am a

hundred Times more unhappy than thou art. But pray, Sir, said the good Man,

how can it possibly be, that he, who is so lavish of his Favours, should be

overwhelm’d  with  greater  Misfortunes  than  the  Man  he  so  generously

relieves? Your greatest Uneasiness, said he, arose from the Narrowness of

your Circumstances; but mine proceeds from an internal, and much deeper

Cause. Pray, Sir, said the Fisherman, has Orcan robb’d you of your Wife?This Interrogatory put Zadig in a Moment upon a Retrospection of all his past

Adventures. He recollected the whole Series of his Misfortunes; commencing

from that of the Eunuch and the Huntsman, to his Arrival at the Free-booter’s

Castle. Alas! said he, to the Fisherman, Orcan, ’tis true, deserves severely to

be punish’d: But for the Generality, we find, such worthless Barbarians are

the Favourites of Fortune. Be that, however, as it will, go as I bade you, to

my  Friend  Cador,  and  wait  there  till  I  come.  They  took  their  Leave;  the

Fisherman blessing his propitious Stars, and Zadig cursing, every Step he

went, the Hour he was born.


  CHAPTER. XV.

  The Basilisk.


  As Zadig was traversing a verdant Meadow, he perceiv’d several young

Female  Syrians,  intent  on  searching  for  something  very  curious,  that  lay

conceal’d, as they imagin’d, in the Grass. He took the Freedom to approach

one of them, and ask her, in the most courteous Manner, if he might have the

Honour to assist her in her Researches. Have a care, said she. What we are

hunting after, Sir, is an Animal, that will not suffer itself to be touch’d by a

Man. ’Tis somewhat surprizing, said Zadig. May I be so bold, pray, as to ask

you what you are in Pursuit after, that shuns the Touch of any Thing but the

Hands of the Fair Sex. ’Tis, Sir, said she, the Basilisk: A Basilisk, Madam,

said he! And pray, if you will be so good as to inform me, with what View,

are you searching after a Creature so very difficult to be met with? ’Tis, Sir,

said she, for our Lord and Master Ogul, whose Castle, you see, situate on the

River-side, at the Bottom of the Meadow. We are all his Vassals. Ogul, you

must  know,  is  in  a  very  bad  State  of  Health,  and  his  first  Physician  has

order’d him, as a Specific, to eat a Basilisk, boil’d in Rose water: And as that

Animal is very hard to be catch’d, and will suffer nothing to approach it, but

one of our Sex, our dying Sovereign Ogul has promis’d to honour her, that

shall be so happy as to catch it for him, so far as to make her his Consort. The

Case, being thus circumstantiated, Sir, I hope you will not interrupt me any

longer, lest my Rivals here in the Field should happen to circumvent me.  Zadig withdrew, and left the Syrian Ladies in Quest of their imaginary

Booty, in order to pursue his intended Journey. But as he came to the Banks

of a Rivulet, at the remotest part of the Meadow, he perceiv’d another young

Lady,  reclin’d  on  the  Grass,  and  entirely  disengag’d.  Her  Stature  seem’d

majestic, but her Face was cover’d with a Vail; and her Eyes were fixt, as one

at her Looking-glass, on the River. Every now and then a Sigh burst out, as if

her Heart were breaking. In her Hand she held a little Wand or Rod, with

which she was tracing out some Characters on the dry Sand, that lay between

the  flow’ry  Bank  she  sat  on,  and  the  purling  Current.  Zadig’s  Curiosity

induc’d him, unperceiv’d, to observe her Operations at some Distance. But

approaching nearer, and perceiving very distinctly the first Character to be an

Z. the next an A. and the third a D. he started; but when he saw the additional

Capitals of I and G. his Astonishment was too great for Words to express. He

stood for some Time perfectly thunder-struck, and as motionless as a Statue;

At last, in a soft, faultring Tone, he broke Silence: O generous Lady, said he,

forgive a Stranger, one overwhelm’d with Sorrows like yourself, if he asks

you, by what amazing Accident he finds the Name of Zadig delineated by so

angelick a Hand. Thus unexpectedly interrupted, and at the Sound of those

Words, she turn’d her Head; and with a trembling Hand, lifting up her Vail,

she espy’d Zadig himself. Upon which, she shriek’d; and as her Heart was

flutter’d between the two Extreams of Transport and Surprize, she fainted

away, and gently dropp’d into his Arms. ’Twas, it seems Astarte her self;

’twas the Queen of Babylon; ’twas the very Goddess whom Zadig ador’d;

’twas,  in  short,  the  very  identical  Lady,  whose  hard  Fate  he  had  so  long

deplor’d; and for whose sake he had felt so many agonizing Pains. For a few

Minutes he stood speechless, and depriv’d, as it were, of all his senses, whilst

his Eyes were fixt on his Astarte, who began to revive; and cast a wishful

Glance at him, attended with some Confusion. O ye immortal Powers, cried

he, who preside over the Destiny of us frail Mortals! Ye have restor’d me my

Astarte; but alas! at what a Conjuncture, in what a Place, and in what a State

and Condition do I view her? He threw himself prostrate on the Ground, and

kiss’d the Dust of her Feet. The Queen of Babylon rais’d him up, and oblig’d

him to sit by her on the flow’ry Bank whereon she was repos’d. Every now

and then she wip’d her Eyes, as the Tears trickl’d down afresh her lovely

Cheeks.  Twenty  times  she  endeavour’d  to  renew  her  Discourse;  but  was

interrupted by her Sighs; she ask’d him over and over to relate to her theHardships he had ran thro’ since their parting, and by what Chance he came

to traverse that solitary Meadow; but prevented him at the same Time from

returning  any  Answer,  by  repeating  Question  upon  Question.  At  last,  she

gave him a particular Detail of her own Misfortunes, and again requested to

know his. Both of them, in short, having, in some Measure, appeas’d the

Tumult of their Souls; Zadig, in a few Words, inform’d her of the Motives

that brought him thither.


  But tell me, O unfortunate, tho’ ever-venerable Queen, how I came to find

you  out,  reclining  on  this  verdant  Bank,  dress’d  in  this  servile  Habit,

accompanied by other Female Slaves, who, I find, have been all Day long in

Quest after a Basilisk, which, as I understand, is by Order of a celebrated

Physician, to be dissolv’d in Rose-water, as a specific Medicine for his dying

Patient.

  Whilst they busy in their fruitless Search, said the beauteous Astarte, I’ll

tell you the whole Series of Sorrows which I have undergone since last we

parted; and since Heav’n has thus unexpectedly blest my Eyes once more

with  the  Sight  of  my  dear  Zadig,  I’ll  no  longer  exclaim  against  my

impropitious Stars.

  You are not insensible, that the jealous King my Spouse, was disgusted to

find you the most amiable of all Mortals, and that for no other Reason he

determin’d to strangle you, and poison me. You know very well too, that

indulgent Heav’n inspir’d, as it were, my little Dwarf, with artful Means to

give  me  timely  Notice  of  the  rash  Resolutions  of  the  King,  my  cruel

Husband.

  No sooner had the faithful Cador oblig’d you to obey my Orders, and to

fly the Court, but he ventur’d to enter my Apartment in the Dead of Night

thro’ a private Door. He snatch’d me up, and convey’d me directly into the

Temple of Orosmades, where the holy Magus, who was his Brother, lock’d

me up in that august and awful Statue, that stands erect upon the Pavement of

the Temple, and Colossus-like, touches the lofty Ceiling with his Head. There

I lay conceal’d, or rather buried for some Time; tho’ taken all imaginable

Care of, and furnish’d with all the Necessaries of Life by that venerable, and

loyal Priest. In the mean Time, his Apothecary enter’d at Break of Day intomy  Apartment,  with  a  Potion  in  his  Hand,  compos’d  of  Opium,  black

Hellebore,  Aconite,  and  other  Ingredients  still  more  baneful.  Whilst  this

mercenary Officer of the King’s Vengeance was thus employ’d, another as

inhuman  as  himself,  went  to  your  Lodgings  with  the  silken  Cord.  Both,

however, were disappointed, as both of us were fled. Cador, very officious,

flew to the King, in order the more artfully to blind him; and in a feign’d

Passion, rail’d at us both, and charg’d us both as perfidious Traitors. As for

that Villain Zadig, said he, he has taken his Flight towards India; and your

false, ungrateful Consort, Sire, said he, is fled to Memphis. The Guards were

order’d that Moment to pursue us both.

  The Couriers, who flew after me, knew nothing of me. I had never expos’d

my Face unveil’d to any one but your self, and that too in the Presence, and

by the express Order of my Royal Master. As they had no other Marks to

distinguish me from others but my Stature, as it had been describ’d, a young

Lady, just of my Size, but in all Probability much more handsome, presented

herself to their View, on the Frontiers of Egypt. She was found alone, and in

a  very  disconsolate  Condition.  This  Lady  must,  doubtless,  said  they  to

themselves,  be  the  Queen  of  Babylon:  And  without  listning  to  her

Complaints,  convey’d  her  instantly  to  my  Husband  Moabdar.  Their  gross

Blunder at first incens’d his Majesty to the last Degree; but after he had

view’d the Lady with an attentive Eye, he found she was extremely pretty,

and was soon pacify’d. Her Name was Missouf. I have been since inform’d,

that her Name in the Egyptian Language signifies the Fair Coquet. And in

Effect,  she  was  so:  She  had  as  much  Art,  however,  as  Caprice.  For  she

pleas’d the King of Kings: In short, she had such an Ascendancy over him,

that  he  didn’t  scruple  in  publick  to  own  her  as  his  Wife.  When  she  had

secur’d him thus far in her Toils, she never conceal’d her Power, but play’d

the Part of a perfect Humourist. She indulg’d herself in every Whim that

came in her Head, without Fear of being brow-beat. In the first Place, She

insisted  that  the  Chief  Magus,  who  was  old  and  gouty,  should  dance  a

Saraband  before  her;  and  upon  his  modest  Refusal  to  comply  with  so

preposterous a Request, she persecuted him without Mercy: Nothing would

serve her Turn, in the next Place, but his Majesty’s grand Master of the Horse

must  make  her  a  Minc’d-pye.  The  Gentleman  took  the  Liberty  to  let  her

know, that he was no profess’d Cook; a Tart, however, he must make for her,and she got him turn’d out of his Place for being so monstrously careless, as

to  burn  one  Corner  of  the  Crust.  Whereupon  she  gave  his  Post  to  her

favourite Dwarf, and made her Fop of a Page the Keeper of his Majesty’s

great Seal, and Confidence. Thus she reign’d arbitrary, and was the Female

Tyrant  of  Babylon.  All  the  World  deplor’d  the  Loss  of  me  their  former

Queen. The King, who never acted the Part of a Tyrant, till the Moment he

would have imprison’d me, and strangled you, seem’d to have drown’d all

his good Qualities in his Dotage on that capricious Enchantress. He came to

the Temple on the solemn Festival of the sacred Fire. I saw him prostrate on

the Pavement before the Statue, wherein I was enclos’d, imploring the Gods

to show’r down their choicest Blessings on his beauteous Missouf. I, with an

audible and distinct, but hollow Tone, address’d my self thus, like an Oracle,

to the King of Kings. The Gods reject the Vows of a Monarch, that acts the

Tyrant o’er his Subjects; One, who could think of murdering an innocent

Wife; and admit of a worthless Beauty to supply her Place. Moabdar was so

startled at this unexpected Answer from the God he ador’d, that he was just at

the Point of Distraction. The Oracle that I had deliver’d, and the tyrannical

Proceedings of his new Spouse Missouf, were enough to deprive him of his

Senses. In short, in a few Days he became a perfect Mad-man. Her Caprice,

which seem’d a Judgement from above, portended a sudden Revolution. His

Subjects accordingly revolted, and were instantly up in Arms. Babylon, that

had  so  long  indulg’d  herself  in  Indolence  and  Ease,  became  the  Seat,  or

Theatre of a bloody Civil War. Whereupon I was taken from my magnificent

Prison, the Bowels of his God, and set up at the Head of a very powerful

Party. Your Friend Cador flew to Memphis in hopes to find you there, and

bring you back to Babylon. The Prince of Hyrcania, hearing of these intestine

Broils, return’d with a powerful Army, in order to form a third Party, among

the  Babylonians.  He  attack’d  the  King,  who  fled  with  his  fair,  but  fickle

Egyptian before him. Moabdar, however, was so closely pursu’d, that he dy’d

of the Wounds he receiv’d in his Retreat. Missouf became the fair Victim of

the Conqueror. As for my own Part, I had the Misfortune to be over-power’d

likewise, and taken Prisoner by an Hyrcanian Party, who brought me into the

Presence of the young Prince, at the very Juncture when Missouf stood before

him. You’ll smile, doubtless, when I tell you the Prince look’d upon me as

the most amiable Captive of the two; but then, I presume you will be sorry to

hear, that my hard Fate doom’d me to be a Vassal in his Seraglio. He told me,in direct Terms, that as soon as he had put an happy Issue to one Military

Expedition, which would not, he flatter’d himself, be long unexecuted, he

would  honour  me  with  a  Visit.  Judge  the  dreadful  Apprehensions  I  was

under, upon his making such a peremptory Declaration. My Obligations to

Moabdar were all cancell’d, and I was free to be the Bride of Zadig; but

instead of that, I fell into the Toils of a Barbarian. I answer’d him with all the

Resentment becoming one of my high Character and unspotted Virtue. I had

always  heard  say,  that  Heav’n  bestow’d  on  Persons  of  my  Rank,  such  a

peculiar Mark of Majesty and Grandeur, that with a bare Word, or the Glance

of  an  angry  Eye,  they  could  bring  down,  and  abase  the  Pride  of  those

audacious Creatures that durst to thwart their Inclinations. I talk’d as big as a

Queen;  but  I  was  treated  like  the  most  servile  Domestic.  The  saucy

Hyrcanian, without so much as vouchsafing me one Single Word, turn’d to

his black Eunuch, and told him that I was very impertinent; but yet he could

not help thinking I was very pretty. He gave him therefore particular Orders

to take care of me, and put me under the same Regimen, with respect to my

Diet, as one of his Favourites, in order that I might recover my Colour, which

was somewhat too languid; in a Word, that I might become worthy in a little

Time of his Royal Favours, and be duely qualified to receive him, when he

should honour me so far as to fix the Day. I told him, I would die first: He

replied, with a Sneer, that young Ladies, like me, seldom kill’d themselves,

and that they were made for Enjoyment; and then turn’d upon his Heel, with

as careless an Air, as a Man would part with his Paroquet, when he had shut

her up close in her gilded Cage. What a shocking State was I in for the first

Queen  of  the  Universe!  Nay,  I’ll  say  more,  for  a  Heart  that  was  wholly

devoted to her Zadig!


  At these endearing Words, Zadig threw himself at her Feet, and bath’d

them with his Tears. Astarte immediately rais’d him in the most courteous

and  engaging  Manner,  and  thus  continu’d  her  Narration.-I  too  plainly

perceiv’d, that I was subject to the Tyranny of a Barbarian, and the Rival of a

Coquet,  that  was  a  Slave  like  myself.  She  related  to  me  all  her  past

Adventures in Egypt. From the Description she gave of her Gallant, the Time

and Place, the Dromedary he was mounted on, and from every other minute

Circumstance, I imagin’d it was your self that play’d the Hero in her Favour.As  I  made  no  Doubt  but  that  you  resided  somewhere  in  Memphis,  I

determin’d to go thither my self, but in Disguise. Beauteous Missouf, said I,

you are of a much sprightlier Disposition than I am; you will be able to

amuse the gay young Prince of Hyrcania a thousand Times better than I shall.

Find out some Way therefore for my Escape; by which you will be sole Lady

Regent. You will oblige me to the last Degree, by your friendly Assistance,

and at the same Time get rid of a Rival. Missouf, (cajol’d with the Hint) came

into my Measures directly. She took care to send me packing forthwith, with

no other Attendant than an old Egyptian Slave.

  No  sooner  had  I  reach’d  the  Borders  of  Arabia,  but  a  notorious  Free-

booter, (one Arbogad by Name) pick’d me up, as I was strolling along, and

sold  me  to  some  Merchants,  who  convey’d  me  to  yonder  Castle,  the

magnificent Residence of the Emir Ogul. He purchas’d me at all Adventures,

without enquiring what, or who I was. He is a perfect Debauchee; his sole

Delight lies in good Eating, Wine, and Women; and is one, who imagines,

that the Almighty sent him into the World for no other Purpose but to gratify

his  unruly  Appetites.  He  is  excessively  fat,  and  puffs  and  blows  every

Moment, like one half choak’d. When he has gorg’d himself so unmercifully

that he is ready to burst, his chief Physician can persuade him to take any

Thing for his Relief; tho’ he laughs at him, and despises his Advice when

he’s well and sober. He has intimated to him, that at present his Life’s in

Danger, and nothing will restore him but a Basilisk, boil’d in Rose-Water.

Whereupon  the  grand  Ogul  has  promis’d  his  last  Favours  to  that  Slave,

whoever she be, that shall be so fortunate as to catch a Basilisk, for him,

since it seems they are so seldom to be met with. You see I have others to

struggle for the Honour propos’d, and I never had a less Inclination to find

out this Basilisk than at present, since I have once more met with my dearest

Zadig.

  After  this  Declaration,  Astarte  and  Zadig  renew’d  with  Warmth  the

virtuous  Affection  which  they  had  long  conceiv’d  for  each  other;  and

reciprocally utter’d all the tenderest Expressions that Love in Distress could

possibly devise. And the Genii, who preside over all the soft Passions, wafted

their mutual Vows of eternal Constancy and Truth to the Sphere of Venus.

  The whole Train of Slaves, after a long fruitless Search, attended on Ogul,

to inform him that all their strictest Search was fruitless. Zadig desired that hemight have the Honour to be introduc’d into his Presence. Accordingly he

was, and his Address was to this or the like Effect. May immortal Health

descend from Heaven to preserve a Life, Sir, so precious as yours is. I am a

Physician  by  Profession.  I  flew  to  your  Palace,  on  the  first  News  of  the

dangerous  Situation  you  were  in,  and  have  brought  a  Basilisk  with  me,

distill’d in Rose-Water. I can have no Hopes of the Honour of your Bed, in

Case I succeed in my Application: All the Favour I request, is, the Release of

one of your Babylonish Slaves, who has been in your Highness’s Retinue for

some Time. And I am willing to be your Bond-slave in her Stead, if I fail of

restoring the most illustrious and magnificent Ogul to his pristine State of

Health.

  The Proposition was readily embrac’d. Astarte was instantly discharg’d,

and  set  out  for  Babylon,  with  a  proper  Attendant,  according  to  Zadig’s

Direction; assuring her that she should hear every Day, by a special Courier,

of his Proceedings with his new Patient. The Farewel which they took of each

other,  was  very  affectionate  and  tender,  expressive  of  the  strongest

Obligations to each other. The Moments of Meeting, and those of Parting, are

(as  it  is  written  in  the  sacred  Book  of  Zend)  the  two  most  remarkable

Epochas of a Lover’s Life. Zadig’s repeated Protestations of Affection for the

Queen were perfectly sincere, and the pure Dictates of his Heart; and the

Queen’s Love for Zadig had made a deeper Impression on hers, than she

thought proper to discover.

  In  the  mean  Time,  Zadig,  again  addressing  himself  to  Ogul,  said;  my

Basilisk, Sir, as others are, is not to be drest or eaten; but all its Virtues must

penetrate your whole Fabrick, thro’ your Pores; I have inclos’d my never-

failing  Sudorific  in  a  Bladder,  full-blown  and  carefully  cover’d  with  the

softest Leather. You must kick this Bladder, Sir, once a Day about your Hall

for a whole Hour together, with all the Vigour and Activity you possibly can.

This Medicine must be repeated every Morning, and I’ll attend the Operation:

Upon your due Observance of the Regimen I shall put you under, I doubt not,

but with the Blessing of Heav’n on my honest Endeavours, I shall give you

ample Demonstration of my being an Adept in Physick. Ogul, upon making

the first Experiment, was ready to expire for want of Breath, and thought he

should die with the Fatigue. The second Day did not prove altogether so

irksome, and he slept much better at Night than he had done before. In short,our  Doctor  in  about  eight  Days  Time,  perform’d  an  absolute  Cure.  His

Patient was as brisk, active and gay, as One in the Bloom of his Youth.

  Now, Sir, said Zadig, I’ll be ingenuous with you, and disclose to you the

important Secret. You have play’d at Foot-ball these eight Days successively;

and  you  have  liv’d  all  that  Time,  within  the  Bounds  of  Sobriety  and

Moderation. Know, Sir, that there is no such Animal in Nature as a Basilisk;

that Health is to be secur’d by Temperance and Exercise; and that the Art of

making Health consistent with Luxury, is altogether as impracticable, and an

Art, in all Respects, as idle and chimerical, as those of the Philosopher’s

Stone, judicial Astrology, or any other Reveries of the like airy and fantastic

Nature.

  Ogul’s  Head-Physician,  apprehensive  that  this  unexpected  Cure,  thus

wrought by a Stranger, through such an Anti-medicinal Preparation, might

possibly not only render himself the Object of Contempt in the Eye of his

great Master, but cast a Kind of Slur in general on his whole Fraternity,

conven’d a Set of petty Doctors and Apothecaries, who were his Vassals, and

entirely devoted to his Interest, to find out some sure Ways and Means to cut

off in private his dreadful Rival; but whilst their wicked Plot was hatching,

Zadig receiv’d a Courier from the Queen Astarte.


  CHAPTER. XVI.

  The Tournaments.


  The Queen was receiv’d at Babylon with all the Transports of Joy that

could  possibly  be  express’d  for  the  safe  Return  of  so  illustrious  and  so

beautiful a Personage, that had run thro’ such a long Series of Misfortunes.

Babylon at that Time seem’d to be perfectly serene and quiet. As for the

young Prince of Hyrcania, he was slain in Battle. The Babylonians, who were

the Victors, declar’d that Astarte should marry that Candidate for the Crown,

who should gain it by a fair and impartial Election. They were determin’d,

that the most valuable Post of Honour in the World, namely, that of being the

Royal Consort of Astarte, and the Sovereign of Babylon, should be the Result

of Merit only; and not be procur’d by any Party-Factions or Court-Intrigues.

A  solemn  Oath  was  voluntarily  taken  by  all  Parties,  that  he  who  shoulddistinguish himself by his superior Valour and Wisdom, should unanimously

be acknowledg’d the Sovereign-Elect.


  A  spacious  List,  or  Circus,  was  pitched  upon,  surrounded  with

commodious  Seats,  erected  in  an  Amphitheatrical  Manner,  and  richly

embellish’d some few Leagues from the City. Thither the Combatants, or

Champions were to repair, compleatly accoutred. Each of them had a distinct

Apartment to himself behind the Lists, where no Soul could either see them,

or know who they were. They were to enter the Lists four several Times.

Those who were so happy as to conquer four Competitors, were afterwards to

engage each other in single Combat; in order that he who should remain

Master of the Field should be proclaim’d the happy Victor.

  Four Days afterwards, they were to meet again, accoutred as before, and to

explain all such Ænigmas, or Riddles, as the Magi should think proper to

propose. If their Queries should prove too intricate and perplext for them to

resolve, they were to have Recourse to the Lists again, and after that, to fresh

Ænigmas,  before  they  could  be  entitled  to  the  Election:  So  that  the

Tournaments were to be continu’d till One of the Candidates should be twice

a Victor, and shine as conspicuous, with respect to his internal Qualities, as to

his Dexterity and Address in heroic Atchievements. The Queen, in the mean

Time, was to be narrowly watch’d, and allow’d only to be a Spectator of both

their  Amusements,  at  some  considerable  Distance;  and  moreover,  to  be

cover’d with a Vail: Nor was she indulg’d so far as to speak one single Word

to  any  Candidate  whomsoever,  in  order  to  prevent  the  least  Jealousy  or

Suspicion either of Partiality or Injustice.

  Astarte  took  care,  by  the  Courier,  to  inform  her  Lover  of  all  the

Preliminary Articles abovemention’d, not doubting but that he would exert

both his Courage and Understanding for her Sake, beyond any of the other

Competitors.

  Zadig accordingly set out for Babylon, and besought the Goddess Venus,

not only to fortify his Courage, but to illuminate his Mind with Wisdom on

this important Occasion.


  The Night before these martial Atchievements were to commence, Zadigarrived upon the Banks of the Euphrates. He inscrib’d his Device amongst the

List of Combatants; concealing, at the same Time, both his Person and Name,

as  the  Laws  of  the  Election  required;  and  accordingly,  withdrew  to  the

Apartment that was provided for him, according to his Lot.

  Cador, who was just return’d to Babylon, having hunted all Egypt over to

no Purpose, in Hopes to find his Friend Zadig, brought a compleat set of

Armour into his Lodge, by express Orders from the Queen: She sent him

likewise One of the finest Horses in all Persia. Zadig knew that these Presents

could come from No-body but his dear Astarte, which redoubled his Vigour

and his Hopes.

  The  next  Morning  the  Queen  being  seated  under  a  Canopy  of  State,

enrich’d with precious Stones; and the Amphitheatres being crowded with

Gentlemen  and  Ladies  of  all  Ranks  and  Conditions  from  Babylon;  the

Competitors made their personal Appearance in the Circus: Each of them

went up to the grand Magus, and laid down his particular Device at his Feet.

The Devices were drawn by Lot: That of Zadig was the last. The first that

advanc’d was a Grandee, one Itabod by Name, immensely rich, indeed, and

very haughty; but no ways couragious; exceedingly awkward, and a Man of

no acquir’d Parts. The Sycophants that hover’d round about him flatter’d

him, that a Man of his Merit couldn’t fail of being King: He imperiously

replied, One of my Merit must be King: Whereupon he was arm’d Cap-a-pee.

His Armour was made of pure Gold, enamell’d with Green. The Housings of

his  Saddle  were  green,  and  his  Lance  embellish’d  with  green  Ribbands.

Every One was sensible, at first Sight, by Itobad’s Manner of managing his

Horse, that he was not the Man whom Heav’n had pitch’d upon to sway the

Babylonish Scepter. The first Combatant that tilted with him, threw him out

of the Saddle; the second flung him quite over the Crupper, and laid him

sprawling on the Ground, with his Heels quiv’ring in the Air. Itobad, ’tis true,

remounted, but with so ill a Grace, that an universal Laugh went round the

Amphitheatre. The third, disdaining to use his Lance, made only a Feint at

him: Then catch’d hold of his Right Leg, and whirling him round, threw him

flat  upon  the  Sand.  The  Esquires,  who  were  the  Attendants,  ran  to  his

Assistance, and with a Sneer remounted him. The fourth Combatant catch’d

hold of his Left Leg, and unhors’d him again. He was convey’d thro’ the

hissing Multitude to his Lodge, where, according to the Law in that Caseprovided, he was to pass the Night. And as he hobbled along, said he, to the

Esquires, what a sad Misfortune is this to One of my Birth and Character!

  The other Champions play’d their Parts much better; and all came off with

Credit.  Some  conquer’d  two  of  their  Antagonists,  and  others  were  so  far

successful as to get the better of three. None of them, however, except Prince

Hottam, vanquish’d four. Zadig, at last, enter’d the Lists, and dismounted all

his four Opponents, one after the other, with the utmost Ease, and with such

an Air and Grace, as gain’d him universal Applause. As the Case stood thus,

Zadig and Hottam were to close the Day’s Entertainment in a single Combat.

The  Armour  of  the  latter  was  of  a  blue  Colour  mixt  with  Gold,  and  the

Housings of his Saddle were of the same. Those of the former white as Snow.

The Multitude were divided in their Wishes. The Knight in blue was the

Favourite  of  some  of  the  Ladies;  and  others  again  were  Admirers  of  the

Cavalier in white. The Queen, whose Heart was in a perfect Palpitation, put

up her secret Prayers to Venus to assist her darling Hero.

  The two Champions making their Passes and their Volta’s, with the utmost

Dexterity and Address, and keeping firm in their Saddles, gave each other

such  Rebuffs  with  their  Lances,  that  all  the  Spectators  (the  Queen  only

excepted) wish’d for two Kings of Babylon. At last, their Horses being tired,

and both their Lances broke, Zadig made use of the following Stratagem,

which his Antagonist wasn’t any ways appriz’d of. He got artfully behind

him, and shooting with a Spring on his Horses Buttocks, grasp’d him close,

threw him headlong on the Sand, then jump’d into his Seat, and wheel’d

round  Prince  Hottam,  while  he  lay  sprawling  on  the  Ground.  All  the

Spectators in general, with loud Acclamations, cried out, Victory! Victory! in

favour of the Champion in white. Hottam, incens’d to the last Degree, got up,

and drew his Sword. Zadig sprang from his Horse with his Sabre in his Hand.

Now, behold the two Chieftains upon their Legs, commencing a new Trial of

Skill! where they seem’d to get the better of each other alternately; for both

were strong, and both were active. The Feathers of their Helmets, the Studs

of their Bracelets, their Coats of Mail, flew about in Pieces, thro’ the dry

Blows  which  they  a  thousand  Times  repeated.  They  struck  at  each  other

sometimes with the Edge of their Swords, at other Times they push’d, as

Occasion offer’d: Now on the Right, then on the Left; now on the Head, then

at the Breast; they retreated; they advanc’d; they kept at a Distance; theyclos’d again; they grasp’d each other, turning and twisting like two Serpents,

and engag’d each other as fiercely as two Libyan Lions fighting for their

Prey: Their Swords struck Fire almost at every Blow. At last, Zadig, in order

to  recover  his  Breath,  for  a  Moment  or  two  stood  still,  and  afterwards,

making a Feint at the Prince, threw him on his Back, and disarm’d him.

Hottam, thereupon, cried out, O thou Knight of the white Armour! ’Tis you

only  are  destin’d  to  be  the  King  of  Babylon.  The  Queen  was  perfectly

transported. The two Champions were reconducted to their separate Lodges,

as the others had been before them, in Conformity to the Laws prescrib’d.

Several Mutes were order’d to wait on the Champions, and carry them some

proper Refreshment. We’ll leave the Reader to judge whether the Queen’s

Dwarf was not appointed to wait on Zadig on this happy Occasion. After

Supper the Mutes withdrew, and left the Combatants to rest their wearied

Limbs till the next Morning; at which Time the Victor was to produce his

Device, before the Grand Magus, in order to confer Notes, and discover the

Hero whoever he might be.

  Zadig  slept  very  sound,  notwithstanding  his  amorous  Regard  for  the

Queen, being perfectly fatigu’d. Itabod, who lay in the Lodge contiguous to

his, could not once close his Eyes for Vexation. He got up therefore in the

Dead of the Night, stole imperceptibly into Zadig’s Apartment, took his white

Armour  and  Device  away  with  him,  and  substituted  his  green  One  in  its

Place.

  As  soon  as  the  Day  began  to  dawn,  he  repair’d,  with  a  seemingly

undaunted Courage, to the Grand Magus, to inform him, that he was the

mighty Hero, the happy Victor. Without the least Hesitation, he gain’d his

Point,  and  was  proclaim’d  Victor  before  Zadig  was  awake.  Astarte,

astonish’d  at  this  unexpected  Disappointment,  return’d  with  a  Heart

overwhelm’d  with  Despair,  to  the  Court  of  Babylon.  Almost  all  the

Spectators were mov’d off from the Amphitheatre before Zadig wak’d: He

hunted  for  his  Arms;  but  could  find  nothing  but  those  in  green.  He  was

oblig’d, tho’ sorely against his Will, to put it on, having nothing else in his

Lodge to appear in: Confounded, and big with Resentment, he drest himself,

and made his personal Appearance in that despicable Equipage. The Populace

that were left behind in the Circus, hiss’d him every Step he took, they made

a  Ring  about  him,  and  treated  him  with  all  the  Marks  of  Ignominy  andContempt. The most cowardly Wretch breathing was never sure so sweated,

or hunted down as poor Zadig! He grew quite out of Patience at last, and cut

his Way thro’ the insulting Mob, with his Rival’s Sabre; but he did not know

what Measures to pursue, or how to rectify so gross a Mistake. It was not in

his Power to have a Sight of the Queen; he could never recover the white

Armour again which She had sent him; That was the Compromise, or the

Engagement, to which the Combatants had all unanimously agreed: Thus, as

he was on the one Hand, plung’d in an Abyss of Sorrow; so on the other, he

was almost drove distracted with Vexation and Resentment. He withdrew

therefore,  in  a  solitary  Mood,  to  the  Banks  of  the  Euphrates,  now  fully

persuaded, that his impropitious Star had shed its most baleful Influence on

him, and that his Misfortunes were irretrievable, revolving in his Mind, all his

Disappointments from his first Adventure with the Court-Coquet, who had

entertain’d an utter Aversion to a blind Eye, down to his late Loss of his

white Armour. See! said he, the fatal Consequence of being a Sluggard! Had

I been more vigilant, I had been King of Babylon; but what is more, I had

been happy in the Embraces of my dearest Astarte. All the Knowledge of

Books  or  Mankind;  all  the  personal  Valour  that  I  can  boast  of,  has  only

prov’d an Aggravation of my Sorrows. He carried the Point so far at last, as

to  murmur  at  the  unequal  Dispensations  of  Divine  Providence;  and  was

tempted  to  believe,  that  all  Occurrences  were  govern’d  by  a  malignant

Destiny, which never fail’d to oppress the Virtuous, and always crown’d the

Actions of such Villains as the green Knight, with uncommon Success. In

one of his frantick Fits, he put on the green Armour, that had created him

such a World of Disgrace. A Merchant happening to pass by, he sold it to him

for a Trifle, and took in Exchange nothing more than a Mantle, and a Cap. In

this Disguise, he took a solitary Walk along the Banks of the Euphrates,

every Minute reflecting in his Mind on the partial Proceedings of Providence,

which never ceas’d to torment him.


  CHAPTER. XVII.

  The Hermit.


  As Zadig was travelling along, he met with a Hermit, whose grey and

venerable Beard descended to his Girdle. He had in his Hand a little Book, onwhich his Eyes were fix’d. Zadig threw himself in his Way, and made him a

profound Bow. The Hermit return’d the Compliment with such an Air of

Majesty and Benevolence, that Zadig’s Curiosity prompted him to converse

with so agreeable a Stranger. Pray, Sir, said he, what may be the Contents of

the Treatise you are reading with such Attention. ’Tis call’d, said the Hermit,

the Book of Fate; will you please to look at it. He put the Book into the

Hands of Zadig, who, tho’ he was a perfect Master of several Languages,

couldn’t decypher one single Character. This rais’d his Curiosity still higher.

You seem dejected, said the good Father to him. Alas! I have Cause enough,

said  Zadig.  If  you’ll  permit  me  to  accompany  you,  said  the  old  Hermit,

perhaps  I  may  be  of  some  Service  to  you.  I  have  sometimes  instill’d

Sentiments of Consolation into the Minds of the Afflicted. Zadig had a secret

Regard for the Air of the old Man, for his Beard, and his Book. He found, by

conversing with him, that he was the most learned Person he had ever met

with.  The  Hermit  harangu’d  on  Destiny,  Justice,  Morality,  the  sovereign

Good, the Frailty of Nature; on Virtue and Vice, in such a lively Manner, and

in such a Flow of Words, that Zadig was attach’d to him by an invincible

Charm. He begg’d earnestly that he would favour him with his Company to

Babylon. That Favour I was going to ask my self, said the old Man. Swear to

me by Orosmades, that you won’t leave me, for some Days at least, let me do

what I please. Zadig took the Oath requir’d, and both pursu’d their Journey.


  The two Travellers arriv’d that Evening at a superb Castle. The Hermit

begg’d for an hospitable Reception of himself and his young Comrade. The

Porter, whom any One might have taken for some Grandee, let them in, but

with a kind of Coldness and Contempt. However, he conducted them to the

Head-Steward,  who  went  with  them  thro’  every  rich  Apartment  of  his

Master’s House. They were seated at Supper afterwards at the lower End,

indeed, of the Table, and where they were taken little or no Notice of by the

Host; but they were serv’d with as much Delicacy and Profusion, as any of

the other Guests. When they arose from Table, they wash’d their Hands in a

Golden Bason set with Emeralds, and other costly Stones. When ’twas Time

to go to Rest, they were conducted into a Bed-chamber richly furnish’d; and

the next Morning two Pieces of Gold were presented to him for their mutual

Service, by a Valet in waiting; and then they were dismiss’d.  The Proprietor of this Castle, said Zadig, as they were upon the Road,

seems to me to be a very hospitable Gentleman; tho’ somewhat too haughty

indeed, and too imperious: The Words were no sooner out of his Mouth, but

he perceiv’d that the Pocket of his Comrade’s Garment, tho’ very large, was

swell’d, and greatly extended: He soon saw what was the Cause, and that he

had clandestinely brought off the Golden Laver. He durst not immediately

take Notice of the Fact; but was ready to sink at the very Thoughts on’t.

About Noon, the Hermit rapp’d at a petty Cottage with his Staff, the beggarly

Residence of an old, rich Miser. He desir’d that he and his Companion might

refresh themselves there for a few Hours. An old, shabby Domestick let them

in  indeed,  but  with  visible  Reluctance,  and  carried  them  into  the  Stable,

where all their Fare was a few musty Olives, and a Draught or two of sower

small Beer. The Hermit seem’d as content with his Repast, as he was the

Night before. At last, rising off from his Seat, he paid his Compliments to the

old Valet (who had as watchful an Eye over them all the Time, as if they had

been a Brace of Thieves, and intimated every now and then that he fear’d

they would be benighted) and gave him the two Pieces of Gold, he had but

just receiv’d that Morning, as a Token of his Gratitude for his courteous

Entertainment. He added moreover, I would willingly speak one Word with

your  Master  before  I  go.  The  Valet,  thunder-struck  at  his  unexpected

Gratuity, comply’d with his Request: Most hospitable Sir, said the Hermit, I

couldn’t go away without returning you my grateful Acknowledgments for

the friendly Reception we have met with this Afternoon. Be pleas’d to accept

this Golden Bason as a small Token of my Gratitude and Esteem. The Miser

started, and was ready to fall down backwards at the Sight of so valuable a

Present. The Hermit gave him no Time to recover out of his Surprise, but

march’d off that Moment with his young Comrade. Father, said Zadig, What

is all this that I have seen? You seem to me to act in a quite different Manner

from the Generality of Mankind. You plunder One, who entertain’d you with

all the Pomp and Profusion in the World, to enrich a covetous, sordid Wretch,

who treated you in the most unworthy Manner. Son, said the old Man, that

Grandee, who receives Visits of Strangers, with no other View than to gratify

his Pride, and to raise their Astonishment at the Furniture of his Palace, will

henceforward learn to be wiser; and the Miser to be more liberal for the Time

to come. Don’t be surpris’d, but follow me. Zadig was at a stand at present;

and couldn’t well determine whether his Companion was a Man of greaterWisdom  than  ordinary,  or  a  Mad-man.  But  the  Hermit  assum’d  such  an

Ascendency over him, exclusive of the Oath he had taken, that he couldn’t

tell how to leave him. At Night they came to a House very commodiously

built,  but  neat  and  plain;  where  nothing  was  wanting,  and  yet  nothing

profuse. The Master was a Philosopher, that had retir’d from the busy World,

in order to live in Peace, and form his Mind to Virtue. He was pleas’d to

build this little Box for the Reception of Strangers, in a handsome Manner,

but without Ostentation. He came in Person to meet them at the Door, and for

a  Time,  advis’d  them  to  sit  down  and  rest  themselves  in  a  commodious

Apartment.  After  some  Respite,  he  invited  them  to  a  frugal,  yet  elegant

Repast; during which, he talk’d very intelligently about the late Revolutions

in Babylon. He seem’d entirely to be in the Queen’s Interest, and heartily

wish’d that Zadig had entred the Lists for the regal Prize: But Babylon, said

he, don’t deserve a King of so much Merit. A modest Blush appear’d in

Zadig’s Face at this unexpected Compliment, which innocently aggravated

his Misfortunes. It was agreed, on all Hands, that the Affairs of this World

took sometimes a quite different Turn from what the wisest Patriots would

wish  them.  The  Hermit  replied,  the  Ways  of  Providence  are  often  very

intricate and obscure, and Men were much to blame for casting Reflections

on the Conduct of the Whole, upon the bare Inspection of the minutest Part.


  The next Topick they entred upon was the Passions. Alas! said Zadig, how

fatal in their Consequences! However, said the Hermit, they are the Winds

that swell the Sail of the Vessel. Sometimes, ’tis true, they overset it; but

there is no such Thing as sailing without them. Phlegm, indeed, makes Men

peevish and sick; but then there is no living without it. Tho’ every Thing here

below is dangerous, yet All are necessary.

  In the next Place, their Discourse turn’d on sensual Pleasures; and the

Hermit demonstrated, that they were the Gifts of Heaven; for, said he, Man

cannot bestow either Sensations or Ideas on himself; he receives them all; his

Pain and Pleasure, as well as his Being, proceed from a superior Cause.

  Zadig stood astonish’d, to think how a Man that had committed such vile

Actions, could argue so well on such Moral Topicks. At the proper Hour,

after an Entertainment, not only instructive, but ev’ry way agreeable, their

Host conducted them to their Bed-chamber, thanking Heaven for directingtwo such polite and virtuous Strangers to his House. He offer’d them at the

same Time some Silver, to defray their Expences on the Road; but with such

an Air of Respect and Benevolence, that ’twas impossible to give the least

Disgust. The Hermit, however, refus’d it, and took his leave, as he propos’d

to  set  forward  for  Babylon  by  Break  of  Day.  Their  Parting  was  very

affectionate and friendly; Zadig, in particular, express’d a more than common

Regard for a Man of so amiable a Behaviour. When the Hermit and he were

alone, and preparing for Bed, they talk’d long in Praise of their new Host. As

soon as Day-light appear’d, the old Hermit wak’d his young Comrade. ’Tis

Time to be gone, said he; but as all the House are fast asleep, I’ll leave a

Token  behind  me  of  my  Respect  and  Affection  for  the  Master  of  it.  No

sooner were the Words out of his Mouth, but he struck a Light, kindled a

Torch,  and  set  the  Building  in  a  Flame:  Zadig,  in  the  utmost  Confusion,

shriek’d out, and would, if possible, have prevented him from being guilty of

such a monstrous Act of Ingratitude. The Hermit dragg’d him away, by a

superior Force. The House was soon in a Blaze: When they had got at a

convenient Distance, the Hermit, with an amazing Sedateness, turn’d back

and survey’d the destructive Flames. Behold, said he, our fortunate Friend! In

the  Ruins,  he  will  find  an  immense  Treasure,  that  will  enable  him,  from

henceforth, to exert his Beneficence, and render his Virtues more and more

conspicuous. Zadig, tho’ astonish’d to the last Degree, attended him to their

last Stage, which was to the Cottage of a very virtuous and well-dispos’d

Widow,  who  had  a  Nephew  of  about  fourteen  Years  of  Age.  He  was  a

hopeful Youth, and the Darling of her Heart. She entertain’d her two Guests

with the best Provisions her little House afforded. In the Morning she order’d

her Nephew to attend them to an adjacent Bridge, which, having been broken

down some few Days before, render’d the Passage dangerous to Strangers.

  The Lad, being very attentive to wait on them, went formost. When they

were got upon the Bridge; come hither, my pretty Boy, said the Hermit, I

must give your Aunt some small Token of my Respect for her last Night’s

Favours. Upon that, he twisted his Fingers in the Hair of his Head, and threw

him, very calmly, into the River. Down went the little Lad; he came up once

again to the Surface of the Water; but was soon lost in the rapid Stream. O

thou Monster! thou worst of Villains, cry’d Zadig! Didn’t you promise, said

the Hermit, to view my Conduct with Patience? Know then, that had that Boyliv’d but one Year longer, he would have murder’d his Foster-Mother. Who

told you so, you barbarous Wretch, said Zadig? And when did you read that

inhuman Event in your Black-Book of Fate? Who gave you Permission pray,

to drown so innocent a Youth, that had never disoblig’d you?


  No sooner had our young Babylonian ceas’d his severe Reflections, but he

perceiv’d that the old Hermit’s long Beard grew shorter and shorter; that the

Furrows in his Face began to fill up, and that his Cheeks glow’d with a Rose-

coloured Red, as if he had been in the Bloom of Fifteen. His Mantle was

vanish’d at once; and on his Shoulders, which were before cover’d, appear’d

four angelic Wings, each refulgent as the Sun. O thou Messenger of Heaven!

O thou angelic Form! cry’d Zadig, and fell prostrate at his Feet; thou art

descended from the Empireum, I find, to instruct such a poor frail Mortal as I

am, how to submit to the Mysteries of Fate. Mankind in general, said the

Angel Jesrad, judge of the Whole, by only viewing the hither Link of the

Chain. Thou, of all the human Race, wast the only Man that deserv’d to have

thy Mind enlighten’d. Zadig, begg’d Leave to speak. I am somewhat diffident

of  myself,  ’tis  true;  but  may  I  presume,  Sir,  to  beg  the  Solution  of  one

Scruple? Would it not have been better to have chastiz’d the Lad, and by that

Means reform’d him, than to have cut him off thus unprepar’d in a Moment.

Jesrad, replied, had he been virtuous, and had he liv’d, ’twas his Fate not only

to  be  murder’d  himself,  but  his  Wife,  whom  he  would  afterwards  have

married, and the little Infant, that was to have been the Pledge of their mutual

Affection.  Is  it  necessary  then,  venerable  Guide,  that  there  should  be

Wickedness and Misfortunes in the World, and that those Misfortunes should

fall with Weight on the Heads of the Righteous? The Wicked, replied Jesrad,

are always unhappy. Misfortunes are intended only as a Touch-stone, to try a

small  Number  of  the  Just,  who  are  thinly  scatter’d  about  this  terrestrial

Globe: Besides, there is no Evil under the Sun, but some Good proceeds from

it: But, said Zadig, Suppose the World was all Goodness, and there was no

such Thing in Nature as Evil. Then, that World of yours, said Jesrad, would

be another World; the Chain of Events would be another Wisdom; and that

other Order, which would be perfect, must of Necessity be the everlasting

Residence of the supreme Being, whom no Evil can approach. That great and

first Cause has created an infinite Number of Worlds, and no two of themalike. This vast Variety is an Attribute of his Omnipotence. There are not two

Leaves on the Trees throughout the Universe, nor any two Globes of Light

amongst the Myriad of Stars that deck the infinite Expanse of Heaven, which

are  perfectly  alike.  And  whatever  you  see  on  that  small  Atom  of  Earth,

whereof you are a Native, must exist in the Place, and at the Time appointed,

according to the immutable Decrees of him who comprehends the Whole.

Mankind imagine, that the Lad, whom I plung’d into the River, was drown’d

by Chance; and that our generous Benefactor’s House was reduc’d to Ashes

by  the  same  Chance;  but  know,  there  is  no  such  Thing  as  Chance,  all

Misfortunes are intended, either as severe Trials, Judgments, or Rewards; and

are the Result of Foreknowledge. You remember, Sir, the poor Fisherman in

Despair, that thought himself the most unhappy Mortal breathing. The great

Orasmades, sent you to amend his Situation. Frail Mortal! Cease to contend

with what you ought to adore. But, said Zadig-whilst the Sound of the Word

But  dwelt  upon  his  Tongue,  the  Angel  took  his  Flight  towards  the  tenth

Sphere. Zadig sunk down upon his Knees, and acknowledg’d an over-ruling

Providence with all the Marks of the profoundest Submission. The Angel, as

he was soaring towards the Clouds, cried out in distinct Accents; Make thy

Way towards Babylon.


  CHAPTER. XVIII.

  The Ænigmas, or Riddles.


  Zadig, as one beside himself, and perfectly thunder-struck, beat his March

at random. He entred, however, into the City of Babylon, on that very Day,

when those Combatants who had been before engag’d in the List or Circus,

were already assembled in the spacious Outer-Court of the Palace, in order to

solve  the  Ænigmas,  and  give  the  wisest  Answers  they  could  to  such

Questions, as the Grand Magus should propose. All the Parties concern’d

were present, except the Knight of the Green Armour. No sooner had Zadig

made his Appearance in the City, but the Populace flock’d round about him:

No Eye was satisfied with gazing at him: All in general were lavish of their

Praises, and in their Hearts wish’d him their Sovereign, except the envious

Man, who as he pass’d by, fetch’d a deep Sigh, and turn’d his Head aside.

The Populace with loud Acclamations attended him to the Palace-Gate. TheQueen, who had heard of his Arrival, was in the utmost Agony, between

Hope and Despair. Her Vexation had almost brought her to Death’s Door; she

couldn’t conceive why Zadig should appear without his Accoutrements, nor

imagine which Way Itobad could procure the snow-white Armour. At the

Sight of Zadig a confus’d Murmur ran thro’ the whole Place. Every Eye was

surpriz’d, tho’ charm’d at the same Time to see him again: But then none

were to be admitted into the Assembly-Room except the Knights.


  I have fought as successfully as any one of them all, said Zadig, tho’

another  appears  clad  in  my  Armour;  but  in  the  mean  Time,  before  I  can

possibly prove my Assertion, I insist upon being admitted into Court, in order

to give my Solutions to such Ænigmas as shall be propos’d. ’Twas put to the

Vote.  As  the  Reputation  of  his  being  a  Man  of  the  strictest  Honour  and

Veracity  was  so  strongly  imprinted  on  their  Minds,  the  Motion  of  his

Admittance was carried in the Affirmative, without the least Opposition.

  The first Question the Grand Magus propos’d was this: What is the longest

and yet the shortest Thing in the World; the most swift and the most slow; the

most  divisible,  and  the  most  extended;  the  least  valu’d,  and  the  most

regretted;  And  without  which  nothing  can  possibly  be  done:  Which,  in  a

Word, devours every Thing how minute soever, and yet gives Life and Spirit

to every Object or Being, however Great?

  Itobad had the Honour to answer first. His reply was, that a Man of his

Merit had something else to think on, than idle Riddles; ’twas enough for

him, that he was acknowledg’d the Hero of the Circus. One said, the Solution

of the Ænigma propos’d was Fortune; others said the Earth; and others again

the Light: But Zadig pronounced it to be Time. Nothing, said he, can be

longer, since ’tis the Measure of Eternity; Nothing is shorter, since there is

Time  always  wanting  to  accomplish  what  we  aim  at.  Nothing  passes  so

slowly as Time to him who is in Expectation; and nothing so swift as Time to

him who is in the perfect Enjoyment of his Wishes. It’s Extent is to Infinity,

in  the  Whole;  and  divisible  to  Infinity  in  part.  All  Men  neglect  it  in  the

Passage; and all regret the Loss of it when ’tis past. Nothing can possibly be

done  without  it;  it  buries  in  Oblivion  whatever  is  unworthy  of  being

transmitted down to Posterity; and it renders all illustrious Actions immortal.

The Assembly agreed unanimously that Zadig was in the Right.  The next Question that was started, was, What is the Thing we receive,

without being ever thankful for it; which we enjoy, without knowing how we

came by it; which we give away to others, without knowing where ’tis to be

found;  and  which  we  lose,  without  being  any  ways  conscious  of  our

Misfortune?

  Each pass’d his Verdict. Zadig was the only Person that concluded it was

Life. He solv’d every Ænigma propos’d, with equal Facility. Itobad, when he

heard the Explications, always said that nothing in the World was more easy,

than to solve such obvious Questions; and that he could interpret a thousand

of them without the least Hesitation, were he inclin’d to trouble his Head

about such Trifles. Other Questions were propos’d in regard to Justice, the

sovereign Good, and the Art of Government. Zadig’s Answers still carried

the greatest Weight. What Pity ’tis, said some who were present, that one of

so comprehensive a Genius, should make such a scurvy Cavalier?

  Most  illustrious  Grandees,  said  Zadig,  I  was  the  Person  that  had  the

Honour  of  being  Victor  at  your  Circus;  the  white  Armour,  most  puissant

Lords, was mine. That awkward Warrior there, Lord Itobad, dress’d himself

in it whilst I was asleep. He imagin’d, it is plain, that it would do him more

Honour than his own Green one. Unaccoutred as I am, I am ready, before this

august Assembly, to give them incontestable Proof of my superior Skill; to

engage with the Usurper of the White Armour with my Sword only in my

Mantle and Bonnet; and to testify that I only was the happy Victor of the

justly admired Hottam.

  Itobad  accepted  of  the  Challenge  with  all  the  Assurance  of  Success

imaginable. He did not doubt, but being properly accoutred with his Helmet,

his Cuirass, and his Bracelets, he should be able to hue down an Antagonist,

in his Mantle and Cap, and nothing to skreen him from his Resentment, but a

single  Sabre.  Zadig  drew  his  Sword,  and  saluted  the  Queen  with  it,  who

view’d him with Transport mix’d with Fear. Itobad drew his, but paid his

Compliments to Nobody. He approach’d Zadig, as one, whom he imagin’d

incapable of making any considerable Resistance. He concluded, ’twas in his

Power  to  cut  Zadig  into  Atoms.  Zadig,  however,  knew  how  to  parry  the

Blow, by dexterously receiving it upon his Fort (as the Swords-men call it)

by which Means Itobad’s Sword was snapt in two. With that Zadig in anInstant clos’d his Adversary, and by his superior Strength, as well as Skill,

laid him sprawling on his Back. Then holding the Point of his Sword to the

opening of his Cuirass, Submit to be stripp’d of your borrow’d Plumes, or

you  are  a  dead  Man  this  Moment.  Itobad,  always  surpriz’d,  that  any

Disappointment should attend a Man of such exalted Merit as himself, very

tamely permitted Zadig to disrobe him by Degrees of his pompous Helmet,

his superb Cuirass, his rich Bracelets, his brilliant Cuisses, or Armour for his

Thighs, and other Martial Accoutrements. When Zadig had equipp’d himself

Cap-a-pee,  in  his  now  recover’d  Armour,  he  flew  to  Astarte,  and  threw

himself prostrate at her Feet. Cador prov’d, without any great Difficulty, that

the White Armour was Zadig’s Property. He was thereupon acknowledg’d

King of Babylon, by the unanimous Content of the Whole Court; but more

particularly with the Approbation of Astarte, who after such a long Series of

Misfortunes,  now  tasted  the  Sweets  of  seeing  her  darling  Zadig  thought

worthy, in the Opinion of the whole World, to be the Partner of her royal

Bed.  Itobad  withdrew,  and  contented  himself  with  being  call’d  my  Lord

within  the  narrow  Compass  of  his  own  Domesticks.  Zadig,  in  short,  was

elected King, and was as happy as any Mortal could be.

  Now he began to reflect on what the Angel Jesrad had said to him: Nay, he

reflected  so  far  back  as  the  Story  of  the  Arabian  Atom  of  Dust

metamorphosed  into  a  Diamond.  The  Queen  and  He  ador’d  the  Divine

Providence.  Zadig  permitted  Missouf,  the  Fair  Coquet,  to  make  her

Conquests  where  she  could.  He  sent  Couriers  to  bring  the  Free-booter

Arbogad to Court, and gave him an Honourable Military Post in his Army,

with a farther Promise of Promotion to the highest Dignity; but upon this

express Condition, that he would act for the future as a Soldier of Honour;

but assur’d him at the same Time, that he’d make a publick Example of him,

if he follow’d his Profession of Free-booting for the future.

  Setoc was sent for from the lonely Desarts of Arabia, together with the fair

Almonza, his new Bride, to preside over the commercial Affairs of Babylon.

Cador was advanc’d to a Post near himself, and was his Favourite Minister at

Court, as the just Reward of his past Services. He was, in short, the King’s

real Friend; and Zadig was the only Monarch in the Universe that could boast

of such an Attendant. The Dwarf, tho’ dumb, was not wholly forgotten. The

Fisherman was put into the Possession of a very handsome House; and Orcanwas sentenc’d, not only to pay him a very considerable Sum for the Injustice

done  him  in  detaining  his  Wife;  but  to  resign  her  likewise  to  the  proper

Owner: The Fisherman, however, grown wise by Experience, soften’d the

Rigour of the Sentence, and took the Money only in full of all Accounts.

  He didn’t leave so much as Semira wholly disconsolate, tho’ she had such

an  Aversion  to  a  blind  Eye;  nor  Azora  comfortless,  notwithstanding  her

affectionate Intention to shorten his Nose; for he sooth’d their Sorrows by

very munificent Presents. The envious Informer indeed, died with Shame and

Vexation. The Empire was glorious abroad, and in the full Enjoyment of

Tranquility, Peace and Plenty, at home: This, in short, was the true golden

Age. The whole Country was sway’d by Love and Justice. Every one blest

Zadig; and Zadig blest Heav’n for his unexpected Success.


  FINIS.