Title : Delphi Complete Works of George Berkeley (Illustrated) (Delphi Series Ten Book 11)
Author: Berkeley, George
ASIN  : B07VX8SD15
Description: www.delphiclassics.com




 [image file=Image00159.jpg]  

         

The Complete Works of

GEORGE BERKELEY

(1685-1753)

 [image "img1.jpg" file=Image00000.jpg] 

Contents

 The Books

Arithmetica (1707)

Miscellanea Mathematica (1707)

Common-Place Book (1709)

An Essay towards a New Theory of Vision (1709)

A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710)

A Discourse on Passive Obedience (1712)

Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous (1713)

An Essay towards Preventing the Ruin of Great Britain (1721)

De Motu (1721)

A Proposal for Better Supplying Churches in our Foreign Plantations (1725)

A Sermon Preached before the Incorporated Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts (1732)

Alciphron (1732)

The Theory of Vision (1733)

The Analyst (1734)

A Defence of Free-thinking in Mathematics (1735)

Reasons for Not Replying to Mr. Walton’s Full Answer (1735)

The Querist (1737)

A Discourse addressed to Magistrates and Men of Authority (1736)

Siris (1744)

A Word to the Wise (1749)

Farther Thoughts on Tar-Water (1752)

Miscellaneous Works

The Criticism

Extract from ‘A Treatise of Human Nature’ by David Hume

Berkeley by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Extract from ‘The World as Will and Idea’ by Arthur Schopenhauer

Extract from ‘The Principles of Psychology’ by William James

The Biographies

George Berkeley by A. Campbell Fraser

George Berkeley by Robert Adamson

The Delphi Classics Catalogue

 [image "img2.png" file=Image00001.gif] 

© Delphi Classics 2019

Version 1

 [image "img3.jpg" file=Image00002.jpg] 

 [image "img4.jpg" file=Image00003.jpg] 

Browse our Main Series

 [image "img5.jpg" file=Image00004.jpg] 

   Browse our Ancient Classics

 [image "img6.jpg" file=Image00005.jpg] 

 Browse our Poets

 [image "img7.jpg" file=Image00006.jpg] 

 Browse our Art eBooks

 [image "img8.jpg" file=Image00007.jpg] 

 Browse our Classical Music series

 [image "img9.jpg" file=Image00008.jpg] 

        

The Complete Works of

GEORGE BERKELEY

 [image "img10.jpg" file=Image00009.jpg] 

By Delphi Classics, 2019

COPYRIGHTComplete Works of George Berkeley

 [image "img11.jpg" file=Image00010.jpg] 

First published in the United Kingdom in 2019 by Delphi Classics.

© Delphi Classics, 2019.

All rights reserved.  No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of the publisher, nor be otherwise circulated in any form other than that in which it is published.

ISBN: 978 1 78877 954 8

Delphi Classics

is an imprint of

Delphi Publishing Ltd

Hastings, East Sussex

United Kingdom

Contact: sales@delphiclassics.com

 [image "img12.png" file=Image00011.jpg] 

www.delphiclassics.com

Interested in Berkeley?

 [image "img13.png" file=Image00012.jpg] 

Our comprehensive editions are beautifully illustrated, packed with bonus texts and offer eReaders some of the greatest philosophical works ever written.

 Explore our wide range of Philosophers...

 The Books [image "img14.jpg" file=Image00013.jpg] 

Berkeley was born at his family home, Dysart Castle, near Thomastown, County Kilkenny, Ireland.

 [image "img15.jpg" file=Image00014.jpg] 

Thomastown, County Kilkenny in the province of Leinster

 Arithmetica (1707) [image "img16.jpg" file=Image00015.jpg] 

Translated by G. N. Wright, 1843

 CONTENTSDEDICATION.

PREFACE.

PART I.

CHAPTER I.

CHAP. II.

CHAP. III.

CHAP. IV.

CHAP. V.

CHAP. VI.

CHAP. VII.

PART II.

CHAP. I.

CHAP. II.

 CHAP. III.

CHAP. IV.

CHAP. V,

PART III.

CHAP. I.

CHAP. II.

  CHAP. III.

 

 [image "img17.jpg" file=Image00016.jpg] 

George Berkeley by William Skelton, after John Vanderbank

NOTE.[THESE two tracts formed Berkeley’s first published matter. They appeared anonymously in 1707, written in Latin. They cannot be said to have any value other than the author’s name gives them. The translation used here is that of the Rev. G. N. Wright (“Works of Berkeley”, 1843).]

 DEDICATION. [image "img18.jpg" file=Image00017.jpg] 

T O THAT VERY promising youth, WILLIAM PALLISER, the only son of the most reverend the ARCHBISHOP of CASHEL, endowed with genius, sagacity, and learning beyond his years, and born with every quality suited to afford some great light and increase to the sciences, this treatise on arithmetic is, as a small pledge of devoted attachment, offered and dedicated by THE AUTHOR.

 PREFACE. [image "img18.jpg" file=Image00017.jpg] 

I PERCEIVE AND regret, that most votaries of mathematical science are blindfolded on the very threshold. Inasmuch as the mode of learning mathematics, at least with us, first to apply to arithmetic, then geometry, then algebra; and as we read Tacquet’s arithmetic, which no one can thoroughly understand without having some knowledge of algebra, it hence happens, that most students in mathematics, whilst they carefully and successfully master the demonstrations of theorems of inferior utility, leave untouched the principles and reasonings of arithmetical operations, though these last are of such efficacy and value, that they give the most important aid, not only to other branches of mathematics, but to the interests of men of all denominations. Wherefore if any one, after a mathematical course, turn his attention back to Tacquet’s work, he will observe many things demonstrated in an obscure manner, so as not so much to enlighten as to force conviction on the mind, being environed with a repulsive array of porisms and theorems.

Nor has any one else, that I am aware of, demonstrated the rules of arithmetic without the aid of algebra. Thinking, then, that it would be of service to beginners if I should set forth my thoughts on these subjects, I now publish them, after they have almost all been kept by me for nearly three years. Now as I have not only given the rules for working questions, but also the demonstrations of those rules, drawn from the proper and genuine principles of arithmetic, some will perhaps be surprised that this treatise is of less size than the common works on arithmetic, though they contain merely the practice. The reason of this is that I have been very brief, both as regards precept and example, in explaining the “wherefore” of operations, on which writers on arithmetic are, in general, very tedious: and yet this brevity, as I hope, has not caused any obscurity. For although the blind require that a guide should lead them by the hand at every step, yet for one proceeding by the clear light of demonstration, it is sufficient to be furnished with even a slender clue. Wherefore I am anxious, that all votaries of mathematics should apply their minds to master the reasons and grounds of the rules of arithmetic.

This is not so difficult as some might suppose. The demonstrations here brought forward are, if I mistake not, easy at once and concise, nor are the principles drawn from any other quarter; nothing borrowed from algebra or Euclid is taken for granted here; I always prefer to prove an operation by obvious and familiar reasoning à priori , than to have recourse to an argumentum ad absurdum, by means of a tedious chain of consecutive demonstrations. I have endeavoured to derive the theory of square and cube roots from the nature itself of arithmetical involution, which, in my opinion, seems better suited to explain complicated extraction of roots, than what is generally applied to this purpose from the second book of Euclid, or from the analysis of algebraical powers. The common rule for the alligation of various things is demonstrated with difficulty and in particular instances. I have therefore substituted for it one of my own, which scarcely needs demonstration. I have rejected “the rule of false,” as it is ineffectual and nearly useless.

I have copied no one; I have trespassed on the intellectual stores of none. For my original purpose was to deduce the rules of arithmetical operations from their principles for my own amusement and exercise, and so to employ my leisure hours. I could not on this occasion, without justly incurring the charge of ingratitude, omit mention of the name of the Rev. John Hall, doctor of divinity, Vice-Provost of this college, and the worthy professor of Hebrew. To that excellent man I acknowledge my obligations on many accounts, and not the least, that by his exhortations I was excited to the delightful study of mathematics.

I have now explained my aim: impartial judges will decide how far I have attained it. To their candid examination I cheerfully submit these first-fruits of my studies, little regarding what sciolists or the malignant may think.

 PART I. [image "img18.jpg" file=Image00017.jpg] 

 CHAPTER I.OF NOTATION AND THE STATEMENT OF NUMBERS.

 [image "img18.jpg" file=Image00017.jpg] 

T HERE ARE NINE numeral signs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, employed with the cypher (0) for expressing unlimited classes of numbers. The whole of this contrivance depends on the value of these signs increasing in a tenfold proportion. The series of numbers rising in value according to that law is divided into members or periods for convenience of statement. The subjoined table will completely explain this:

 

 [image "img19.jpg" file=Image00018.jpg] 

 [image "img20.jpg" file=Image00019.jpg] 

in which is exhibited a series of numeral signs, set forth by threes, the members or periods advancing in thousandfold proportion, and the places in tenfold proportion. For instance, the figure in the units place, and marked by a point placed under it, denotes seven individuals, integral, or considered at least as integral; the next number on the right hand, three tenth parts of that integer, and the number which immediately precedes it denotes four tens of the same integers, and in this tenfold proportion each place exceeds that following it, and is exceeded by that preceding it.

Still further, since by an infinite multiplication and division of units, the series of signs is infinitely extended in each direction, from the units place, and so innumerable places for expressing their exact value, there is need merely of the continual repetition of three numbers, provided that each collection of threes, or period, be designated by its own name, as is the case in the table; for, in proceeding from the units place, towards the left, the first period marks units, or integers, the second thousands, the third millions, the fourth billions, and so on. In the same way, preserving the analogy, in the periods descending below units, first occur the parts simply, then thousandths, then millionths, then billionths, and so on; and these last are to be divided into unesimal or unit parts, tenths, hundredths, the others to be collected into units, tens, hundreds.

If then we wish to state the number expressed by any figure of the series, we must, 1st, note the simple value of the figure; 2nd, the value of the place; lastly, of the period. For instance, let the number selected be 9, in the fifth period towards the left. The figure,’taken simply, has the value of nine; in consequence of its place, it has the value of nine tens; and in consequence of its period, of nine tens of trillions. Let 5 be chosen in the third period: taken simply, it signifies five; in consequence of its place, five units; in consequence of its period, five units of millions, or five millions. In the second period below unit, let 8 be chosen: the simple value of the figure is eight: in consequence of its place, eight hundredths; in consequence of its period, eight hundredths of thousandths.

If the number to be stated have not words affixed, to denote the value of the periods and of the places, it should be pointed into threes towards the right and left, from the units place, and then should be expressed by the name assigned to the place and period. For instance, let the numbers proposed be 73,480,195. The figures being divided into periods, I first inquire what is the value of the figure in the first place on the left, which, since it is in the second place of the third period, is seven tens of millions; but since the numbers advance in tenfold proportion, the value of the first figure being known, the values of the rest follow in due order. We shall therefore thus express the proposed number: seven tens, and three units of millions; four hundreds, and eight tens of thousands; one hundred, nine tens, and five units: or more concisely, seventy-three millions, four hundred and eighty thousand, a hundred and ninety-five. Hence we perceive that a cypher, though in itself of no value, must of necessity be expressed, for the purpose of assigning a proper place to each figure.

There will be no difficulty in writing and expressing the largest numbers, if due attention be given to what has been just laid down, an acquaintance with which will also afterwards be of the greatest importance; for nature itself teaches us the way of working arithmetical questions on the fingers, but there is need of science to perform these operations accurately, with respect to greater numbers; all turning upon this, that whereas the [limited nature of our faculties does not permit the work to be done at once, and with a single effort, we divide it into various operations, by separately inquiring the aggregate or sum, the difference, the product, and then combining them, express the ultimate sum total, remainder, or product; the whole reason and contrivance of the operations resulting from the simple progression of the places, and being ultimately founded on it.

N.B. — I am aware that some arithmeticians divide the series otherwise than I do; for compounding the denominations, they use sixes instead of threes. But as others (For instance, the celebrated Wallis in his “Universal Mathesis, and Father Lamy, in his “Elements of Mathematics.”) follow the method pursued by me, I have thought it advisable to retain it as simpler.

 CHAP. II.ON ADDITION.

 [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

I N ADDITION , THE sum of two or more numbers is required; to obtain which the numbers to be added should be set down, so that units should be placed under units, tens under tens, and decimal parts under decimals, and so forth. On this account, when decimal parts are added, the units place should be marked by the insertion of a comma. Then commencing from the right, the figures in the first place should be added, and if any tens result, they should be carried over to the next place, and be added to the sum of the figures of that place, the tens which belong to the next place being reserved, and so the process should be continued. For instance, in the first example of the operations below, 9 and 5 make 14; I therefore reserve the 10 and proceed with the 4; 4 and 8 make 12, therefore I reserve the 10, and going on to the next place I find 6, to which I add 2, on account of the tens reserved in the first place; and as 8 and 2 make 10, I reserve that, and set down the 1 which remains, and proceed in the same way.

 [image "img22.jpg" file=Image00021.jpg] 

If the things to be summed up be of different kinds, we should proceed in the same way, taking into account, however, the proportions according to which the different denominations advance. For instance, the denominations of pounds, shillings, and pence, do not advance as those of numbers; for 12 pence, not 10 pence, make a shilling: 20 shillings, and not 10 shillings, make a pound. On this account, in adding such quantities, instead of tens, twelves should be carried from the pence, twenties should be carried from the shillings to the next place.

 CHAP. III.ON SUBTRACTION.

 [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

I N SUBTRACTION , THE difference of two numbers is required, or what remains after one has been taken from the other; for ascertaining which the less quantity of each denomination should be placed under the greater; then beginning from the right, the first denomination of the quantity to be subtracted is to be taken from that written above it, and the remainder set down below, and the work continued in this way until the whole subtraction be effected.

If, however, it should happen that any number be too small to admit of the lower quantity being taken from it, such upper number should be increased by ten, that is, by a unit borrowed from the next place.

Let it be required to subtract 1189 from 32034; the numbers being set down as in the adjoined example, I set about subtracting the first figure 9 from the 4 placed over it; but as 4 does not even once contain 9, a ten must be added to it, so as to make 14, and then 9 taken from 14 leaves 5. Proceeding then to the left, I have to subtract 8 from 2, not from 3, because we should take into account the ten which has been borrowed, and as 8 cannot be subtracted from 2, I subtract it from 12, and 4 remains. The next figure of the quantity to be subtracted is 1, which, however, cannot be subtracted from nothing or o; in place of the cipher o I use 9; now I use 9 because the ten which is borrowed must be diminished by the unit which has been added to the preceding figure; continuing the process in this manner, 1 taken from 1 leaves nothing. Finally, the subtraction being completed, 3 remain, which I set down below.

In a similar manner, the subtraction of different denominations is effected: only we should observe that ten is not necessarily to be used, but such a number as declares how many of the denominations in question are in the next denomination, and this number should be borrowed to supply the defect of any particular figure.

 

 [image "img23.jpg" file=Image00022.jpg] 

 

N.B. — From what has been here laid down, it is plain that the science of arithmetic, as far as we have treated it, consists in doing in detail that which cannot be done at once; and that the reason of reserving tens in addition, and of borrowing them in subtraction, altogether depends on the tenfold advance in the value of the places.

 CHAP. IV.ON MULTIPLICATION.

 [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

I N MULTIPLICATION THE multiplicand is taken as often as the multiplier requires; or in other words, a number is sought bearing the same ratio to the multiplicand that the multiplier does to unity. That number is called the product, or rectangle; the factors or sides of which are called respectively, the multiplicand, and the number by which it is multiplied.

For finding the product of two numbers, the multiplying number being written under the multiplicand, this last should be multiplied by each figure of the former, beginning from the right hand: the first figure of the product should be written directly under the multiplying figure, and the rest in order towards the left.

The multiplication being finished, the several products should be collected into one sum, the number of decimal places in which should be equal to those in both the factors.

Let 30,94 be the number to be multiplied by 26,5. Five times 4 produce 20, the first figure of which (o) I place under the multiplying figure (5), and carry the remaining 2; then 5 multiplied into 9 produces 45; 5 with the 2 carried make 7, which I set down, carrying 4 to the next place, and so on.

 [image "img24.jpg" file=Image00023.jpg] 

As there is a twofold value of each number, this should be taken into account, so that the multiplication be rightly effected, that is, that each figure be multiplied as well according to the simple value of the multiplying figure, as according to that which it has from its place. Hence the figure of each respective product is written under the multiplying figure. For instance, in the multiplier of the second example, the figure 2 has the value, not of 2 units, but of 2 tens; therefore, when multiplied into 6, the first figure of the multiplicand, it will produce, not 12 units, but r2 tens; therefore, the first figure of the product should be set down in the place of tens, that is, directly under the multiplying figure 2.

For the same reason, when there are (decimal) parts in the factors, the number produced by the multiplication of the first figure of the multiplier into the first of the multiplicand, is to be removed as far below the multiplied figure as the multiplier is to the right hand below unity; so that as many (decimal) places in the entire product are to be marked off as there were in both factors.

N.B. — If there be ciphers continuously to the right of each or of both factors, the multiplication should be performed on the other figures merely, and the ciphers afterwards annexed to the entire product; for since the places advance in value in a tenfold proportion, it is clear that a number becomes tenfold, a hundredfold, a thousandfold itself, if it be advanced one, two, or three places.

 CHAP. V.ON DIVISION.

 [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

D IVISION IS THE reverse of multiplication, its object being to resolve or divide that quantity which the latter produces. The number found by division is called the quotient, because it declares how often the dividend contains the divisor, or, what is the same, the ratio of the dividend to the divisor, or finally, the part of the dividend denominated from the divisor.

In division, having written down the dividend and divisor, as in the first of the subjoined examples, commencing from the left, that part of the dividend containing the divisor, or having the least excess above the containing number, should be marked off by a point. I mean in this instance the simple values. It should then be ascertained how often the divisor is contained in that member of the dividend, and the resulting number will be the first figure of the quotient; the divisor should then be multiplied into the figure thus found, and the product subtracted from the member of the dividend, and the remainder set down below; to which should be annexed the next figure of the dividend, and a new dividend thus obtained, from whence must be ascertained the next figure of the quotient, which being multiplied into the divisor, and the product subtracted from the dividend just divided, the remainder with the next figure of the original dividend annexed will form a new member, and so on, until the operation is finished. The decimal places of the divisor being then subtracted from those in the dividend, the remainder will indicate what number of places should be in the quotient; but if this subtraction be not feasible, so many decimal cyphers should be added to the dividend as are necessary.

If, after the division has been completed, there should be a remainder, by adding decimal cyphers the division can be continued until either nothing remain, or it be so minute that it need not be taken into account, or the remaining figures may be set down and the divisor under them.

If both the dividend and divisor end in cyphers, an equal number of these should be struck off in both: but if the divisor alone end in cyphers they should not be taken into account in the operation, but the same number of the last figures of the dividend should be struck off, and at the end of the work set down, a line drawn below them, and the divisor written underneath.

Let it be required to divide 45832 by 67. Since the divisor is greater than 45 let another figure be added, and the member taken for division be 458, which I separate from the rest of the dividend by a point. 6 is contained in 45 seven times, with three remainder; but, as 7 is not also contained seven times in 38, the quotient must be taken less. Let 6 therefore be taken; and, as 6 is contained 6 times in 45 and 9 remains, and 98 contains 7 six times, the first figure of the quotient should be 6. This, multiplied into the divisor, produces a subtrahend 402, which being taken from 458, there will be a remainder 56; to which I annex 3, the next figure of the dividend, by which means a new dividend is formed 563, which I divide as the former, and find 8 for the second figure of the quotient; and, as 8 multiplied into 67 produces ‘536, I subtract this from 563, and, adding to the remainder 2, the next figure of the dividend, I obtain 272 as a new dividend, which, when divided, gives 4, which, being first set down in the quotient, and then multiplied into the divisor, and the product subtracted from 272, there remains 4, which should be annexed to the quotient, a line being drawn under it, and the divisor then written below it.

The operation is more speedy when the subtraction immediately follows the multiplication of each figure, and the multiplication proceeds from left to right. For instance, let it be proposed to divide 1219980 by 156, as in the third example; the divisor being written under 1219, the first member of the dividend, it is plain that the one is contained 7 times in the other; and, in consequence, 7 is put down in the quotient. Seven times r make 7; which, being subtracted from 12, I strike out both the multiplied figure 1 and 12, the part of the member from which the product was subtracted, setting down above the remainder 5; then I proceed to 5, the next figure of the divisor; 7 multiplied into 5 makes 35, and 35 being subtracted from sr, there remains 16, which I write above and strike out 51 and 5. I then multiply 7 into 6, and the product 42 being subtracted from 69 there remain 27, which I set down, striking out both 69 and 6, the last figure of the dividend. The divisor being now entirely struck out, I set it down, moved one place to the right, and with it I divide the member written above it, which indeed is made up of the remainder of the last divided member increased by the following figure. In this way the divisor should be moved until it goes through the whole dividend.

 [image "img25.jpg" file=Image00024.jpg] 

In the next place the reason of the rules will be given; and first, it is plain why we should seek for the quotient by separate divisions.

2ndly, It may, for instance, be asked why, in the example above given, 6 should be taken as the quotient of the first member, divided by the divisor; for 67 is contained in 458 hundreds, not six times but six hundred times, for they are not units but hundreds, since they are distant two places to the left from units.

To this I answer, that in reality not merely 6 but 600 is written in the quotient, for two figures afterwards ascertained follow it, and thus the proper value is assigned to the quotient; for as many places are set down after each figure in the quotient as there are after that member of the dividend from which they are obtained.

3rdly, Since each figure of the quotient indicates how often that member of the dividend from which it was obtained contains the divisor, it is proper that the subtrahend should be formed by multiplying the divisor into the figure last found; for then the divisor is subtracted exactly as often as it is contained in the dividend, unless it should happen that the number last set down in the quotient should be too large or too small: if the first be the case the product will be so large that it cannot be subtracted; if the latter be the case, then the resulting product will be so small, that after performing the subtraction the remainder will be equal to or greater than the divisor.

4thly, The reason why so many (decimal) places should be marked off in the quotient that with those which are in the divisor they may be equal to those in the dividend, is that the dividend is the product resulting from the multiplication of the divisor into the quotient, and consequently it should have as many decimal places as those two, as we have shown when treating of multiplication.

5thly, It is clear that decimal cyphers, annexed to the end of the dividend, do not affect its value; for as to the integers, those which are removed for the same distance from the units place, have the same value, but decimals are not diminished in value unless the cyphers be placed before them.

6thly, Since the quotient expresses or denominates the ratio of the dividend to the divisor, it is clear, that as long as that continues the same the quotient must be the same; but the common cyphers, being cast away, the ratio of the numbers to each other is not in the slightest degree altered. Thus, for instance, 200 bears the same ratio to 100 — that is, 200 contains 100 as often as 2 contains 1, which is sufficiently manifest by itself.

 CHAP. VI.ON FORMING SQUARES AND FINDING THEIR ROOTS.

 [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

T HE PRODUCT OF a number multiplied into itself is called its square; and the number by the multiplication of which into itself the square is produced is called the square root or side; and the operation by which we search for the root of the given square is called the extraction of the square root; for understanding which it will be necessary to consider the manner in which the square is produced, the parts of which it is composed, their order, and relative position. And since it is best in acquiring a knowledge of any thing to proceed from the simplest and easiest, let us commence with the consideration of the production of a square, resulting from a binomial root.

We should, in the first place, closely consider what takes place when a number, consisting of two figures, is multiplied into itself. And first it is plain that the first figure on the right of the root is multiplied into the one placed above it, that is, into itself, and thence results the square of the lesser number. Then, by multiplying the same figure into the next part of the multiplicand, a rectangle results contained by both members of the root. Having then finished the multiplication of the whole multiplicand by the first figure of the root, we come to the second, which, being multiplied into the first figure of the multiplicand, there results again a rectangle, contained under the two figures of the binomial root; then the second figure of the multiplicand multiplied into itself, gives the square of the second member of the binomial root. We ascertain from this that any square produced from a binomial root consists, in the first place, of the square of the lesser member; in the second, of double the rectangle contained under the members; in the third, of the square of the greater member.

Let it be required to square a binomial root, for instance, 23, according to what has been laid down in chap iv. 23 I first multiply 3 into 3, which gives 9, as the square of — the first member; I secondly multiply 3 into 2, the 69 other figure of the root, and obtain 6, the rectangle  contained by both; thirdly, from 2 multiplied into 3 arises a second time, the rectangle contained under the members; in the fourth place, 2 multiplied into 2 produces 4 the square of the greater member.

Let us now proceed to the production of a square, from a root of three members. In this operation, the first figure of the root multiplied into the whole root, produces, in the first place, the square of the first member; in the second place, the rectangle contained under the first and second member; in the third place, the rectangle contained under the first and third member. Now for the second figure, this multiplied into the root gives first the rectangle contained under the first and second member; secondly, the square of the second member; thirdly, the rectangle contained under the second and third members. Lastly, from the third figure of the root, multiplied into the root, results first, the rectangle contained under the first and third members; secondly, the rectangle contained under the second and third members; and thirdly, the square of the third member.

From this we ascertain, that a square, produced from a trinomial root comprises, first, the square of the first figure of the root; secondly, double the rectangle contained under the first figure and the two others; in the third place, the square of the two others, that is, the square of each, and also double the rectangle contained under both, which we have before shown, constitute the square of the two figures.

In the same way, it can be shown, that the square of four, five, or any number of figures, contains, first, the square of the figure of lowest value; secondly, double the rectangle resulting from the multiplication of the figure of lowest value into all the others; thirdly, the square of all the other figures, which itself, as is plain from what has been stated, contains the square of the figure next from the right, double the rectangle of that same figure multiplied into all the others, the square of all the other figures, which in the same way contains the square of the third figure, two rectangles of it, and the others, and the square of these, and so on, until we come to the square of the highest figure of the root.

 [image "img26.jpg" file=Image00025.jpg] 

The parts of which the square is composed being ascertained, we should next consider, concerning their arrangement and place. If therefore, beginning from the right, we divide the square into periods of twos, from the mode of production which we have explained above, it is plain that the first member from the left will be occupied by the square of the first or highest figure, and at the same time, of that portion of double the rectangle resulting from the multiplication together of the first and second figures, which is redundant above the first place of the following’ period of two; that the first place of the second period contains double the rectangle mentioned, and besides whatever of the square of the second figure is over; that the second contains the square of the second figure, and whatever is over of double the rectangle of the two first figures, multiplied into the third as far as the lowest figure at the first place of the third two, and so on. For instance, in the annexed example, the first member 10 contains 9, the square of the first figure 3, besides 1 by which 12 (double the rectangle of the figure 3 multiplied into the following 2) exceeds the first place of the second member. The first place of the second two contains 2 (the remainder of the double rectangle of the figures 3 and 2), and also that which is over the next following place, and so on, &c.

 

 

 [image "img27.jpg" file=Image00026.jpg] 

Having thus considered the formation of the square, let us proceed to its analysis. Let any number, for instance 103041, be proposed, the square root of which is required. This should be pointed off by twos, beginning from the right in case the number be even, as if otherwise the last member will consist of but one figure.

I then inquire, what is the greatest square contained in 10, the first member towards the left, and 3, the root of this, is the first figure of the root required, the square of which (9) I subtract from (1o) the member. From the remainder (1), with (3) the first figure of the following member added, is formed a dividend (13), which I divide by the found figure doubled (6), the quotient (2) will be the second figure of the root; which being multiplied first into the divisor, and then into itself, and the sum of the product, taken so, however, that the latter be removed one place to the right (124), I take away this from the dividend (13), increased by O, the remaining figure of the second member. To the remainder 6, I add 4, the first figure of the third two, and so a new dividend (64) is produced, which being divided by 64, twice the root already found, gives 1, the third of the required root; this being then multiplied into itself and the products added up, I subtract the sum (641) from the dividend, increased by the addition of the other figure of the third member, and in this way we must proceed to whatever length the operation may be carried.

If after the last subtraction there be a remainder, it shows that the given number was not a square; however by adding to it decimal cyphers, the operation can be continued to any extent thought desirable.

If there be any decimal places in the number, for the root of which we are searching, their number divided by two, will show how many should be in the root. The reason of this appears from chap iv.

The reason of the mode of proceeding is quite clear from what has been stated. For as a divisor I employed 6, the double of the found figure, because, from the formation of the square as it has been explained, I knew that double the rectangle of that figure, multiplied into the following one, comprised the dividend; consequently, if this were divided by the double of one factor (3), that the other factor (2), that is, the next figure of the root, could be obtained. So likewise I have formed a subtrahend from double the rectangle of the quotient and the divisor, and the square of the quotient added together, because I found that those two rectangles and the square were contained in that order in the remainder and the following member from which the subtraction was made, and so the evolution of the power is easily effected from its involution or formation.

 CHAP. VII.CONCERNING THE INVOLUTION AND EVOLUTION OF THE CUBE.

 [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

T HE ROOT MULTIPLIED into the square produces the cube. To prepare the way for the analysis we should, as has been done in the former chapter, begin with the composition of the power. In the production then of the cube from a binomial root, the first member of the root, in the first place, meets with its own square, whence results the cube of the first figure; secondly, double the rectangle of the members, whence double the solid of the square of the first figure multiplied into the other; thirdly, the square of the other member, whence the solid produced from the first figure and the square of the second. In the same way, when the multiplication takes place by the second member, there arises the solid of the second figure and of the square of the first; in the second place double the solid of the first figure and of the square of the second; in the third place the cube of the second member.

Therefore the cube produced from the binomial root contains the cubes of the two members and six solids, that is to say, three made from the square of each member, multiplied into the other.

The reasoning being continued according to the analogy of the preceding chapter, it will follow, that if, as the square should be divided into twos, the cube resulting from any root be distributed into threes, that the three, or member first from the left, contains the cube of the figure first on the left, and also the excess, if there be any, of three solids of the square of the same, multiplied into the second; that the first place of the second contains the said solids and the excess of the three solids of the square of the second figure, multiplied into the first; that the second place contains the same three solids and the excess of the cube of the second figure; and that the third is occupied by the said cube and the excess of the three solids produced from the square of the preceding figures, multiplied into the third; and that the solids just mentioned fill the first place of the third member, arid so on. From this we shall easily derive the following manner of extracting the cube root.

Beginning from the right, I divide, by means of points, the resolvend (8062 J 568) into threes, except the last member, which can be less. I then take the greatest cube (64) contained in the first member towards the left, and having written down its root (4) for the first figure of the sought root, I annex to the remainder (16) the next figure (6) of the resolvend, whence results a dividend (166), which I divide by 48, thrice the square of the figure which has been found: the quotient (3) is the second figure of the root. I multiply this first into the divisor, secondly its square into three times the first figure, and thirdly itself into itself twice. The products then being collected in this way, that the second be set down one place to the right of the first, the

{

 ——

108

 ——

27}

 

 [image "img28.jpg" file=Image00027.jpg]  third one place to the right of the second. I subtract it from the dividend increased by the addition of the two remaining figures of the second member. In this way, however prolonged the operation, a dividend will always result from the remainder, with the addition of the first figure of the following member, and a divisor from three times the square of the figures of the root already found, and a subducend from the figure last found, the square of the same multiplied into three times the preceding figures, lastly its cube, and these collected in the manner set forth.

 

If the resolvend be not a cube, by adding decimals to the remainder you can carry its exhaustion to infinity.

The root should have a third part of the decimal places of the resolvend.

N.B. — Synthetical operations can be examined by means of analytical, and analytical by means of synthetical; so if either number, being subtracted from the sums of two numbers, the other remains, the addition has been rightly performed; and vice versâ, subtraction is proved to be right when the sum of the subtrahend and remainder is equal to the greater number. So if the quotient multiplied into the divisor produce the dividend, or the root multiplied into itself produce the resolvend, it is a proof that the division or evolution has been correct.

 PART II. CHAP. I.ON FRACTIONS.

 [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

I T HAS BEEN before mentioned that division is signified by setting down the dividend with the divisor under it, and separated from it by a line drawn between them. Quotients of this kind are called broken numbers, or fractions, because the upper number, called also the numerator, is divided or broken into parts, the denomination of which is fixed by the lower, which is therefore called the denominator. For instance, in the fraction 2/4, 2 is the dividend or numerator, 4 the divisor or denominator, and the fraction indicates the quotient which arises from 2 divided by 4, that is the fourth of any two things whatever, or two-fourths of one, for they mean the same.

N.B. — It is clear that numbers which denote decimal parts, and which are commonly called decimal fractions, can be expressed as vulgar fractions, if the denominator be written beneath. For instance, ‘25 is equivalent to 25/100,.004 is equivalent to 4/1000 &c, which we must either do, or understand to be done, as often as those are to be reduced to vulgar fractions, or conversely these are to be reduced into those, or any other operation is to take place equally affecting both fractions, decimal and vulgar.

 CHAP. II.OF ADDITION AND SUBTRACTION OF FRACTIONS.

 [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

1. IF FRACTIONS , whose sum or difference is sought, have the same denominator, the sum or difference of the numerators should be taken, and the common denominator written under, and this will be the answer.

2. If they be not of the same denomination let them be reduced to the same denomination. The denominators multiplied into each other will give a new denominator, but the numerator of each fraction multiplied into the denominators of the others will give a numerator of a new fraction of equal value. Then the new fractions should be treated as above.

3. If an integer is to be added to a fraction or subtracted from it, or vice versâ, it should be reduced to a fraction of the same denomination as the given one; that is, it is to be multiplied into the given denominator, and that denominator to be placed under it.

 

 [image "img29.jpg" file=Image00028.jpg] 

 

In the first place, it should be explained why fractions should be reduced to the same denomination before we treat them; and it is on this account, that numbers enumerating heterogeneous things cannot be added together, or subtracted from each other. For instance, if I wish to add three pence to two shillings, the sum will not be 5 shillings, or 5 pence, nor can it be ascertained before that the things mentioned be brought to the same sort, by using 24 pence instead of 2 shillings, to which if I add 3 pence, there results a sum of 2 7 pence; for the same reason, if I have to add 2 thirds and 3 fourths, I do not write down 5 parts either thirds or fourths, but, instead of them I employ 8 twelfths and 9 twelfths, the sum of which is 17 twelfths.

Secondly. I wish to show that fractions after such reduction are of the same value as before, for instance, 2/3 and 8/12; since both numerator and denominator are multiplied by the same number (4); but every fraction represents the ratio of the numerator or dividend to the denominator, or divisor, and consequently as long as that remains the same, the fraction retains the same value, but each term of the ratio being multiplied by the same number, it is certain that the ratio is not changed: for instance, if the half of one thing be double the half of another, that whole will be double this whole, which is so plain that it does not require proof.

Thirdly. An integer reduced to a fraction is not altered in value, for if the rectangle of two numbers be divided by one of them, the other will be quotient; but, in the reduction of an integer to a fraction, it is multiplied into the given denominator, and also divided by it, therefore the fraction has the same value as the given integer.

N.B. — It will sometimes be useful to reduce a fraction to a given denominator, for instance, 2/8 to another whose denominator is 9, which is done by means of the rule of three (laid down subsequently), by finding a number to which the given denominator will be as the denominator of the given fraction to its numerator; that will be the numerator of the fraction of which the name has been given, and the value will be the same as of the former, for, in each instance the ratio between the terms of the fraction is the same.

 CHAP. III.OF THE MULTIPLICATION OF FRACTIONS.

 [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

1. IF A fraction is to be multiplied into a fraction, the numerators of the given fractions multiplied into each other will give the numerator of the product, and the denominators in the same way will give the denominators.

2. If a fraction is to be multiplied into an integer, the given integer should be multiplied into the numerator of the fraction, the denominator remaining the same.

3. If in either factor, or in both, integers occur, or heterogeneous fractions, they, for the sake of clearness, should be collected together.

 

 [image "img30.jpg" file=Image00029.jpg] 

 

1. It is plain that the quotient is increased in the same proportion as is the dividend: for instance, if 2 be contained three times in 6 it will be contained twice three times in twice 6. It is plain also that it is diminished in the same proportion as the divisor increases: for instance, if the number 3 be contained 4 times in 12, twice 3 will be contained only twice in 12; therefore when I multiply 2/3 by 5/8, the fraction f is to be increased in a fivefold ratio, since it is to be multiplied by 5; and to be diminished in an eightfold ratio, since it is multiplied, not actually by 5, but only by its eighth part; consequently I multiply the dividend 2 by 5, and the divisor 3 by 8.

2. As to the second rule, it is plain that twice 4 of any things are equal to 8 things of the same denomination, whatever it may be.

 CHAP. IV.ON DIVISION OF FRACTIONS.

 [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

1. A FRACTION is divided by an integer, by multiplying the given integer into the denominator of the given fraction.

2. If a fraction is to be divided by a fraction, the numerator of the divisor multiplied into the denominator of the dividend will give the denominator of the quotient; and its denominator multiplied into the numerator of the dividend will give the numerator of the quotient.

3. Whenever integers or fractions of different denominations are mixed, the easiest way of proceeding will be to collect the members of each, as well dividend as divisor, into two sums.

 [image "img31.jpg" file=Image00030.jpg] 

 

1. As to the first rule, it is clear from the preceding chapter that a fraction is lessened or divided in the same proportion as the denominator is multiplied.

2. Since to divide one fraction by another, for instance, 4/9 by 2/5, I have multiplied the denominator 9 into 2, the fraction 4/18 only expresses how often 2 is contained in the dividend; but the fifth of it will indicate how often the fifth part of the number 2 is contained in it; wherefore I multiply the first quotient A by 5, whence results 20/18.

N.B. — If the given fractions be homogeneous, the shorter and more elegant way is to divide the numerator of the dividend by the numerator of the divisor as often as it measures it. Thus, 6/8 being divided by 3/8, the quotient will be 2, for whatever things are enumerated by 6 contain 3 twice.

2. If a root is to be extracted from a given fraction, the root of the denominator, placed under the root of the numerator, will form a fraction, which is the root sought. For instance, 2/3is the square root of the fraction f, and the cube root of the fraction 8/27; for, from what we have said about multiplication it is clear that f multiplied into f produces 4/9; and that 2/3 multiplied into 4/9 produces 8/27.

 CHAP. V,OF THE REDUCTION OF FRACTIONS TO THEIR LOWEST TERMS.

 [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

1. SINCE THE value of fractions is most easily ascertained when they are at their lowest terms, it is of advantage when feasible to divide fractions by a common measure. The greater that common divisor may be so much less will be the quotients or terms of the fraction equal to the given one. It is necessary, therefore, when two numbers are given, to have a method of finding their greatest common measure, that is to say, the greatest divisor which will divide the given divisor without a remainder. Such is the following:

2. Divide the greater of the given numbers by the less, and that divisor by the remainder of the division; and, if still there be a remainder, you should by it divide the former divisor — that is, the last remainder, and so on until you come to a divisor which exhausts or measures its dividend, that is, the greatest common measure of the two.

For instance, let 9 and 15 be the given numbers. I divide 15 by 9, and 6 remains; I divide 9 by 6, and 3 remains; I divide 6 by 3, and nothing remains. Therefore 3 is the greatest common measure of the two numbers 9 and 15, which I show thus.

(a) 3 measures 6, but (b) 6 measures 9, if 3 be taken away. Therefore 3 measures 9, if 3 be taken away; but 3 measures itself, therefore it measures the whole 9; but (c ) 9 measures 15, 6 being taken away; therefore 3 measures 15, 6 being taken away; but it measures 6, therefore it measures the whole number 15. Hence it is clear, that 3 is the common measure of the given numbers, 9 and 15. It remains for me to show that it is the greatest common measure. If not, let there be some other common measure, say 5. Now since (d ) 5 measures 9, (e) but 9 measures 15, 6 being taken away; it is plain that 5 measures 15, 6 being taken away; but it measures the whole 15 (by hypothesis), therefore it measures 6; but 6 measures 9, 3 being taken from it; therefore 5 measures 9, 3 being taken from it. Therefore since 5 measures both the whole of 9, and 9, 3 being taken from it: it will also measure 3 itself, that is, (f) the lesser number, which is absurd.

The greatest common measure being found, it is plain that the fraction 9/15 can be lowered to this fraction 3/5, which I thus show to be equal to the former. Every fraction denotes the quotient of the numerator divided by the denominator; (a) By construction, (b) By construction, (c) By construction, (d) By hyp. (e) By construction. (f) By hyp. but in division the quotient expresses the ratio of the dividend to the divisor; whilst the ratio therefore remains the same, the quotient or fraction will be the same. Moreover, it is very clear, that the ratio is not changed, its terms being equally divided; for instance, if anything be double of another, or triple, the half of that will be double or triple of the half of the other.

Those who can divide and multiply fractions by integers will find no difficulty in reducing fractions of fractions to integers. For instance, this fraction of a fraction 3/4 of 2/5, what else is it, than three times the fourth part of the fraction or multiplied into the integer 3? In like manner, the numerators and denominators being mutually multiplied into the fraction of a fraction of a fraction, is reduced to an integer. Since these things are so clear and manifest, it is amazing by what circuitous processes, what a tedious apparatus of theorems, quotations, and species they are demonstrated, or rather obscured.

 PART III. CHAP. I.OF THE RULE OF PROPORTION.

 [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

T HE RULE OF Proportion is that by which, three numbers being given, a fourth, proportional to them, is found. Its use is frequent and very great, and hence it is called the golden rule. It is also called the Rule of Three, on account of the three given terms. We directly find the fourth proportional by multiplying the second term by the third, and dividing the product by the first; for instance, if as 2 is to 6, so should 4 be to the number required; multiply 4 into 6, and divide the product 24 by 2, the quotient 12 will be the fourth proportional required, which I demonstrate as follows.

In four proportionals the product of the extremes is equal to the product of the intermediate terms. For, since the numbers are proportional, that is, have the same ratio between themselves, but ratio is estimated by division, if the second term be divided by the first, and the fourth by the third, the quotient will be the same, which, according to the nature of division, multiplied into the first term will produce the second, and into the third will produce the fourth. If therefore we multiply the first term into the fourth, or which is the same thing, into the third and common quotient, and the third term into the second, or which is the same thing, into the first and common quotient, it is clear that the products will be equal, as the factors are in each case the same. But from the nature of multiplication and division, it is clear that the product being divided by one of the factors, the other is the quotient; therefore if I divide the product of the two intermediate terms (6 and 4) by the first (2), the quotient (12) will be the fourth proportional sought.

Question 1. A traveller in 3 hours goes 15 miles: how many will he go in 9 hours? Answer 45. For it is clear from the question, that as 3 is to 15, so is 9 to the number required; that is, 3: 15:: 9: therefore 135, the product of 9 into 15, divided by 3, will give the number required, that is 45.

Question 2. If 2 workmen in 4 days earn 2s., how much will 5 earn in 7 days? that is, as 2 multiplied by 4 are to 2, so are 5 multiplied by 7 to the number sought; or as 8:2:: 35 to the number sought; and thus the hire sought is found to be 8s. 9d.

Question 3. Three merchants forming a partnership, gain £100. The first spent £5, the second £ 8, the third £10. It is sought how much each gained. The sum of the expenditure is £23. Say therefore, as 23 is to 5, so is £100 to the sum sought. The resulting number will indicate how much is due to the first from the common gain, for it is fair that, as the expense of each is to the sum of the expenses, so should be his gain to the sum of the gains. Further, in the same way by saying 23: 8:: 100 &c., and 23: 10:: 100, &c., the gains of the others will appear.

The inverse rule of proportion is easily resolved into simple. For instance, 2 men expend £5 in 6 days: in how many days will 8 men expend £30 ? Say first 2: 5:: 8: &c. and the answer will be 20; say therefore, then as 20: 6:: 30: &c and you will find the number required. It is superfluous to explain, why the sought term immediately is found by means of this rather intricate rule.

Question 4. Four pipes fill a cistern in 12 hours: in how many hours will it be filled by 8 of the same size? We should say, as 8: 4:: 12: &c.; then 4, multiplied into 12, that is, 48 divided by 8, give the answer, that is 6. Nor in this case, when the proportion is inverted, is there any new difficulty; for the terms being properly arranged, we shall have two equal rectangles of one, of which both sides are known, but the other is produced from the known term, multiplied into the unknown; and by dividing that first product by the known side or factor, the unknown term will come out. But it will appear from the question itself, in what order the terms are to be arranged.

 CHAP. II.ON ALLIGATION.

 [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

T HE RULE CALLED Simple Alligation is that by which, two things being given, of different price or weight, &c., there is found some third sort, so compounded of the given, that its price, weight, &c., be equal to a given price, weight, &c., intermediate between the given. For instance, a cubic inch of gold weighs 18 ounces, a cubic inch of silver weighs 12 ounces. It is required to have a cubic inch of metal compounded of both, and weighing 16 ounces: in which problem, the intermediate weight 16, exceeds the weight of silver by 4, and is exceeded by the weight of gold, by 2. Now if we take 2/6 of a cube inch of silver and 4/6 of a cube of gold, it is clear that these, if combined, will make up a cube inch, as they are equal to unity. But it is also plain, that the weight of this mixed metal is equal to the intermediate 16; for we took 2 parts of silver, which is lighter by 4, therefore the defect is 2 in 4; but of gold, which is heavier by 2, we took 4 parts, so the excess is 4 in 2; that is, equal to the defect, so that they counterbalance each other.

Hence results a rule for the alligation of two things. The quantity of the greater, which is to be taken, is indicated by a fraction, the denominator of which is the sum of the differences, and the numerator, the difference between the middle and less; and in the next place, that which has the same denominator, and for numerator the difference between the greater and middle, shows the less quantity which is to be taken.

Question. There are two kinds of silver: the ounce of finer ’is worth 7, that of inferior quality is worth 4; we want to find 3 ounces of silver which are each worth 5. Answer. It is clear, that if I take 2/3 of the inferior, and 1/3 of the finer, there will be one ounce of the mixed compound, and three times this will be the quantity required.

If the things to be alligated are more than two, the rule is called Compound Alligation. For instance, there are five kinds of wine, the strength of massic is 1, of chian 3, of falernian 5, of cæcuban 7, of corcyræan 9: I require a mixture, the strength of which is 4. The strength of a mixture of equal parts of massic and chian, will be 2, being half of the sum of that of the given quantities 1 and 3, as is plain; so the strength of a mixture of equal parts of falemian, cæcuban, and corcyræan will be 7; that is 1/3 of the number 21, or of the sum of the strengths of the components of the mixture. I alligate 2 and 7 with the given intermediate strength 4, and the defect is 2, the excess 3, the sum of the differences 5; consequently there should be taken 3/5 of the first mixture, 2/5 of the latter, then 2/5 being divided by 2, the quotient shows how much of each, chian and massic, should be taken. In the same way 2/5 divided by 3, will indicate: how much of falernian, &c., should be in the required mixture. So 3/10 massic, 3/10 chian, 2/15 falernian, 2/15 cæcuban, 2/15 corcyræan, will give the answer.

Hence we perceive how compound alligation may be reduced to simple. The prices, magnitudes, weights, or whatever else should be alligated, ought to be collected into two sums, which are to be divided each by the number of terms which constitute it; the quotients should be alligated with the intermediate term; the resulting fractions, divided each by the number of things entering into the sum to which they refer, will express the quantity of each to be taken. The demonstration is plain, from what has been said.

N.B. — In alligation of several things, each question admits of innumerable solutions, and this for two reasons; first, the deficient terms can be combined with the exceeding ones in several ways, whence will result various quotients to be alligated with the given intermediate term. Care should be taken, however, lest the quotients be together greater, or together less, than the mean; for if this happen, it is plain that the question is impossible; secondly, it is allowable frequently to repeat the same term, whence its share or portion will be increased, but those of the others diminished.

I am glad here, for the gratification of the studious, to give a solution of that famous problem given to Archimedes by Hiero.

Question: A crown is made of an alloy of gold and silver: it is asked how much gold, how much silver, is in it, and the king does not allow the crown to be broken up. Ans. Two masses should be taken, one of gold, another of silver, each of equal weight with the crown, which being done, it is manifest that the problem could be proposed in another form, as follows: a pound of gold and a pound of silver being given to find a pound of an alloy made up of both, which shall be of the given intermediate mass. Now, as the solid contents of the crown cannot be ascertained geometrically, there is need of contrivance. Each of the masses should be separately immersed in a vessel full of water, and the quantity of water which flows out on each immersion should be measured, it being obvious that it must be equal in bulk to the immersed mass; suppose the gold being immersed, let the bulk of displaced water be 5, of the silver 9, of the crown 6. The question, therefore, comes to this; there being given a pound of gold of the magnitude of 5, and a pound of silver of the magnitude of 9, it is required how much of each we should take to have a pound of an alloy of the magnitude of 6. Then if 9 and 5 be alligated with the intermediate magnitude 6, the quantity of gold will be ascertained, that is, 3/4 of the quantity of gold, and 1/4 of the quantity of silver, combined in the crown.

Hence it appears how little difficulty there is in the problem on the solution of which Archimedes of old exclaimed “Eureka!”

 CHAP. III.OF ARITHMETICAL AND GEOMETRICAL PROGRESSION.

 [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

A RITHMETICAL PROGRESSION IS a name given to a series of numbers increasing or diminishing by a common difference. For instance, in this series 1, 4, 7, 10, 13, 16, 19, 22, 25, 3 is the common excess by which the second term exceeds the first, the third the second, the fourth the third, and so on; and in this other series of decreasing numbers 15, 13, 11, 9, 7, 5, 3, 1,  is the common quantity by which each number falls short of the preceding.

Now, from considering this series and the definition which we have laid down, it is manifest that each term contains the lesser extreme, and the common difference multiplied by the number of places by which it is removed from that lesser extreme. For instance, in the first series the number 13 consists of the lesser extreme 1, and the common difference 3 multiplied into 4, the number of places by which it is removed from the lesser extreme. Hence the lesser extreme and the common difference being given, any term, for example the eleventh from the lesser exclusive, can be easily found, by multiplying the difference 3 into 11, and adding the product 33 to the lesser extreme 1. If the greater extreme, the common difference, and the number of places intervening between the term sought and the greater extreme be given, the term sought may be found by multiplying the difference into the number of places, and taking the product from the greater extreme. It is clear also how the first term is assigned, if any term, its index, and common difference be given; and how the common difference may be obtained if any term, its index, and the lesser extreme be given; and also how the index of any term may be obtained if the term, the difference, and lesser extreme, be given. It is also clear that the half of the sum of two terms is equal to the arithmetical mean proportional. For instance, 7 and 13 make 20, whose half, ro, is a mean between the given terms. Any one can easily deduce these and many other problems and theorems, and their solutions, from the nature of arithmetical progression, especially if he use skilful symbolical computation. I therefore leave them to beginners for points of practice.

GEOMETRICAL progression is the name given to a series of numbers increasing or decreasing by the same continued ratio. For instance, 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 96 are in a geometrical progression, the common ratio of which is twice, as each term is twice the preceding one. In like manner the numbers of this decreasing series 81, 27, 9, 3, 1, proceed in a subtriple ratio, that is, each term is in a subtriple ratio to the preceding, or 1/3; where it should be observed that each term is composed of the power of the common ratio, bearing the same name with it, multiplied into the first term. For instance, 48, the fourth term, exclusively, is produced from 16, the fourth power of the number 2 (that is, that which produced from 2 multiplied three times into itself, since the root itself is called the first power,) multiplied by the first term 3. Wherefore what has been laid down concerning arithmetical progression holds good here, if, instead of addition and subtraction, we use multiplication and division; and instead of multiplication and division, involution and  evolution, or the extraction of roots. (N.B. — A careful reader can investigate bow the roots of any powers may be extracted by means of the method which we followed when treating of the cube, the square, and their roots.) For instance, as in arithmetical progression the sum of the extremes divided into two equal parts gives the arithmetical mean, so in geometrical progression the mean proportional is the root of the product of the extremes. Therefore, as regards theorems and problems, we shall not longer dwell upon deducing them, since they easily result from the mere consideration of the series.

But there is one theorem of geometrical progression from which the knowledge of logarithms was originally derived, and on which they still rest; and which therefore it is fit to explain here. In a geometrical progression, the commencement of which is unity, the rectangle of any two terms is equal to the term of the same progression, which has for index the sum of the index of the factors. For instance,  [image "img32.jpg" file=Image00031.jpg]  if in the following series,

 the second term 2 be multiplied into the fourth 8, the product, 16, is the fifth term, the index of which, 4, is the sum of the indexes of the second and fourth. The reason is manifest; for each power, multiplied into any other power of the same root, produces a third, in which there are as many dimensions as there were in both of the generating powers. But in a geometrical progression, of which the first term is unity, it is clear that all the other subsequent ones are powers produced from the common ratio, and that each have as many dimensions as their places are distant from unity. Therefore, if to an infinite geometrical progression there were annexed also an infinite series of indices, to obtain the rectangle of two terms it would not be necessary to multiply one by the other; but, merely adding the indices to find an index equal to the sum, and this would show the sought rectangle annexed to it. In like manner, if one term is to be divided by another, the difference of the indices, if the square or cube root is to be extracted, 1/2 or 1/3 as an index, would show the required quotient or root.

Hence it is plain that the more difficult operations in arithmetic could be singularly abridged, if tables were formed in which the numbers placed in natural order should have each a corresponding index annexed; for then multiplication can be effected by addition alone; division by subtraction; the extraction of roots by halving or trisecting the indices: but to accommodate those indices or logarithms to numbers, “this is the task, this the labour,” in effecting which numbers of mathematicians have toiled.

The first who formed tables generally proceeded in this way. To the numbers 1, 10, 100, 1000, &c., in decuple progression, they assigned the logarithms 0.0000000, 1.0000000, 2.0000000, — 3.0000000, &c. Then to find the logarithm of any number, for instance, 4, between 1 and 10, seven cyphers being added to each, they sought a mean proportional between 1.0000000 and 10.0000000; and if it were less than 4, the mean proportional was to be sought between it and 10.0000000, — but if greater, between it and 1.0000000; and then they finally sought a mean proportional between this (if it were less than 4) and the next greatest, but if greater, and the next less, and so on until they came to a number differing by a very small part, for instance, 1/100000 from the proposed 4. Then the logarithm of this was had by finding an arithmetic mean between the logarithms of the numbers 1 and 10, and another between it and the logarithm of ten, &c. Now if the logarithm of the number 4 be halved, the logarithm of 2 is found; the same when doubled gives the logarithm of the number 16; and if to the logarithm of 4 be added the logarithm of 2, the sum will be the logarithm of 8.

In the same way, from one logarithm of the number 4, others innumerable can be obtained. In this manner, when logarithms were adapted to other numbers between 10 and unity, they supplied very many others to their sum and difference. But of this enough; for we have not undertaken to give all things which bear on logarithms. It was merely proposed to a certain extent to explain their nature, use, and invention.

 Miscellanea Mathematica (1707) [image "img33.jpg" file=Image00032.jpg] 

Translated by G. N. Wright, 1843

 CONTENTSMATHEMATICAL MISCELLANIES:

TO THAT EXCELLENT YOUTH, D. SAMUEL MOLYNEUX

OF SURD ROOTS.

ON THE ATMOSPHERIC TIDE.

ON THE ALGEBRAIC GAME.

APPENDIX.

 

 MATHEMATICAL MISCELLANIES:SOME THOUGHTS

 CONCERNING

SURD ROOTS, THE ATMOSPHERIC TIDE, AN EQUILATERAL CONE AND CYLINDER CIRCUMSCRIBED ABOUT THE SAME SPHERE, ON THE ALGEBRAIC GAME, AND SOME PERSUASIVES TO

THE STUDY OF MATHEMATICS, ESPECIALLY ALGEBRA.

BY * * * * BACHELOR OF ARTS, TRINITY COLLEGE, DUBLIN.

1707.

 TO THAT EXCELLENT YOUTH, D. SAMUEL MOLYNEUX [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

FELLOW COMMONER IN DUBLIN COLLEGE, SON OF THE EMINENT WILLIAM MOLYNEUX, CUT OFF A FEW YEARS AGO, BY A FATE LAMENTABLE BOTH FOR HIS COUNTRY AND THE INTERESTS OF LITERATURE.

EXCELLENT YOUTH, Such was the esteem in which your father when living was held by the learned, that I consider I would do them a grateful service, if I should show that he has left a son, who inherits his penetration and sagacity. It must indeed be allowed, that your uncle, a man of a remarkably enlarged and well-informed mind, had previously done something of the kind. For that eminent man had perceived your disposition as you approached maturity, that it was probable you would follow in the footprints of your father. The authority of such a man influenced me so far, that I from that thenceforth conceived great hopes of you. But now when becoming acquainted with the nature of your studies, I perceive you devoting yourself to sound philosophy and mathematics, when I perceive that the thorns which seem to beset mathematics, and usually deter others from its study, on the contrary, spur you on to a more speedy progress; when I also see, that high intellectual powers accompany that industry and desire of knowledge, I cannot restrain my joy from manifesting itself to the learned world, and expressing my undoubting anticipation that, if God grant you life and health, you will be one of the chief ornaments of the rising age. Wherefore, presenting to you the following pieces, whatever may be their merit, I wished to seize the opportunity of communicating publicly with, as well that I might gratify my affection towards you, as well as, that expectation being raised respecting you, you might by some tie, and that no ungrateful one, be attached to the study of such excellent objects.

 OF SURD ROOTS. [image "img21.jpg" file=Image00020.jpg] 

I T FORMERLY OCCURRED to me to think that algebraical operations would be rendered more easy, if, discarding the radical signs, some other method could be contrived of computing the roots of imperfect powers which would be less at variance with the forms used in other processes. For, as in arithmetic, fractions are rendered much more manageable by being reduced from vulgar to decimal, for then, the place of each figure serving as a denominator, they are abridged in one part and expressed as integers, and form the same sort of series as they do, and are regulated by the same rules: so if from symbolical computations we removed that radical sign (√), which, as the denominator marks the difference between integers and fractions, points out a difference in treating radicals and surds, unquestionably the mode of treating them would be simplified.

Wherefore should we not, therefore, designate surd roots like rational, merely by letters, and substitute c or d for √b? for if they were expressed in this way there will be no distinction between them and the roots of perfect powers, and addition, subtraction, multiplication, &c., will be managed in the same manner in each case. But there is a ready objection, that quantities multiplied in this way confuse calculations more than radical signs do. To this I answer, a remedy can be applied if we use the letters of the Greek alphabet for expressing roots, by writing B for √b, y for √d, &c.; in which way not so much the letters themselves as the characters will be varied, and each substituted figure will so far correspond to the primitive that there will be no room for scruple. The root of a quantity produced from the multiplication or division of others, will be marked by their roots simply multiplied and divided, for instance, √bc = bk, and √bdm/e = bou/e But if a multinomial quantity, or one consisting of many members, in which there is no unknown quantity connected by the signs + or -, be proposed, their aggregate might be expressed (as is often the case) by some one letter. For instance, let a + b - c = g, the root of which is y. You will perhaps ask, what is to be done where unknown and known quantities are connected; for instance, if the imperfect power be f + x: for if we use p and ξ as the roots of the parts, the root of the whole cannot be determined from them. Why, then, could we not render the given imperfect power equal to some perfect one; as for instance,  [image "img34.jpg" file=Image00033.jpg] 

But it has been omitted how we are to ascertain of what sort is the root; whether quadratic, cube, or biquadratic; and whether, Greek characters being left to quadratics, others should be used for the rest. Or rather, the characters remaining the same, we should by means of one point placed above, denote a square root, by two a cube root, by 3 a biquadratic root, &c.; in the same way as first, second, third, &c., fluxions are expressed. Or, finally, should consider it sufficient that the denominator of the root might appear by retrogression; since in the course of the operation it is of no import of what kind the root may be, since all expressed without a radical sign are subject to the same laws, and treated in the same manner.

These things are, indeed, crude and imperfect; and I am aware of how little value is that which I am proposing. But you, illustrious youth, who have both leisure and abilities, can perhaps extract some good from this refuse. However I am not certain whether the thing which we have been discussing may not be of some use to beginners, for I know others will little regard them; and whether by their aid the thread of analytic investigation may not be disentangled when the radical sign being laid aside, the heterogeneous operations which accompany it may also disappear. However this may be, I am convinced that these being partially set forth, I could more briefly and clearly explain the common theory of surds than I am aware that it has been done by anyone. I now proceed to do it.

 [image "img35.jpg" file=Image00034.jpg] 

 

 [image "img36.jpg" file=Image00035.jpg] 

 

 [image "img37.jpg" file=Image00036.jpg] 

 ON THE ATMOSPHERIC TIDE. [image "img38.jpg" file=Image00037.jpg] 

S OME TIME SINCE I met with a book bearing the title, “On the Influence of the Sun and Moon on the Human Body,” by an eminent doctor of medicine and F.R.S. I am well aware how celebrated he is and how insignificant I am. But that I may freely declare my opinion, I thoroughly receive the opinion concerning the atmospheric tide as he there explains it, and how it is based on the principle of the celebrated Newton. I am not, however, convinced that the ingenious author has rightly ascertained the causes of some phenomena connected with it. How far my doubts may be well founded, you, with whose acuteness I am well acquainted, will best judge.

That eminent man considers that there is a swelling out of the spheroidal figure of the earth about the equinoctial line. He attributes to the same cause the difference between the swelling of the air caused in the oblique sphere by the meridional, and (if I may use the expression) antimeridional moon. But I do not think that the explanation of either of those phenomena should be sought in the oblate spheroid. On this account, because though the opinion that the aëreo-terrestrial mass is of that figure is supported both by mathematical and physical grounds, and also agrees well with some phenomena, still it is not so fully received by all, but that some, and those of note too, hold the opposite opinion. And indeed I remember that Dr. Chardellou, who is profoundly skilled in astronomy, informed me that he had ascertained that the axis of the earth is longer than the diameter of the equator, and consequently, that the earth is a spheroid, but such as Burnet describes it, rising at the poles and lower at the equator. But as for me, I would rather call in question the observations of that eminent man, than reject the arguments for the earth being oblate. Still since that opinion does not equally please all, I should be reluctant to adopt it as a principle for explaining any phenomenon, unless the thing could not otherwise be explained. But in the next place, so far from the explanation of the above-mentioned effects requiring necessarily a spheroidal figure of the earth, that it gains not a particle of light from it, and I will try to show this, by adding what that eminent man writes on the subject: “The air rises above its usual level about the two equinoxes, because when the equinoctial line corresponds with that circle of the terrestrial globe which has the greatest diameter, each of the heavenly bodies, while in it, is nearer to the earth.” On the Influence of the Sun and Moon, p. 9. However, it may be well doubted, whether that nearer position of the luminaries be adequate to raise the air above the usual level. For so slight is the difference  [image "img39.jpg" file=Image00038.jpg]  between the transverse and conjugate axis of the ellipse, by the revolution of which the terrestrial spheroid is generated, that it approaches very near to a sphere. But that we may consider the question more accurately, let a c b d denote a section of the aëreo-terrestrial mass through the poles d c being the axis, a b the diameter of the equator. Now by calculation I have ascertained, that the attractive power of the moon is not 1/4000 Part stronger at a or b than it would be at c or d if it directly were above either pole, and, therefore, that so small a difference would be altogether unequal to producing any sensible effect. It should also be considered, that the moon is never distant from the equator a third part of the arc b d, and that consequently the aforesaid difference must be still very much restricted. But what we have said of the moon must be still further the case as to the sun, since it is many times further distant. It is true indeed that Dr. Mead has adduced, besides other causes of the tide being higher near the equinoxes, to wit, “the greater agitation of a fluid spheroid revolving in a greater circle, besides the centrifugal force having a much greater influence there.” As to the first, although at first it appears of some import, I must confess that I do not altogether perceive how any thing bearing on the distinct explanation of the subject can be concluded from that. As to the second, it is plain that the centrifugal force is far the greatest near the equator, and on that account that the aëreo-terrestrial mass has the figure of an oblate spheroid; but I do not see what consequence results from this. But although we should allow that the air, for the causes mentioned by this eminent man, should about the equinoxes swell out near the equator, it does not, however, appear thence, how with us, who live so far from the equator, it then should be higher than usual, but rather the contrary seems to follow. Mead writes thus in the following page: “To conclude, in the same parallels where the declination of the moon is towards that pole of the heavens which rises highest, the attraction is the strongest, when it comes to the meridian of the place, but least, when it comes to the meridian of the opposite place; the contrary of which happens in the opposite parallels. The cause is in the spheroid figure of the earth and atmosphere.” But I do not think that the cause is in the figure of the earth and ambient atmosphere, because if we assume the earth to be perfectly spherical, or even oblong, the same thing will certainly happen, as will be shown below.

It remains for me to attempt the explanation of these things, especially on this account, because a reason drawn from the spheroidal figure of the earth was regarded by me with suspicion; for without taking it at all into account, the affair could be most clearly and easily explained.

Newton, in his Physico-mathematical work, book iii., prop. 24, where he explains the phenomena of the tides of the sea, has this passage: “The influence of each luminary also depends on its declination, or distance from the equator. For if the luminary were placed at the pole it would constantly attract every particle of water without increase or diminution of its action, and so would cause no reciprocation of motion. Therefore the luminaries, in proceeding towards the pole from the equator, will gradually lose their effects, and on that account will cause less tides in the solstitial than in the equinoctial syzygies.” But no other cause need be sought for any phenomenon of the atmospheric tide, than is sufficient for producing a similar effect in the tide of the sea. But that I may explain more fully that which has been rather briefly, and therefore obscurely by the most eminent man in the world, in the former figure let a db c be the meridian, and a b the axis of the aëreo-terrestrial mass, and let the sun and moon be conceived to be placed at the poles. It is clear that each part of the aerial mass, d for instance, during the diurnal revolution retains an equal distance from the luminary, and so is equally attracted towards their bodies; so that the air is not at one time elevated, at another depressed, but through the whole day remains at the same altitude. But secondly let a cb d represent the equator, or some parallel, and let the luminaries be in the equinoctial plane; at that time it is plain that the equator itself, as well as each parallel, assumes an elliptical figure. It is manifest also that the air which now is at a , the summit of the transverse axis, and is the highest six hours afterwards, will be at c, the extreme of the conjugate axis and lowest, and that the greatest reciprocation of motion results. To finish the whole work at once, let us suppose the swellings of the tidal spheroid to have a threefold position, either in the poles, or in the equator, or in the intermediate parts. In the first case the plane of diurnal rotation would be perpendicular to the axis of the spheroid, and therefore a circle; whence there would be no tide; in the second, it would be parallel to the same, and consequently an ellipse, between the axes of which would be the greatest difference, consequently the tides be greatest; in the third, in proportion as it approached nearer to the perpendicular position, it would be more nearly  [image "img40.jpg" file=Image00039.jpg]  a circle, and consequently the tides would be less.

 

 

It remains that I should demonstrate that the difference which exists in an oblique sphere between any tide and the following one, when the moon is away from the equator, will result indifferently, the earth being assumed either oblate, or exactly spherical, or oblong. Let a b be the axis of the world, g d the equator, k any place, f k the parallel of the place, h l the axis of the tidal spheroid, swelling on both sides principally by the influence of the moon. Let the moon’s place be near /. It is to be demonstrated that c k, the height of the air when the moon is near the meridian, is greater than c f, the height of the air when the moon has passed the meridian of the opposite place. Let p s be drawn, a parallel corresponding to the former on the opposite side, and let c k c f be produced to p and s. By construction the arc p h is equal to the arc k /, therefore the arc fh is greater than the arc k l ; therefore on account of the ellipse the right line f s is less than the right line k p, and f c less than k c. Q. E. D.

OF THE EQUILATERAL CONE AND CYLINDER DESCRIBED ROUND THE SAME SPHERE.

LEMMA.

THE side of an equilateral triangle is to the diameter of the inscribed circle as √

 3 to, and the perpendicular, let fall from any angle to the opposite side, is to the same as 3 to 2.

These things are plain to anyone at all acquainted with algebra and geometry.

 [image "img41.jpg" file=Image00040.jpg] 

 [image "img42.jpg" file=Image00041.jpg] 

 

THEOREM.

Between an equilateral cone and cylinder circumscribed about the same sphere, there is the same sesquialterate ratio as to the whole surfaces, the solids, altitudes, and bases. Two years ago I discovered that theorem to my no small surprise. I did not wonder at my own talents or peculiar sagacity, as the thing is so easy, but merely that Tacquet, a celebrated professor of mathematics, prided himself so much qn a discovery, to which a beginner is competent. His discovery, which is but a part of that stated above, is, “that an equilateral cone is sesquialterate in solid contents and entire surface, of a cylinder circumscribed about the same sphere,” and that consequently, “there is a continued ratio” between an equilateral cone, cylinder, and sphere.

This is that proposition, to which reference is made by the figure, which is with an inscription placed on the title-page of that author’s work on the select theorems of Archimedes. The reader may still further consult what the Jesuit states in his preface, in the scholium to Prop. 32, and at the end of the 44th proposition of the same work, where he puts forward his theorem as a wonderful invention, and rivalling those of Archimedes. And not only Tacquet, but the celebrated Wallis also, brings it out in the additions and emendations to the 81st chapter of his Algebra, as having been demonstrated by Caswell by means of the arithmetic of infinites; which is also done, as to one part, by Dechales, in the 20th proposition of his book about indivisibles. However, the method of indivisibles and the arithmetic of infinites founded on it, are by some scarcely allowed to be geometrical.

But the whole theorem has been demonstrated before by no one that I know. However, if it be true, as Tacquet thinks, that amongst the other various and celebrated discoveries of Archimedes, he was most pleased with that in which he shows that the cylinder is sesquialterate of the inscribed sphere in solid contents and surface, because there is one connected proportion of the bodies and of the surfaces containing them. If this was the reason that he wished the cylinder circumscribed about the sphere to be sculptured on his tomb, what would the old Sicilian have done had he discovered that the one connected proportion held in a fivefold respect as to the two bodies. But we have just noticed how easily that follows from his inventions.

In much the same way as we have done that, it will not be difficult to discover and demonstrate all the theorems which Tacquet annexes to the Archimedean, and a hundred more of the same sort, if necessary.

 ON THE ALGEBRAIC GAME. [image "img38.jpg" file=Image00037.jpg] 

I INVENTED THE algebraic game about the same time that I did that theory. For when I saw some of my acquaintance, perhaps for half a day, intent on chess, wondering at their close pursuit of trifling, I asked what it was on which they were so closely occupied, and was answered, a delightful exercise of the mind. Turning this over in my thoughts, I wondered why so few applied their minds to mathematics, a pursuit at once so pleasing and so useful. Is it on account of difficulty? but many have great abilities, and decline no toil in trifles. Or is it because it is not a pleasing exercise of the mind? But what discipline or occupation whatsoever, I would ask, could better exercise skill, penetration, sagacity, every faculty of the mind? Are mathematics a game? They are no less agreeable; however, if they were to present themselves in that guise, perhaps those nice fellows, who spend their time in games, might devote themselves to this study. To this was added, the advice of that profound thinker, John Locke, on a similar occasion. I then contrived the following game as an exercise in algebra, with no great reach of mind, I allow, but such as will, I hope, easily be excused in a youth, especially one engaged in other studies.

 

 [image "img43.jpg" file=Image00042.jpg] 

 

Algebraical problems consist of given equations, which in determinate questions bring out sought quantities equal to a number. But each equation consists of two members, connected by a sign of equality, in each of which are for consideration, first, the sorts, whether they denote given or sought quantities; then, the signs by which they are connected. It is our object, then, to contrive that all these come out, to produce questions from chance, and a game, as well from the formation of the questions as from their solution. On a small board, such as is commonly used for the game of draughts, or of chess, let there be marked out a circle, inscribed in a square, and everything set down as in the adjoining plan, except that in place of black spots there should be holes. We then shall have the table for the game. There should also be provided a slender peg of wood, which could fit in any of the holes. We now shall proceed to explain the use of these.

It may be observed that the symbols of calculation are set down at the sides and angles of the squares; moreover the sides give signs to the first, the angles to the latter members of equations. The inscribed circle is divided by sixteen points into as many equal parts, so that three points are directed to each side and angle, but some directly, some obliquely. Those which are directed obliquely to any side or angle, are common to the side and angle, but those which directly point to any side belong to no angle, but are referred equally to each adjacent one; and vice versa , those which are directly pointed towards any angle belong to no side, but are to be considered referable equally to each of the adjacent ones.

In forming, then, the question, our attention should be first directed to the point which the peg marks, and the side and angle to which it belongs. These signs should be noted as those which, as we have said, connect the sorts of each member of the equation; then the peg being placed at the letter written at the said point number 1, and that being transferred to the opposite side by means of the direction of right line (as the astrologers do, assigning the reason of names by which feasts are designated) number 2. Then proceeding to the other extremity of the line, as if it were continued through the intermediate ring number 3, and so on, until the letter adjacent to the first point recurs, and so on. Hence descending by the right line to the point terminated in the convexity of the interior circle, fix the peg in either adjacent hole. The number last enumerated will show how many sought quantities, or, which is the same, how many given equations there are in the question. The former members of these are constituted by the unknown quantities taken alternately, and connected with the lateral sign, the latter, by the unknown or known quantities (as may be determined by the letter written at the internal point) connected with the sought by the angular. Moreover, d shows that various sorts of known quantities are to be used, r that only one, f the numeral figures 2, 3, 4, &c., x that the sought quantities are to be repeated. But it is to be observed, in the latter member of each equation no other unknown quantities are set down than those which are found in the first member of the following equation. What has been said will be illustrated by examples.

Let us say now, that the peg occupies the hole marked by a star, and the point to which it refers will belong to the side, the sign of which is +, and to the angle, the sign of which is x; which signs I set down on paper, the lateral on the left, or first, then the angular. Moreover, e is written at the point at which I reckon 1; thence (but it is allowable of two lines to follow the direction of either) proceeding towards the left, I come on a , at which I reckon 2; thence, turning to z, I reckon 3; then proceeding across, I meet with e, the letter placed at the first point, at which, reckoning 4, I proceed directly to the interior point marked by the letter d. There will, therefore, be four sought quantities in the question; which, connected alternately by the lateral sign +, will constitute the first members of the given equation. But the latter will be constituted of various known and unknown quantities (on account of d), connected by x, the angular sign, in this way: —

 

 [image "img44.jpg" file=Image00043.jpg] 

 

Wherefore, if we say that the peg is in the preceding hole, so that it will directly be directed to the lateral +, and we follow the direction of the left line, there will result three quantities to be investigated; and the interior point will have the letter f. Whence the number of the given equations, and the signs of the former members of the same, and the species of the latter are determined. But since in this case the point is circumstanced indifferently with respect to the two adjacent angles, therefore their signs are to be employed alternately; from which conditions results a question of this kind: —

 [image "img45.jpg" file=Image00044.jpg] 

But if we say that the peg is to be fixed in the following hole, the peg point should be directed towards + angular, and will equally have reference to the lateral signs + and — . Then, if you be inclined to take the right path, according to the rules laid down above, the following question will result: —

 [image "img46.jpg" file=Image00045.jpg] 

But it should first be observed, that the rules laid down admit some variety in the combinations of signs and sorts, whence it is that the point and direction being determined, various questions arise.

Secondly, that although we have already said, that a stop should be made at the recurrence of the first letter, that rule, however, can be changed at the will of each; so that we may proceed until a, e, z, x, successively turn up, or some of them twice; or until we reach some other limit. But we hasten to the game. First, then, let some of the players form a question for himself, according to the method just laid down. The other must do the same, then, by the same rules. So the question of each being made out, each should set himself about the solution of that which chance has given him. Then let each set down a fraction, the numerator of which is to be the number of quantities sought in his problem, and the denominator the number of degrees or equations which, whilst the question was solving, he set down on paper. He is to be the winner whose fraction is the largest.

Then, if fugitive quantities elude the eager algebraist, he must be considered to have lost all hope of victory. Nor altogether unreasonably, since it must happen rather by the fault of the selector than by mischance, that the question is undeterminate.

As often as in the sport we come to an equation adfected beyond quadratic, there will be no need of a tedious process, or construction by parabola; it is sufficient if an unknown root, its kind being changed, be regarded as known.

The solution of all the questions being finished, each should examine the work of the other, for which purpose parchment margins are convenient. As to pledges and fines, each may settle that as he pleases, for I leave these to others.

As regards the problems, they are not difficult, for otherwise they would be ill suited for amusement; but they are of that kind the solution of which will redound to the great advantage of the players whilst they strive to reach the proper path, whilst they, in their minds, run over long trains of consequences, and try to comprehend the whole series of analysis in a very brief glance. Permit me now, excellent youth, briefly to address others, for you, whom the difficulty itself attracts, have no need of an exhorter. I address you, college youths, who have energy of mind, sagacity, and penetration, but are averse from sad seclusion in the study and the lives of those generally called Pumps, thinking better to show your talents among your fellow idlers in play and games. You see what a mere game is algebra, and that both chance and science find place in it. Why should you not, then, come to this gaming table? For you need not here dread that which happens in cards, chess, draughts — that whilst some play others stand idly by; for whoever wish to play, can at once play and study; and some, too, make a little money. But I think I hear some one exclaiming in these words, Do you think that we can be deceived? We are not to be lured by presenting the appearance of a game, into learning a very difficult science, which must be mastered with great pains. I answer, that algebra is so far difficult as is required for a game; for if you take away all difficulty, you also take away all recreation and amusement. For all plays are so many arts and sciences. Nor is there any distinction between this and the others, but that they only regard present gratification; but from this, besides most delightful occupation, other abundant fruits are obtained. But, so far is this from having a pernicious tendency, that he is in every respect praiseworthy, according to the expression of the poet, “and has gained every point, who has combined the useful with the agreeable.”

But what are those fruits which you extol? To enumerate them, mathematics in all their extent; the arts and sciences, advancing civil and military affairs, should be reviewed. For through all these is diffused the wonderful power of algebra. It is styled by all, the great, the wonderful art, the highest pinnacle of human knowledge, the kernel and key of all mathematics; and, by some, the foundation of all sciences. And, indeed, how difficult would it be to assign the limits of algebra, when it has latterly extended to natural philosophy and medicine, and daily sets about the most valuable arguments. That I may pass over other things, in the Philosophical Transactions, No. 257, there are algebraic theorems on the certainty of human evidences and traditions; and it may be laid down for certain that wherever greater and less are brought forward, wherever any ratio or proportion can be admitted, there algebra finds a place.

But perhaps some one may say, that he cares neither for mathematics, nor for anything treated mathematically. Be it so; let us so far indulge the desire, the ignorance of persons; for I venture to maintain that this contempt proceeds from ignorance of the most exalted pursuits, and “which distinguish us from barbarians.” (See an Essay in English, on the Gardens of Epicurus, by Sir William Temple, Bart.) But is there anyone who thinks slightingly of a capacious intellect, a sagacious genius, a sound judgment? If there be anyone so devoid of reason, let him then disregard mathematics, the great importance of which, for forming all the best habits of the mind, is allowed by all.

Bacon somewhere, in what he has written concerning the advancement of knowledge, has observed a sort of analogy between the play of hand-ball and mathematics. To wit, as by means of that, besides the pleasure primarily aimed at, we attain other more valuable objects, agility and strength of body, quicksightedness; so mathematical studies, besides their proper aims and uses, have that collateral one, that they abstract the mind from the senses, sharpen and confirm the talents. The ancients formerly, the wiser of the moderns now, allow this.. The efficacy of algebra in rearing the intellectual powers is shown, amongst others, by Descartes, and more at length by Malbranche’s Inquiry into Truth, book vi., part i., chap 5, and part ii., chap. 8; and many other places. And those excellent rules which, in book vi., part ii., chap. 1, he lays down to be observed in the solution of questions, and which are so admirable, that an ingenious author considers that an angel could not give better; these angelic rules, I say, seem taken from algebra. Why need I mention others, when John Locke, who, if anyone did, knew well all the defects of the human intellect and their remedies, recommends, as infinitely useful, the study of mathematics in general, and of algebra especially, to all raised above the populace? See his Posthumous Works, pp. 30, 31, 32, &c., Treatise on the Conduct of the Understanding, a small and imperfect work indeed, but which may well be preferred to the vast and elaborate volumes of others. But an author of great name thinks that mathematical pursuits require too severe meditation, and which is less suitable for a man of rank and devoted to pleasure. I answer, as Locke exhorts, that the judgment of the dissentient, St. Evremont, is set against it to no purpose. For he must be regarded an incompetent judge who, as is most probable from his life and writings, had scarcely entered the threshold. But if the bark seem hard and dry, what wonder is it? But that I may state the affair as it is, the best way is that each, making trial of the matter, follow their own judgment. Nor is there reason for raising up great difficulties because the word algebra has I know not what harsh and fearful sound. For anyone can, in the short space of a month, learn the art as far as may be requisite for the game.

Having now explained our game and views, I request the mathematical reader to receive candidly these scanty first-fruits of my studies, as I will probably produce others better hereafter. For the present other studies engage, which, dry and jejune enough, have taken the place of delightful mathematics. In the meantime do you, excellent youth, accept this rhapsody of trifles as a sort of emblem of regard for yourself. Adieu.

 APPENDIX. [image "img47.jpg" file=Image00046.jpg] 

T HAT ANYONE MAY fully comprehend my purpose, I have thought it advisable to place before the view, in the following pages, all the variations of combinations and sorts in the questions which the above-stated conditions of playing admit of.

But it should be observed, in the first place, that the following formulae, according to the modes of combination and sorts of quantities, but not all according to the number of the given equations, belong to the respective points; for often more than three quantities are to be investigated.

Secondly, that as all formulae of questions may be had, various limits are to be laid down; otherwise only two of the four classes can belong to any one point.

I call the first point that which is directed to the lateral +, the second that next to it on the right, and so on.

 

TO THE READER.

I HAVE sometimes regretted too late to have given forth these efforts of my youth, struggling for some knowledge of mathematics only occasionally, and from my own resources. And I would still regret it, but that hence has arisen an occasion of emulation for a noble pair of geniuses, growing up as the hope of the rising generation. Nor do I boast any other claim on the republic of letters. Let these things be considered a deprecation of envy, of censure, on account of my rashness; if, indeed, I have given occasion of any.

 [image "img48.jpg" file=Image00047.jpg] 

 [image "img49.jpg" file=Image00048.jpg] 

 [image "img50.jpg" file=Image00049.jpg] 

 [image "img51.jpg" file=Image00050.jpg] 

 [image "img52.jpg" file=Image00051.jpg] 

 [image "img53.jpg" file=Image00052.jpg] 

N.B. — There is also another variety in the first member of the equations, where the analytic sign is found; that is, if we transpose the sorts. For instance, if in the fourth point we  [image "img54.jpg" file=Image00053.jpg] 

Lest anyone should perchance suppose that in our game all possible questions are exhibited by our tables, it should be observed that they are, in fact, innumerable. For these stops can be varied without end; whence arise innumerable questions, in each of which, however, no other methods are to be followed in determining signs, combinations, and sorts, than those which are set forth in the questions alone of each odd number except unit of the quantities sought, and these are accordingly exhibited in the tables which we have given.

 Common-Place Book (1709) [image "img55.jpg" file=Image00054.jpg] 

OR, PHILOSOPHICAL COMMENTARIES

OXFORD CLARENDON PRESS 1901 TEXT

 CONTENTSEDITOR’S PREFACE TO THE COMMONPLACE BOOK

COMMONPLACE BOOK

 

 EDITOR’S PREFACE TO THE COMMONPLACE BOOK [image "img56.jpg" file=Image00055.jpg] 

B ERKELEY ’ S JUVENILE C OMMONPLACE Book is a small quarto volume, in his handwriting, found among the Berkeley manuscripts in possession of the late Archdeacon Rose. It was first published in 1871, in my edition of Berkeley’s Works. It consists of occasional thoughts, mathematical, physical, ethical, and metaphysical, set down in miscellaneous fashion, for private use, as they arose in the course of his studies at Trinity College, Dublin. They are full of the fervid enthusiasm that was natural to him, and of sanguine expectations of the issue of the prospective authorship for which they record preparations. On the title-page is written, “G. B. Trin. Dub. alum.,” with the date 1705, when he was twenty years of age. The entries are the gradual accumulation of the next three years, in one of which the Arithmetica and the Miscellanea Mathematica made their appearance. The New Theory of Vision , given to the world in 1709, was evidently much in his mind, as well as the sublime conception of the material world in its necessary subordination to the spiritual world, of which he delivered himself in his book of Principles  , in 1710.

 

This disclosure of Berkeley’s thoughts about things, in the years preceding the publication of his first essays, is indeed a precious record of the initial struggles of ardent philosophical genius. It places the reader in intimate companionship with him when he was beginning to awake into intellectual and spiritual life. We hear him soliloquising. We see him trying to translate into reasonableness our crude inherited beliefs about the material world and the natural order of the universe, self-conscious personality, and the Universal Power or Providence — all under the sway of a new determining Principle which was taking profound possession of his soul. He finds that he has only to look at the concrete things of sense in the light of this great discovery to see the artificially induced perplexities of the old philosophers disappear, along with their imposing abstractions, which turn out empty words. The thinking is throughout fresh and sincere; sometimes impetuous and one-sided; the outcome of a mind indisposed to take things upon trust, resolved to inquire freely, a rebel against the tyranny of language, morally burdened with the consciousness of a new world-transforming conception, which duty to mankind obliged him to reveal, although his message was sure to offend. Men like to regard things as they have been wont. This new conception of the surrounding world — the impotence of Matter, and its subordinate office in the Supreme Economy must, he foresees, disturb those accustomed to treat outward things as the only realities, and who do not care to ask what constitutes reality. Notwithstanding the ridicule and ill-will that his transformed material world was sure to meet with, amongst the many who accept empty words instead of genuine insight, he was resolved to deliver himself of his thoughts through the press, but with the politic conciliation of a persuasive Irish pleader.

The Commonplace Book  steadily recognises the adverse influence of one insidious foe. Its world-transforming-Principle  has been obscured by “the mist and veil of words.” The abstractions of metaphysicians, which poison human language, had to be driven out of the author’s mind before he could see the light, and must be driven out of the minds of others before they could be got to see it along with him: the concrete world as realisable only in percipient mind is with difficulty introduced into the vacant place. “The chief thing I pretend to is only to remove the mist and veil of words.” He exults in the transformed mental scene that then spontaneously rises before him. “My speculations have had the same effect upon me as visiting foreign countries, — in the end I return where I was before, get my heart at ease, and enjoy myself with more satisfaction. The philosophers lose their abstract matter; the materialists lose their abstract extension; the profane lose their extended deity. Pray what do the rest of mankind lose?” This beneficent revolution seemed to be the issue of a simple recognition of the fact, that the true way of regarding the world we see and touch is to regard it as consisting of ideas or phenomena that are presented to human senses, somehow regularly ordered, and the occasions of pleasure or pain to us as we conform to or rebel against their natural order. This is the surrounding universe — at least in its relations to us, and that is all in it that we have to do with. “I know not,” he says, “what is meant by things considered in themselves, i.e. in abstraction. This is nonsense. Thing and idea are words of much about the same extent and meaning. Existence is not conceivable without perception and volition. I only declare the meaning of the word existence , as far as I can comprehend it.”

In the Commonplace Book  we see the youth at Trinity College forging the weapons which he was soon to direct against the materialism and scepticism of the generation into which he was born. Here are rough drafts, crude hints of intended arguments, probing of unphilosophical mathematicians — even Newton and Descartes, memoranda  of facts, more or less relevant, on their way into the Essay on Vision and the treatise on Principles — seeds of the philosophy that was to be gradually unfolded in his life and in his books. We watch the intrepid thinker, notwithstanding the inexperience of youth, more disposed to give battle to mathematicians and metaphysicians than to submit even provisionally to any human authority. It does not seem that his scholarship or philosophical learning was extensive. Descartes, Malebranche, and Locke were his intimates; Hobbes and Spinoza were not unknown to him; Newton and some lesser lights among the mathematicians are often confronted. He is more rarely in company with the ancients or the mediaevalists. No deep study of Aristotle appears, and there is even a disposition to disparage Plato. He seeks for his home in the “new philosophy” of experience; without anticipations of Kant, as the critic of what is presupposed in the scientific reliability of any experience, against whom his almost blind zeal against abstractions would have set him at this early stage. “Pure intellect I understand not at all,” is one of his entries. He asks himself, “What becomes of the aeternae veritates  ?” and his reply is, “They vanish.” When he tells himself that “we must with the mob place certainty in the senses,” the words are apt to suggest that the senses are our only source of knowledge, but I suppose his meaning is that the senses must be trustworthy, as ‘the mob’ assume. Yet occasionally he uses language which looks like an anticipation of David Hume, as when he calls mind “a congeries of perceptions. Take away perceptions,” he adds, “and you take away mind. Put the perceptions and you put the mind. The understanding seemeth not to differ from its perceptions and ideas.” He seems unconscious of the total scepticism which such expressions, when strictly interpreted, are found to involve. But after all, the reader must not apply rigorous rules of interpretation to random entries or provisional  memoranda, meant only for private use, by an enthusiastic student who was preparing to produce books.

 

I have followed the manuscript of the Commonplace Book , omitting a few repetitions of thought in the same words. Here and there Berkeley’s writing is almost obliterated and difficult to decipher, apparently through accident by water in the course of his travels, when, as he mentions long after in one of his letters, several of his manuscripts were lost and others were injured.

The letters of the alphabet which are interpreted on the first page, and prefixed on the margin to some of the entries, may so far help to bring the apparent chaos of entries under a few articulate heads.

 I have added some annotations here and there as they happened to occur, and these might have been multiplied indefinitely had space permitted.

 COMMONPLACE BOOK [image "img56.jpg" file=Image00055.jpg] 

I . = I NTRODUCTION .

M. = Matter.

P. = Primary and Secondary qualities.

E. = Existence.

T. = Time.

S. = Soul — Spirit.

G. = God.

Mo. = Moral Philosophy.

N. = Natural Philosophy.

Qu. If there be not two kinds of visible extension — one perceiv’d by a confus’d view, the other by a distinct successive direction of the optique axis to each point?

I.

No general ideas. The contrary a cause of mistake or confusion in mathematiques, &c. This to be intimated in ye Introduction.

The Principle may be apply’d to the difficulties of conservation, co-operation, &c.

N.

Trifling for the [natural] philosophers to enquire the cause of magnetical attractions, &c. They onely search after co-existing ideas.

 

M. P.

Quæcunque in Scriptura militant adversus Copernicum, militant pro me.

M. P.

All things in the Scripture wch  side with the vulgar against the learned, side with me also. I side in all things with the mob.

 

M.

I know there is a mighty sect of men will oppose me, but yet I may expect to be supported by those whose minds are not so far overgrown wth madness. These are far the greatest part of mankind — especially Moralists, Divines, Politicians; in a word, all but Mathematicians and Natural Philosophers. I mean only the hypothetical gentlemen. Experimental philosophers have nothing whereat to be offended in me.

Newton begs his Principles; I demonstrate mine.

E.

I must be very particular in explaining wt is meant by things existing — in houses, chambers, fields, caves, &c. — wn not perceiv’d as well as wn perceived; and shew how the vulgar notion agrees with mine, when we narrowly inspect into the meaning and definition of the word existence , wh is no simple idea, distinct from perceiving and being perceived.

The Schoolmen have noble subjects, but handle them ill. The mathematicians have trifling subjects, but reason admirably about them. Certainly their method and arguing are excellent.

God knows how far our knowledge of intellectual beings may be enlarg’d from the Principles.

M.

The reverse of the Principle I take to have been the chief source of all that scepticism and folly, all those contradictions and inextricable puzzling absurdities, that have in all ages been a reproach to human reason, as well as of that idolatry, whether of images or of gold, that blinds the greatest part of the world, and that shamefull immorality that turns us into beasts.

E.

היה Vixit & fuit.

οὐσία, the name for substance, used by Aristotle, the Fathers, &c.

 

If at the same time we shall make the Mathematiques much more easie and much more accurate, wt  can be objected to us?

 

We need not force our imagination to conceive such very small lines for infinitesimals. They may every whit as well be imagin’d big as little, since that the integer must be infinite.

Evident that wch has an infinite number of parts must be infinite.

We cannot imagine a line or space infinitely great — therefore absurd to talk or make propositions about it.

We cannot imagine a line, space, &c., quovis lato majus. Since yt what we imagine must be datum aliquod; a thing can’t be greater than itself.

If you call infinite that wch is greater than any assignable by another, then I say, in that sense there may be an infinite square, sphere, or any other figure, wch is absurd.

Qu. if extension be resoluble into points it does not consist of?

No reasoning about things whereof we have no ideas; therefore no reasoning about infinitesimals.

No word to be used without an idea.

 

S.

If uneasiness be necessary to set the Will at work, Qu. how shall we will in heaven?

Bayle’s, Malbranch’s, &c. arguments do not seem to prove against Space, but onely against Bodies.

M. P.

I agree in nothing wth the Cartesians as to ye existence of Bodies & Qualities.

Aristotle as good a man as Euclid, but he was allowed to have been mistaken.

Lines not proper for demonstration.

M.

 We see the house itself, the church itself; it being an idea and nothing more. The house itself, the church itself, is an idea, i.e. an object — immediate object — of thought.

 

Instead of injuring, our doctrine much benefits geometry.

E.

Existence is percipi, or percipere, [or velle, i.e. agere]. The horse is in the stable, the books are in the study as before.

N.

In physiques I have a vast view of things soluble hereby, but have not leisure.

N.

Hyps and such like unaccountable things confirm my doctrine.

Angle not well defined. See Pardies’ Geometry, by Harris, &c. This one ground of trifling.

N.

One idea not the cause of another — one power not the cause of another. The cause of all natural things is onely God. Hence trifling to enquire after second causes. This doctrine gives a most suitable idea of the Divinity.

N.

Absurd to study astronomy and other the like doctrines as speculative sciences.

N.

The absurd account of memory by the brain, &c. makes for me.

How was light created before man? Even so were Bodies created before man.

E.

Impossible anything besides that wch thinks and is thought on should exist.

 

That wch is visible cannot be made up of invisible things.

M.S. is that wherein there are not contain’d distinguishable sensible parts. Now how can that wch hath not sensible parts be divided into sensible parts? If you say it may be divided into insensible parts, I say these are nothings.

 Extension abstract from sensible qualities is no sensation, I grant; but then there is no such idea, as any one may try. There is onely a considering the number of points without the sort of them, & this makes more for me, since it must be in a considering thing.

 

Mem. Before I have shewn the distinction between visible & tangible extension, I must not mention them as distinct. I must not mention M. T. & M. V., but in general M. S., &c.

Qu. whether a M. V. be of any colour? a M. T. of any tangible quality?

If visible extension be the object of geometry, ’tis that which is survey’d by the optique axis.

P.

I may say the pain is in my finger, &c., according to my doctrine.

 

Mem. Nicely to discuss wt is meant when we say a line consists of a certain number of inches or points, &c.; a circle of a certain number of square inches, points, &c. Certainly we may think of a circle, or have its idea in our mind, without thinking of points or square inches, &c.; whereas it should seem the idea of a circle is not made up of the ideas of points, square inches, &c.

Qu. Is any more than this meant by the foregoing expressions, viz. that squares or points may be perceived in or made out of a circle, &c., or that squares, points, &c. are actually in it, i.e. are perceivable in it?

A line in abstract, or Distance, is the number of points between two points. There is also distance between a slave & an emperor, between a peasant & philosopher, between a drachm & a pound, a farthing & a crown, &c.; in all which Distance signifies the number of intermediate ideas.

Halley’s doctrine about the proportion between infinitely great quantities vanishes. When men speak of infinite quantities, either they mean finite quantities, or else talk of [that whereof they have] no idea; both which are absurd.

 If the disputations of the Schoolmen are blam’d for intricacy, triflingness, & confusion, yet it must be acknowledg’d  that in the main they treated of great & important subjects. If we admire the method & acuteness of the Math[ematicians] — the length, the subtilty, the exactness of their demonstrations — we must nevertheless be forced to grant that they are for the most part about trifling subjects, and perhaps mean nothing at all.

Motion on 2d thoughts seems to be a simple idea.

P.

Motion distinct from ye thing moved is not conceivable.

N.

Mem. To take notice of Newton for defining it [motion]; also of Locke’s wisdom in leaving it undefin’d.

Ut ordo partium temporis est immutabilis, sin etiam ordo partium spatii. Moveantur hæ de locis suis, et movebuntur (ut ita dicam) de seipsis. Truly number is immensurable. That we will allow with Newton.

P.

Ask a Cartesian whether he is wont to imagine his globules without colour. Pellucidness is a colour. The colour of ordinary light of the sun is white. Newton in the right in assigning colours to the rays of light.

A man born blind would not imagine Space as we do. We give it always some dilute, or duskish, or dark colour — in short, we imagine it as visible, or intromitted by the eye, wch he would not do.

N.

Proinde vim inferunt sacris literis qui voces hasce (v. tempus, spatium, motus) de quantitatibus mensuratis ibi interpretantur. Newton, .

N.

I differ from Newton, in that I think the recession ab axe motus is not the effect, or index, or measure of motion, but of the vis impressa. It sheweth not wt is truly moved, but wt has the force impressed on it, or rather that wch hath an impressed force.

D and P are not proportional in all circles. d d is to 1/4d p as d to p /4; but d and p /4 are not in the same proportion in all circles. Hence ’tis nonsense to seek the terms of one general proportion whereby to rectify all peripheries, or of another whereby to square all circles.

 N. B. If the circle be squar’d arithmetically, ’tis squar’d geometrically, arithmetic or numbers being nothing but lines & proportions of lines when apply’d to geometry.

 

Mem. To remark Cheyne & his doctrine of infinites.

Extension, motion, time, do each of them include the idea of succession, & so far forth they seem to be of mathematical consideration. Number consisting in succession & distinct perception, wch also consists in succession; for things at once perceiv’d are jumbled and mixt together in the mind. Time and motion cannot be conceiv’d without succession; and extension, qua mathemat., cannot be conceiv’d but as consisting of parts wch may be distinctly & successively perceiv’d. Extension perceived at once & in confuso does not belong to math.

 

The simple idea call’d Power seems obscure, or rather none at all, but onely the relation ‘twixt Cause and Effect. When I ask whether A can move B, if A be an intelligent thing, I mean no more than whether the volition of A that B move be attended with the motion of B? If A be senseless, whether the impulse of A against B be followed by ye motion of B?

 

Barrow’s arguing against indivisibles, lect. i. , is a petitio principii, for the Demonstration of Archimedes supposeth the circumference to consist of more than 24 points. Moreover it may perhaps be necessary to suppose the divisibility ad infinitum , in order to demonstrate that the radius is equal to the side of the hexagon.

Shew me an argument against indivisibles that does not go on some false supposition.

 A great number of insensibles — or thus, two invisibles, say you, put together become visible; therefore that M. V. contains or is made up of invisibles. I answer, the M. V. does not comprise, is not composed of, invisibles. All the matter amounts to this, viz. whereas I had no idea awhile agoe, I have an idea now. It remains for you to prove that I came by the present idea because there were two invisibles added together. I say the invisibles are nothings, cannot exist, include a contradiction.

 

I am young, I am an upstart, I am a pretender, I am vain. Very well. I shall endeavour patiently to bear up under the most lessening, vilifying appellations the pride & rage of man can devise. But one thing I know I am not guilty of. I do not pin my faith on the sleeve of any great man. I act not out of prejudice or prepossession. I do not adhere to any opinion because it is an old one, a reviv’d one, a fashionable one, or one that I have spent much time in the study and cultivation of.

 

Sense rather than reason or demonstration ought to be employed about lines and figures, these being things sensible; for as for those you call insensible, we have proved them to be nonsense, nothing.

I.

If in some things I differ from a philosopher I profess to admire, ’tis for that very thing on account whereof I admire him, namely, the love of truth. This &c.

I.

Whenever my reader finds me talk very positively, I desire he’d not take it ill. I see no reason why certainty should be confined to the mathematicians.

I say there are no incommensurables, no surds. I say the side of any square may be assign’d in numbers. Say you assign unto me the side of the square 10. I ask wt 10 — 10 feet, inches, &c., or 10 points? If the later, I deny there is any such square, ’tis impossible 10 points should compose a square. If the former, resolve yr 10 square inches, feet, &c. into points, & the number of points must necessarily be a square number whose side is easily assignable.

A mean proportional cannot be found betwixt any two given lines. It can onely be found betwixt those the numbers of whose points multiply’d together produce a square number. Thus betwixt a line of 2 inches & a line of 5 inches a mean geometrical cannot be found, except the number of points contained in 2 inches multiply’d by ye number of points contained in 5 inches make a square number.

 If the wit and industry of the Nihilarians were employ’d  about the usefull & practical mathematiques, what advantage had it brought to mankind!

 

M. E.

You ask me whether the books are in the study now, when no one is there to see them? I answer, Yes. You ask me, Are we not in the wrong for imagining things to exist when they are not actually perceiv’d by the senses? I answer, No. The existence of our ideas consists in being perceiv’d, imagin’d, thought on. Whenever they are imagin’d or thought on they do exist. Whenever they are mentioned or discours’d of they are imagin’d & thought on. Therefore you can at no time ask me whether they exist or no, but by reason of yt very question they must necessarily exist.

E.

But, say you, then a chimæra does exist? I answer, it doth in one sense, i.e. it is imagin’d. But it must be well noted that existence is vulgarly restrain’d to actuall perception, and that I use the word existence in a larger sense than ordinary.

N. B. — According to my doctrine all things are entia rationis , i.e. solum habent esse in intellectum.

E.

[According to my doctrine all are not entia rationis . The distinction between ens rationis and ens reale is kept up by it as well as any other doctrine.]

You ask me whether there can be an infinite idea? I answer, in one sense there may. Thus the visual sphere, tho’ ever so small, is infinite, i.e. has no end. But if by infinite you mean an extension consisting of innumerable points, then I ask yr pardon. Points, tho’ never so many, may be numbered. The multitude of points, or feet, inches, &c., hinders not their numbrableness (i.e. hinders not their being numerable) in the least. Many or most are numerable, as well as few or least. Also, if by infinite idea you mean an idea  too great to be comprehended or perceiv’d all at once, you must excuse me. I think such an infinite is no less than a contradiction.

 

M.

The sillyness of the current doctrine makes much for me. They commonly suppose a material world — figures, motions, bulks of various sizes, &c. — according to their own confession to no purpose. All our sensations may be, and sometimes actually are, without them; nor can men so much as conceive it possible they should concur in any wise to the production of them.

M.

Ask a man, I mean a philosopher, why he supposes this vast structure, this compages of bodies? he shall be at a stand; he’ll not have one word to say. Wch sufficiently shews the folly of the hypothesis.

M.

Or rather why he supposes all ys Matter? For bodies and their qualities I do allow to exist independently of our mind.

S.

Qu. How is the soul distinguish’d from its ideas? Certainly if there were no sensible ideas there could be no soul, no perception, remembrance, love, fear, &c.; no faculty could be exerted.

S.

The soul is the Will, properly speaking, and as it is distinct from ideas.

S.

The grand puzzling question, whether I sleep or wake, easily solv’d.

 

Qu. Whether minima or meer minima may not be compar’d by their sooner or later evanescence, as well as by more or less points, so that one sensible may be greater than another, though it exceeds it not by one point?

Circles on several radius’s are not similar figures, they having neither all nor any an infinite number of sides. Hence in vain to enquire after 2 terms of one and ye same proportion that should constantly express the reason of the d to the p in all circles.

 Mem. To remark Wallis’s harangue, that the aforesaid proportion can neither be expressed by rational numbers nor surds.

 

We can no more have an idea of length without breadth or visibility, than of a general figure.

 

One idea may be like another idea, tho’ they contain no common simple idea. Thus the simple idea red is in some sense like the simple idea blue; ’tis liker it than sweet or shrill. But then those ideas wch are so said to be alike, agree both in their connexion with another simple idea, viz. extension, & in their being receiv’d by one & the same sense. But, after all, nothing can be like an idea but an idea.

 

No sharing betwixt God & Nature or second causes in my doctrine.

M.

Materialists must allow the earth to be actually mov’d by the attractive power of every stone that falls from the air, with many other the like absurditys.

 

Enquire concerning the pendulum clock, &c.; whether those inventions of Huygens, &c. be attained to by my doctrine.

The ... & ... & ... &c. of time are to be cast away and neglected, as so many noughts or nothings.

Mem. To make experiments concerning minimums and their colours, whether they have any or no, & whether they can be of that green wch seems to be compounded of yellow and blue.

 

S.

Qu. Whether it were not better not to call the operations of the mind ideas — confining this term to things sensible?

E.

Mem. diligently to set forth how that many of the ancient philosophers run into so great absurditys as even to deny the existence of motion, and of those other things they perceiv’d actually by their senses. This sprung from their not knowing wt  Existence was, and wherein it consisted. This the source of all their folly. ’Tis on the discovering of the nature and meaning and import of Existence that I chiefly insist. This puts a wide difference betwixt the  sceptics &c. & me. This I think wholly new. I am sure this is new to me.

We have learn’d from Mr. Locke that there may be, and that there are, several glib, coherent, methodical discourses, which nevertheless amount to just nothing. This by him intended with relation to the Scholemen. We may apply it to the Mathematicians.

Qu. How can all words be said to stand for ideas? The word blue stands for a colour without any extension, or abstract from extension. But we have not an idea of colour without extension. We cannot imagine colour without extension.

Locke seems wrongly to assign a double use of words: one for communicating & the other for recording our thoughts. ’Tis absurd to use words for recording our thoughts to ourselves, or in our private meditations.

No one abstract simple idea like another. Two simple ideas may be connected with one & the same 3d simple idea, or be intromitted by one & the same sense. But consider’d in themselves they can have nothing common, and consequently no likeness.

Qu. How can there be any abstract ideas of colours? It seems not so easily as of tastes or sounds. But then all ideas whatsoever are particular. I can by no means conceive an abstract general idea. ’Tis one thing to abstract one concrete idea from another of a different kind, & another thing to abstract an idea from all particulars of the same kind.

N.

Mem. Much to recommend and approve of experimental philosophy.

S.

What means Cause as distinguish’d from Occasion? Nothing but a being wch  wills, when the effect follows the volition. Those things that happen from without we are not the cause of. Therefore there is some other Cause of them, i.e. there is a Being that wills these perceptions in us.

 

S.

[It should be said, nothing but a Will — a Being which wills being unintelligible.]

 

One square cannot be double of another. Hence the Pythagoric theorem is false.

Some writers of catoptrics absurd enough to place the apparent place of the object in the Barrovian case behind the eye.

Blew and yellow chequers still diminishing terminate in green. This may help to prove the composition of green.

There is in green 2 foundations of 2 relations of likeness to blew & yellow. Therefore green is compounded.

A mixt cause will produce a mixt effect. Therefore colours are all compounded that we see.

Mem. To consider Newton’s two sorts of green.

N. B. My abstract & general doctrines ought not to be condemn’d by the Royall Society. ’Tis wt their meeting did ultimately intend. V. Sprat’s History S. R.

Mem. To premise a definition of idea.

 

I. Mo.

The 2 great principles of Morality — the being of a God & the freedom of man. Those to be handled in the beginning of the Second Book.

Subvertitur geometria ut non practica sed speculativa.

Archimedes’s proposition about squaring the circle has nothing to do with circumferences containing less than 96 points; & if the circumference contain 96 points it may be apply’d, but nothing will follow against indivisibles. V. Barrow.

Those curve lines that you can rectify geometrically. Compare them with their equal right lines & by a microscope you shall discover an inequality. Hence my squaring of the circle as good and exact as the best.

 

M.

 Qu. whether the substance of body or anything else be  any more than the collection of concrete ideas included in that thing? Thus the substance of any particular body is extension, solidity, figure. Of general abstract body we can have no idea.

I.

Mem. Most carefully to inculcate and set forth that the endeavouring to express abstract philosophic thoughts by words unavoidably runs a man into difficulties. This to be done in the Introduction.

 

Mem. To endeavour most accurately to understand what is meant by this axiom: Quæ sibi mutuo congruunt æqualia sunt.

Qu. what the geometers mean by equality of lines, & whether, according to their definition of equality, a curve line can possibly be equal to a right line?

If wth me you call those lines equal wch contain an equal number of points, then there will be no difficulty. That curve is equal to a right line wch contains the same points as the right one doth.

 

M.

I take not away substances. I ought not to be accused of discarding substance out of the reasonable world. I onely reject the philosophic sense (wch in effect is no sense) of the word substance. Ask a man not tainted with their jargon wt he means by corporeal substance, or the substance of body. He shall answer, bulk, solidity, and such like sensible qualitys. These I retain. The philosophic nec quid, nec quantum, nec quale, whereof I have no idea, I discard; if a man may be said to discard that which never had any being, was never so much as imagin’d or conceiv’d.

M.

In short, be not angry. You lose nothing, whether real or chimerical. Wt  ever you can in any wise conceive or imagine, be it never so wild, so extravagant, & absurd, much good may it do you. You may enjoy it for me. I’ll never deprive you of it.

 

N. B. I am more for reality than any other philosophers. They make a thousand doubts, & know not certainly but we may be deceiv’d. I assert the direct contrary.

 

A line in the sense of mathematicians is not meer distance. This evident in that there are curve lines.

Curves perfectly incomprehensible, inexplicable, absurd, except we allow points.

 

I.

If men look for a thing where it’s not to be found, be they never so sagacious, it is lost labour. If a simple clumsy man knows where the game lies, he though a fool shall catch it sooner than the most fleet & dexterous that seek it elsewhere. Men choose to hunt for truth and knowledge anywhere rather than in their own understanding, where ’tis to be found.

M.

All knowledge onely about ideas. Locke, B. 4. c. 1.

S.

It seems improper, & liable to difficulties, to make the word person stand for an idea, or to make ourselves ideas, or thinking things ideas.

I.

Abstract ideas cause of much trifling and mistake.

Mathematicians seem not to speak clearly and coherently of equality. They nowhere define wt they mean by that word when apply’d to lines.

Locke says the modes of simple ideas, besides extension and number, are counted by degrees. I deny there are any modes or degrees of simple ideas. What he terms such are complex ideas, as I have proved.

 

Wt do the mathematicians mean by considering curves as polygons? Either they are polygons or they are not. If they are, why do they give them the name of curves? Why do not they constantly call them polygons, & treat them as such? If they are not polygons, I think it absurd to use polygons in their stead. Wt is this but to pervert language? to adapt an idea to a name that belongs not to it but to a different idea?

 The mathematicians should look to their axiom, Quæ  congruunt sunt æqualia. I know not what they mean by bidding me put one triangle on another. The under triangle is no triangle — nothing at all, it not being perceiv’d. I ask, must sight be judge of this congruentia or not? If it must, then all lines seen under the same angle are equal, wch they will not acknowledge. Must the touch be judge? But we cannot touch or feel lines and surfaces, such as triangles, &c., according to the mathematicians themselves. Much less can we touch a line or triangle that’s cover’d by another line or triangle.

Do you mean by saying one triangle is equall to another, that they both take up equal spaces? But then the question recurs, what mean you by equal spaces? If you mean spatia congruentia , answer the above difficulty truly.

I can mean (for my part) nothing else by equal triangles than triangles containing equal numbers of points.

I can mean nothing by equal lines but lines wch ’tis indifferent whether of them I take, lines in wch I observe by my senses no difference, & wch therefore have the same name.

Must the imagination be judge in the aforementioned cases? but then imagination cannot go beyond the touch and sight. Say you, pure intellect must be judge. I reply that lines and triangles are not operations of the mind.

 

If I speak positively and with the air of a mathematician in things of which I am certain, ’tis to avoid disputes, to make men careful to think before they answer, to discuss my arguments before they go to refute them. I would by no means injure truth and certainty by an affected modesty & submission to better judgments. Wt I lay before you are undoubted theorems; not plausible conjectures of my own, nor learned opinions of other men. I pretend not to prove them by figures, analogy, or authority. Let them stand or fall by their own evidence.

 

N.

 When you speak of the corpuscularian essences of bodys, to reflect on sect. 11. & 12. b. 4. c. 3. Locke. Motion supposes not solidity. A meer colour’d extension may give us the idea of motion.

 

P.

Any subject can have of each sort of primary qualities but one particular at once. Lib. 4. c. 3. s. 15. Locke.

M.

Well, say you, according to this new doctrine, all is but meer idea — there is nothing wch is not an ens rationis . I answer, things are as real, and exist in rerum natura , as much as ever. The difference between entia realia & entia rationis may be made as properly now as ever. Do but think before you speak. Endeavour rightly to comprehend my meaning, and you’ll agree with me in this.

N.

Fruitless the distinction ‘twixt real and nominal essences.

We are not acquainted with the meaning of our words. Real, extension, existence, power, matter, lines, infinite, point, and many more are frequently in our mouths, when little, clear, and determin’d answers them in our understandings. This must be well inculcated.

M.

Vain is the distinction ‘twixt intellectual and material world. V. Locke, lib. 4. c. 3. s. 27, where he says that is far more beautiful than this.

S.

Foolish in men to despise the senses. If it were not for

Mo.

them the mind could have no knowledge, no thought at all. All ... of introversion, meditation, contemplation, and spiritual acts, as if these could be exerted before we had ideas from without by the senses, are manifestly absurd. This may be of great use in that it makes the happyness of the life to come more conceivable and agreeable to our present nature. The schoolemen & refiners in philosophy gave the greatest part of mankind no more tempting idea of heaven or the joys of the blest.

 The vast, wide-spread, universal cause of our mistakes is, that we do not consider our own notions. I mean consider them in themselves — fix, settle, and determine them, — we regarding them with relation to each other only. In short, we are much out in study[ing] the relations of things before we study them absolutely and in themselves. Thus we study to find out the relations of figures to one another, the relations also of number, without endeavouring rightly to understand the nature of extension and number in themselves. This we think  is of no concern, of no difficulty; but if I mistake not ’tis of the last importance,

Mo.

I allow not of the distinction there is made ‘twixt profit and pleasure.

Mo.

I’d never blame a man for acting upon interest. He’s a fool that acts on any other principles. The not considering these things has been of ill consequence in morality.

My positive assertions are no less modest than those that are introduced with “It seems to me,” “I suppose,” &c.; since I declare, once for all, that all I write or think is entirely about things as they appear to me. It concerns no man else any further than his thoughts agree with mine. This in the Preface.

I.

Two things are apt to confound men in their reasonings one with another. 1st. Words signifying the operations of the mind are taken from sensible ideas. 2ndly. Words as used by the vulgar are taken in some latitude, their signification is confused. Hence if a man use words in a determined, settled signification, he is at a hazard either of not being understood, or of speaking improperly. All this remedyed by studying the understanding.

Unity no simple idea. I have no idea meerly answering the word one. All number consists in relations.

Entia realia et entia rationis, a foolish distinction of the Schoolemen.

M. P.

We have an intuitive knowledge of the existence of other things besides ourselves & order, præcedaneous. To the knowledge of our own existence — in that we must have ideas or else we cannot think.

S.

We move our legs ourselves. ’Tis we that will their movement. Herein I differ from Malbranch.

Mo.

Mem. Nicely to discuss Lib. 4. c. 4. Locke.

M.

Mem. Again and again to mention & illustrate the doctrine of the reality of things, rerum natura, &c.

M.

Wt  I say is demonstration — perfect demonstration. Wherever men have fix’d & determin’d ideas annexed to  their words they can hardly be mistaken. Stick but to my definition of likeness, and ’tis a demonstration yt colours are not simple ideas, all reds being like, &c. So also in other things. This to be heartily insisted on.

E.

The abstract idea of Being or Existence is never thought of by the vulgar. They never use those words standing for abstract ideas.

M.

I must not say the words thing, substance, &c. have been the cause of mistakes, but the not reflecting on their meaning. I will be still for retaining the words. I only desire that men would think before they speak, and settle the meaning of their words.

Mo.

I approve not of that which Locke says, viz. truth consists in the joining and separating of signs.

I.

Locke cannot explain general truth or knowledge without treating of words and propositions. This makes for me against abstract general ideas. Vide Locke, lib. 4. ch. 6.

 

I.

Men have been very industrious in travelling forward. They have gone a great way. But none have gone backward beyond the Principles. On that side there lies much terra incognita to be travel’d over and discovered by me. A vast field for invention.

 

Twelve inches not the same idea with a foot. Because a man may perfectly conceive a foot who never thought of an inch.

A foot is equal to or the same with twelve inches in this respect, viz. they contain both the same number of points.

[Forasmuch as] to be used.

Mem. To mention somewhat wch may encourage the study of politiques, and testify of me yt I am well dispos’d toward them.

I.

If men did not use words for ideas they would never have thought of abstract ideas. Certainly genera and species are not abstract general ideas. Abstract ideas include a contradiction in their nature. Vide Locke, lib. 4. c. 7. s. 9.

 A various or mixt cause must necessarily produce a various or mixt effect. This demonstrable from the  definition of a cause; which way of demonstrating must be frequently made use of in my Treatise, & to that end definitions often præmis’d. Hence ’tis evident that, according to Newton’s doctrine, colours cannot be simple ideas.

 

M.

I am the farthest from scepticism of any man. I know with an intuitive knowledge the existence of other things as well as my own soul. This is wt Locke nor scarce any other thinking philosopher will pretend to.

 

I.

Doctrine of abstraction of very evil consequence in all the sciences. Mem. Barrow’s remark. Entirely owing to language.

Locke greatly out in reckoning the recording our ideas by words amongst the uses and not the abuses of language.

I.

Of great use & ye last importance to contemplate a man put into the world alone, with admirable abilitys, and see how after long experience he would know wth out words. Such a one would never think of genera and species or abstract general ideas.

I.

Wonderful in Locke that he could, wn advanced in years, see at all thro’ a mist; it had been so long a gathering, & was consequently thick. This more to be admir’d than yt he did not see farther.

Identity of ideas may be taken in a double sense, either as including or excluding identity of circumstances, such as time, place, &c.

Mo.

I am glad the people I converse with are not all richer, wiser, &c. than I. This is agreeable to reason; is no sin. ’Tis certain that if the happyness of my acquaintance encreases, & mine not proportionably, mine must decrease. The not understanding this & the doctrine about relative good, discuss’d with French, Madden, &c., to be noticed as 2 causes of mistake in judging of moral matters.

Mem. To observe (wn  you talk of the division of ideas into simple and complex) that there may be another cause  of the undefinableness of certain ideas besides that which Locke gives; viz. the want of names.

M.

Mem. To begin the First Book not with mention of sensation and reflection, but instead of sensation to use perception or thought in general.

I.

I defy any man to imagine or conceive perception without an idea, or an idea without perception.

E.

Locke’s very supposition that matter & motion should exist before thought is absurd — includes a manifest contradiction.

Locke’s harangue about coherent, methodical discourses amounting to nothing, apply’d to the mathematicians.

They talk of determining all the points of a curve by an equation. Wt mean they by this? Wt would they signify by the word points? Do they stick to the definition of Euclid?

S.

We think we know not the Soul, because we have no imaginable or sensible idea annex’d to that sound. This the effect of prejudice.

S.

Certainly we do not know it. This will be plain if we examine what we mean by the word knowledge. Neither doth this argue any defect in our knowledge, no more than our not knowing a contradiction.

The very existence of ideas constitutes the Soul.

S.

Consciousness, perception, existence of ideas, seem to be all one.

Consult, ransack yr understanding. Wt find you there besides several perceptions or thoughts? Wt mean you by the word mind? You must mean something that you perceive, or yt you do not perceive. A thing not perceived is a contradiction. To mean (also) a thing you do not perceive is a contradiction. We are in all this matter strangely abused by words.

 Mind is a congeries of perceptions. Take away perceptions  and you take away the mind. Put the perceptions and you put the mind.

Say you, the mind is not the perception, not that thing which perceives. I answer, you are abused by the words “that a thing.” These are vague and empty words with us.

S.

The having ideas is not the same thing with perception. A man may have ideas when he only imagines. But then this imagination presupposeth perception.

 

M.

That wch extreamly strengthens us in prejudice is yt we think we see an empty space, which I shall demonstrate to be false in the Third Book.

There may be demonstrations used even in Divinity. I mean in revealed Theology, as contradistinguish’d from natural; for tho’ the principles may be founded in faith, yet this hinders not but that legitimate demonstrations might be built thereon; provided still that we define the words we use, and never go beyond our ideas. Hence ‘twere no very hard matter for those who hold episcopacy or monarchy to be established jure Divino to demonstrate their doctrines if they are true. But to pretend to demonstrate or reason anything about the Trinity is absurd. Here an implicit faith becomes us.

S.

Qu. if there be any real difference betwixt certain ideas of reflection & others of sensation, e.g. betwixt perception and white, black, sweet, &c.? Wherein, I pray you, does the perception of white differ from white men....

I shall demonstrate all my doctrines. The nature of demonstration to be set forth and insisted on in the Introduction. In that I must needs differ from Locke, forasmuch as he makes all demonstration to be about abstract ideas, wch I say we have not nor can have.

S.

The understanding seemeth not to differ from its perceptions or ideas. Qu. What must one think of the will and passions?

E.

 A good proof that Existence is nothing without or  distinct from perception, may be drawn from considering a man put into the world without company.

E.

There was a smell, i.e. there was a smell perceiv’d. Thus we see that common speech confirms my doctrine.

T.

No broken intervals of death or annihilation. Those intervals are nothing; each person’s time being measured to him by his own ideas.

I.

We are frequently puzzl’d and at a loss in obtaining clear and determin’d meanings of words commonly in use, & that because we imagine words stand for abstract general ideas which are altogether inconceivable.

I.

“A stone is a stone.” This a nonsensical proposition, and such as the solitary man would never think on. Nor do I believe he would ever think on this: “The whole is equal to its parts,” &c.

E.

Let it not be said that I take away existence. I only declare the meaning of the word, so far as I can comprehend it.

I.

If you take away abstraction, how do men differ from beasts? I answer, by shape, by language. Rather by degrees of more and less.

Wt means Locke by inferences in words, consequences of words, as something different from consequences of ideas? I conceive no such thing.

I.

N. B. Much complaint about the imperfection of language.

 

M.

But perhaps some man may say, an inert thoughtless Substance may exist, though not extended, moved, &c., but with other properties whereof we have no idea. But even this I shall demonstrate to be impossible, wn I come to treat more particularly of Existence.

 

Will not rightly distinguish’d from Desire by Locke — it seeming to superadd nothing to the idea of an action, but the uneasiness for its absence or non-existence.

S.

 Mem. To enquire diligently into that strange mistery,  viz. How it is that I can cast about, think of this or that man, place, action, wn nothing appears to introduce them into my thoughts, wn they have no perceivable connexion with the ideas suggested by my senses at the present?

I.

’Tis not to be imagin’d wt a marvellous emptiness & scarcity of ideas that man shall descry who will lay aside all use of words in his meditations.

M.

Incongruous in Locke to fancy we want a sense proper to see substances with.

I.

Locke owns that abstract ideas were made in order to naming.

M.

The common errour of the opticians, that we judge of distance by angles, strengthens men in their prejudice that they see things without and distant from their mind.

E.

I am persuaded, would men but examine wt they mean by the word existence, they wou’d agree with me.

c. 20. s. 8. b. 4. of Locke makes for me against the mathematicians.

M.

The supposition that things are distinct from ideas takes away all real truth, & consequently brings in a universal scepticism; since all our knowledge and contemplation is confin’d barely to our own ideas.

I.

Qu. whether the solitary man would not find it necessary to make use of words to record his ideas, if not in memory or meditation, yet at least in writing — without which he could scarce retain his knowledge.

We read in history there was a time when fears and jealousies, privileges of parliament, malignant party, and such like expressions of too unlimited and doubtful a meaning, were words of much sway. Also the words Church, Whig, Tory, &c., contribute very much to faction and dispute.

S.

The distinguishing betwixt an idea and perception of the idea has been one great cause of imagining material substances.

S.

 That God and blessed spirits have Will is a manifest  argument against Locke’s proofs that the Will cannot be conceiv’d, put into action, without a previous uneasiness.

S.

The act of the Will, or volition, is not uneasiness, for that uneasiness may be without volition.

S.

Volition is distinct from the object or idea for the same reason.

S.

Also from uneasiness and idea together.

The understanding not distinct from particular perceptions or ideas.

The Will not distinct from particular volitions.

S.

It is not so very evident that an idea, or at least uneasiness, may be without all volition or act.

The understanding taken for a faculty is not really distinct from ye will.

This allow’d hereafter.

S.

To ask whether a man can will either side is an absurd question, for the word can presupposes volition.

 

N.

Anima mundi, substantial form, omniscient radical heat, plastic vertue, Hylaschic principle — all these vanish.

M.

Newton proves that gravity is proportional to gravity. I think that’s all.

Qu. whether it be the vis inertiæ that makes it difficult to move a stone, or the vis attractivæ, or both, or neither?

 

Mem. To express the doctrines as fully and copiously and clearly as may be. Also to be full and particular in answering objections.

S.

To say ye Will is a power; [therefore] volition is an act. This is idem per idem.

Wt  makes men despise extension, motion, &c., & separate them from the essence of the soul, is that they imagine them to be distinct from thought, and to exist in unthinking substance.

 

An extended may have passive modes of thinking good actions.

There might be idea, there might be uneasiness, there might be the greatest uneasiness wth out any volition, therefore the....

M.

Matter once allow’d, I defy any man to prove that God is not Matter.

 

S.

Man is free. There is no difficulty in this proposition, if we but settle the signification of the word free — if we had an idea annext to the word free, and would but contemplate that idea.

S.

We are imposed on by the words will, determine, agent, free, can, &c.

S.

Uneasiness precedes not every volition. This evident by experience.

S.

Trace an infant in the womb. Mark the train & succession of its ideas. Observe how volition comes into the mind. This may perhaps acquaint you with its nature.

S.

Complacency seems rather to determine, or precede, or coincide wth & constitute the essence of volition, than uneasiness.

S.

You tell me, according to my doctrine a man is not free. I answer, tell me wt you mean by the word free, and I shall resolve you.

 

N.

Qu. Wt do men mean when they talk of one body’s touching another? I say you never saw one body touch, or (rather) I say, I never saw one body that I could say touch’d this or that other; for that if my optiques were improv’d, I should see intervalls and other bodies behind those whch now seem to touch.

Mem. Upon all occasions to use the utmost modesty — to confute the mathematicians wth the utmost civility & respect, not to style them Nihilarians, &c.

N. B. To rein in ye satyrical nature.

Blame me not if I use my words sometimes in some latitude. ’Tis wt  cannot be helpt. ’Tis the fault of language  that you cannot always apprehend the clear and determinate meaning of my words.

Say you, there might be a thinking Substance — something unknown — wch perceives, and supports, and ties together the ideas. Say I, make it appear there is any need of it and you shall have it for me. I care not to take away anything I can see the least reason to think should exist.

I affirm ’tis manifestly absurd — no excuse in the world can be given why a man should use a word without an idea. Certainly we shall find that wt ever word we make use of in matter of pure reasoning has, or ought to have, a compleat idea, annext to it, i.e. its meaning, or the sense we take it in, must be compleatly known.

’Tis demonstrable a man can never be brought to imagine anything should exist whereof he has no idea. Whoever says he does, banters himself with words.

 

G.

We imagine a great difference & distance in respect of knowledge, power, &c., betwixt a man & a worm. The like difference betwixt man and God may be imagin’d; or infinitely greater difference.

G.

We find in our own minds a great number of different ideas. We may imagine in God a greater number, i.e. that ours in number, or the number of ours, is inconsiderable in respect thereof. The words difference and number, old and known, we apply to that wch is unknown. But I am embrangled in words— ’tis scarce possible it should be otherwise.

 

The chief thing I do or pretend to do is onely to remove the mist or veil of words. This has occasion’d ignorance & confusion. This has ruined the schoolmen and mathematicians, lawyers and divines.

 

S.

 The grand cause of perplexity & darkness in treating of the Will, is that we imagine it to be an object of thought: (to speak with the vulgar), we think we may perceive, contemplate, and view it like any of our ideas; whereas in  truth ’tis no idea, nor is there any idea of it. ’Tis toto cælo different from the understanding, i.e. from all our ideas. If you say the Will, or rather volition, is something, I answer, there is an homonymy in the word thing , wn apply’d to ideas and volition and understanding and will. All ideas are passive.

S.

Thing & idea are much what words of the same extent and meaning. Why, therefore, do I not use the word thing? Ans. Because thing is of greater latitude than idea. Thing comprehends also volitions or actions. Now these are no ideas.

S.

There can be perception wth out volition. Qu. whether there can be volition without perception?

E.

Existence not conceivable without perception or volition — not distinguish’d therefrom.

T.

N. B. Several distinct ideas can be perceived by sight and touch at once. Not so by the other senses. ’Tis this diversity of sensations in other senses chiefly, but sometimes in touch and sight (as also diversity of volitions, whereof there cannot be more than one at once, or rather, it seems there cannot, for of that I doubt), gives us the idea of time — or is time itself.

Wt would the solitary man think of number?

S.

There are innate ideas, i.e. ideas created with us.

 

S.

Locke seems to be mistaken wn he says thought is not essential to the mind.

S.

Certainly the mind always and constantly thinks: and we know this too. In sleep and trances the mind exists not — there is no time, no succession of ideas.

S.

To say the mind exists without thinking is a contradiction, nonsense, nothing.

 

S.

Folly to inquire wt  determines the Will. Uneasiness, &c. are ideas, therefore unactive, therefore can do nothing, therefore cannot determine the Will.

 

S.

Again, wt mean you by determine?

N.

T.

For want of rightly understanding time, motion, existence, &c., men are forc’d into such absurd contradictions as this, viz. light moves 16 diameters of earth in a second of time.

S.

’Twas the opinion that ideas could exist unperceiv’d, or before perception, that made men think perception was somewhat different from the idea perceived, i.e. yt it was an idea of reflection; whereas the thing perceiv’d was an idea of sensation. I say, ’twas this made ’em think the understanding took it in, receiv’d it from without; wch could never be did not they think it existed without.

M.

Properly speaking, idea is the picture of the imagination’s making. This is ye likeness of, and refer’d to the real idea, or (if you will) thing.

S.

To ask, have we an idea of Will or volition, is nonsense. An idea can resemble nothing but an idea.

S.

If you ask wt thing it is that wills, I answer, if you mean idea by the word thing, or anything like any idea, then I say, ’tis no thing at all that wills. This how extravagant soever it may seem, yet is a certain truth. We are cheated by these general terms, thing, is, &c.

S.

Again, if by is you mean is perceived, or does perceive, I say nothing wch is perceived or does perceive wills.

S.

The referring ideas to things wch are not ideas, the using the term “idea of,” is one great cause of mistake, as in other matters, so also in this.

S.

Some words there are wch do not stand for ideas, viz. particles, will, &c. Particles stand for volitions and their concomitant ideas.

S.

There seem to be but two colours wch  are simple ideas, viz. those exhibited by the most and least refrangible rays; [the others], being the intermediate ones, may be formed by composition.

 

S.

I have no idea of a volition or act of the mind, neither has any other intelligence; for that were a contradiction.

N. B. Simple ideas, viz. colours, are not devoid of all sort of composition, tho’ it must be granted they are not made up of distinguishable ideas. Yet there is another sort of composition. Men are wont to call those things compounded in which we do not actually discover the component ingredients. Bodies are said to be compounded of chymical principles, which, nevertheless, come not into view till after the dissolution of the bodies — wch were not, could not, be discerned in the bodies whilst remaining entire.

 

I.

All our knowledge is about particular ideas, according to Locke. All our sensations are particular ideas, as is evident. Wt use then do we make of abstract general ideas, since we neither know nor perceive them?

S.

’Tis allow’d that particles stand not for ideas, and yet they are not said to be empty useless sounds. The truth really is, they stand for operations of the mind, i.e. volitions.

Mo.

Locke says all our knowledge is about particulars. If so, pray wt is the following ratiocination but a jumble of words? “Omnis homo est animal; omne animal vivit: ergo omnis homo vivit.” It amounts (if you annex particular ideas to the words “animal” and “vivit”) to no more than this: “Omnis homo est homo; omnis homo est homo: ergo, omnis homo est homo.” A mere sport and trifling with sounds.

Mo.

We have no ideas of vertues & vices, no ideas of moral actions. Wherefore it may be question’d whether we are capable of arriving at demonstration about them, the morality consisting in the volition chiefly.

 

E.

Strange it is that men should be at a loss to find their idea of Existence; since that (if such there be distinct from perception) it is brought into the mind by all the ways of sensation and reflection, methinks it should be most familiar to us, and we best acquainted with it.

E.

This I am sure, I have no idea of Existence, or annext to the word Existence. And if others have that’s nothing to me; they can never make me sensible of it; simple ideas being incommunicable by language.

S.

Say you, the unknown substratum of volitions & ideas is something whereof I have no idea. I ask, Is there any other being which has or can have an idea of it? If there be, then it must be itself an idea; which you will think absurd.

S.

There is somewhat active in most perceptions, i.e. such as ensue upon our volitions, such as we can prevent and stop: e.g. I turn my eyes toward the sun: I open them. All this is active.

S.

Things are twofold — active or inactive. The existence of active things is to act; of inactive to be perceiv’d.

S. E.

Distinct from or without perception there is no volition; therefore neither is there existence without perception.

G.

God may comprehend all ideas, even the ideas wch are painfull & unpleasant, without being in any degree pained thereby. Thus we ourselves can imagine the pain of a burn, &c. without any misery or uneasiness at all.

N. Mo.

Truth, three sorts thereof — natural, mathematical, & moral.

Mo.

Agreement of relation onely where numbers do obtain: of co-existence, in nature: of signification, by including, in morality.

I.

Gyant who shakes the mountain that’s on him must be acknowledged. Or rather thus: I am no more to be reckon’d stronger than Locke than a pigmy should be reckon’d stronger than a gyant, because he could throw off the molehill wch lay upon him, and the gyant could onely shake or shove the mountain that oppressed him. This in the Preface.

I.

Promise to extend our knowledge & clear it of those shamefull contradictions which embarrass it. Something like this to begin the Introduction in a modest way.

I.

Whoever shall pretend to censure any part, I desire he would read out the whole, else he may perhaps not understand me. In the Preface or Introduction.

S.

Doctrine of identity best explain’d by taking the Will for volitions, the Understanding for ideas. The difficulty of consciousness of wt are never acted surely solv’d thereby.

I.

I must acknowledge myself beholding to the philosophers who have gone before me. They have given good rules, though certainly they do not always observe them. Similitude of adventurers, who, tho’ they attained not the desired port, they by their wrecks have made known the rocks and sands, whereby the passage of aftercomers is made more secure & easy. Preface or Introduction.

Mo.

The opinion that men had ideas of moral actions has render’d the demonstrating ethiques very difficult to them.

S.

An idea being itself unactive cannot be the resemblance or image of an active thing.

I.

Excuse to be made in the Introduction for using the word idea , viz. because it has obtain’d. But a caution must be added.

Scripture and possibility are the onely proofs with Malbranch. Add to these what he calls a great propension to think so: this perhaps may be questioned. Perhaps men, if they think before they speak, will not be found so thoroughly persuaded of the existence of Matter.

M.

On second thoughts I am on t’other extream. I am certain of that wch Malbranch seems to doubt of, viz. the existence of bodies.

I. &c.

Mem. To bring the killing blow at the last, e.g. in the matter of abstraction to bring Locke’s general triangle in the last.

I.

 They give good rules, tho’ perhaps they themselves do not always observe them. They speak much of clear and distinct ideas, though at the same time they talk of general abstract ideas, &c. I’ll [instance] in Locke’s opinion of abstraction, he being as clear a writer as I have met with.

 

Such was the candour of this great man that I perswade myself, were he alive, he would not be offended that I differ from him: seeing that even in so doing I follow his advice, viz. to use my own judgement, see with my own eyes, & not with another’s. Introduction.

S.

The word thing, as comprising or standing for idea & volition, usefull; as standing for idea and archetype without the mind, mischievous and useless.

Mo.

To demonstrate morality it seems one need only make a dictionary of words, and see which included which. At least, this is the greatest part and bulk of the work.

Mo.

Locke’s instances of demonstration in morality are, according to his own rule, trifling propositions.

P. S.

Qu. How comes it that some ideas are confessedly allow’d by all to be onely in the mind, and others as generally taken to be without the mind, if, according to you, all are equally and only in the mind? Ans. Because that in proportion to pleasure or pain ideas are attended with desire, exertion, and other actions which include volition. Now volition is by all granted to be in spirit.

I.

If men would lay aside words in thinking, ’tis impossible they should ever mistake, save only in matters of fact. I mean it seems impossible they should be positive & secure that anything was true wch in truth is not so. Certainly I cannot err in matter of simple perception. So far as we can in reasoning go without the help of signs, there we have certain knowledge. Indeed, in long deductions made by signs there may be slips of memory.

Mo.

From my doctrine there follows a cure for pride. We are only to be praised for those things which are our own, or of our own doing; natural abilitys are not consequences of our volitions.

 

M.

Mem. Candidly to take notice that Locke holds some dangerous opinions; such as the infinity and eternity of Space and the possibility of Matter’s thinking.

I.

Once more I desire my reader may be upon his guard against the fallacy of words. Let him beware that I do not impose on him by plausible empty talk, that common dangerous way of cheating men into absurditys. Let him not regard my words any otherwise than as occasions of bringing into his mind determin’d significations. So far as they fail of this they are gibberish, jargon, & deserve not the name of language. I desire & warn him not to expect to find truth in my book, or anywhere but in his own mind. Wt ever I see myself ’tis impossible I can paint it out in words.

Mo.

N. B. To consider well wt is meant by that wch Locke saith concerning algebra — that it supplys intermediate ideas. Also to think of a method affording the same use in morals &c. that this doth in mathematiques.

Mo.

Homo is not proved to be vivens by means of any intermediate idea. I don’t fully agree wth Locke in wt he says concerning sagacity in finding out intermediate ideas in matter capable of demonstration & the use thereof; as if that were the onely means of improving and enlarging demonstrative knowledge.

S.

There is a difference betwixt power & volition. There may be volition without power. But there can be no power without volition. Power implyeth volition, & at the same time a connotation of the effects following the volition.

M. S.

We have assuredly an idea of substance. ’Twas absurd of Locke to think we had a name without a meaning. This might prove acceptable to the Stillingfleetians.

M. S.

The substance of Body we know. The substance of Spirit we do not know — it not being knowable, it being a purus actus .

I.

Words have ruin’d and overrun all the sciences — law, physique, chymistry, astrology, &c.

I.

 Abstract ideas only to be had amongst the learned. The vulgar never think they have any such, nor truly do they find any want of them. Genera & species & abstract ideas are terms unknown to them.

 

S.

Locke’s out — the case is different. We can have an idea of body without motion, but not of soul without thought.

Mo.

God ought to be worship’d. This easily demonstrated when once we ascertain the signification of the words God, worship, ought.

S.

No perception, according to Locke, is active. Therefore no perception (i.e. no idea) can be the image of, or like unto, that which is altogether active & not at all passive, i.e. the Will.

S.

I can will the calling to mind something that is past, tho’ at the same time that wch I call to mind was not in my thoughts before that volition of mine, & consequently I could have had no uneasiness for the want of it.

S.

The Will & the Understanding may very well be thought two distinct beings.

S.

Sed quia voluntas raro agit nisi ducente desiderio. V. Locke, Epistles, , ad Limburgum.

You cannot say the m. t. [minimum tangibile] is like or one with the m. v. [minimum visibile], because they be both minima, just perceiv’d, and next door to nothing. You may as well say the m. t. is the same with or like unto a sound, so small that it is scarce perceiv’d.

 

Extension seems to be a mode of some tangible or sensible quality according as it is seen or felt.

 

S.

The spirit — the active thing — that wch is soul, & God — is the Will alone. The ideas are effects — impotent things.

S.

The concrete of the will & understanding I might call mind; not person, lest offence be given. Mem. Carefully to omit defining of person, or making much mention of it.

S.

You ask, do these volitions make one Will? Wt you ask is meerly about a word — unity being no more.

 

N. B. To use utmost caution not to give the least handle of offence to the Church or Churchmen.

I.

Even to speak somewhat favourably of the Schoolmen, and shew that they who blame them for jargon are not free of it themselves. Introd.

Locke’s great oversight seems to be that he did not begin with his third book; at least that he had not some thought of it at first. Certainly the 2d & 4th books don’t agree wth wt he says in ye 3d .

M.

If Matter is once allow’d to exist, clippings of weeds and parings of nails may think, for ought that Locke can tell; tho’ he seems positive of the contrary.

Since I say men cannot mistake in short reasoning about things demonstrable, if they lay aside words, it will be expected this Treatise will contain nothing but wt is certain & evident demonstration, & in truth I hope you will find nothing in it but what is such. Certainly I take it all for such. Introd.

I.

When I say I will reject all propositions wherein I know not fully and adequately and clearly, so far as knowable, the thing meant thereby, this is not to be extended to propositions in the Scripture. I speak of matters of Reason and Philosophy — not Revelation. In this I think an humble, implicit faith becomes us (when we cannot comprehend or understand the proposition), such as a popish peasant gives to propositions he hears at mass in Latin. This proud men may call blind, popish, implicit, irrational. For my part I think it is more irrational to pretend to dispute at, cavil, and ridicule holy mysteries, i.e. propositions about things that are altogether above our knowledge, out of our reach. When I shall come to plenary knowledge of the meaning of any fact, then I shall yield an explicit belief. Introd.

Complexation of ideas twofold. Ys refers to colours being complex ideas.

Considering length without breadth is considering any length, be the breadth wt it will.

M.

 I may say earth, plants, &c. were created before man — there being other intelligences to perceive them, before man was created.

 

M.

There is a philosopher who says we can get an idea of substance by no way of sensation or reflection, & seems to imagine that we want a sense proper for it. Truly if we had a new sense it could only give us a new idea. Now I suppose he will not say substance, according to him, is an idea. For my part, I own I have no idea can stand for substance in his and the Schoolmen’s sense of that word. But take it in the common vulgar sense, & then we see and feel substance.

E.

N. B. That not common usage, but the Schoolmen coined the word Existence, supposed to stand for an abstract general idea.

 

Writers of Optics mistaken in their principles both in judging of magnitudes and distances.

 

I.

’Tis evident yt wn the solitary man should be taught to speak, the words would give him no other new ideas (save only the sounds, and complex ideas which, tho’ unknown before, may be signified by language) beside wt he had before. If he had not, could not have, an abstract idea before, he cannot have it after he is taught to speak.

Mo.

“Homo est homo,” &c. comes at last to Petrus est Petrus, &c. Now, if these identical propositions are sought after in the mind, they will not be found. There are no identical mental propositions. ’Tis all about sounds and terms.

Mo.

Hence we see the doctrine of certainty by ideas, and proving by intermediate ideas, comes to nothing.

Mo.

We may have certainty & knowledge without ideas, i.e. without other ideas than the words, and their standing for one idea, i.e. their being to be used indifferently.

Mo.

 It seems to me that we have no certainty about ideas, but only about words. ’Tis improper to say, I am certain I see, I feel, &c. There are no mental propositions  form’d answering to these words, & in simple perception ’tis allowed by all there is no affirmation or negation, and consequently no certainty.

Mo.

The reason why we can demonstrate so well about signs is, that they are perfectly arbitrary & in our power — made at pleasure.

Mo.

The obscure ambiguous term relation , which is said to be the largest field of knowledge, confounds us, deceives us.

Mo.

Let any man shew me a demonstration, not verbal, that does not depend on some false principle; or at best on some principle of nature, which is ye effect of God’s will, and we know not how soon it may be changed.

I.

Qu. What becomes of the æternæ veritates ? Ans. They vanish.

I.

But, say you, I find it difficult to look beneath the words and uncover my ideas. Say I, Use will make it easy. In the sequel of my Book the cause of this difficulty shall be more clearly made out.

I.

To view the deformity of error we need onely undress it.

E.

“Cogito ergo sum.” Tautology. No mental proposition answering thereto.

N. Mo.

Knowledge, or certainty, or perception of agreement of ideas — as to identity and diversity, and real existence, vanisheth; of relation, becometh merely nominal; of co-existence, remaineth. Locke thought in this latter our knowledge was little or nothing. Whereas in this only real knowledge seemeth to be found.

P.

We must wth the mob place certainty in the senses.

’Tis a man’s duty, ’tis the fruit of friendship, to speak well of his friend. Wonder not therefore that I do wt I do.

I.

 A man of slow parts may overtake truth, &c. Introd. Even my shortsightedness might perhaps be aiding to me in this matter— ‘twill make me bring the object nearer to my thoughts. A purblind person, &c. Introd.

 

S.

Locke to Limborch, &c. Talk of judicium intellectus preceding the volition: I think judicium includes volition. I can by no means distinguish these — judicium , intellectus , indifferentia , uneasiness to many things accompanying or preceding every volition, as e.g. the motion of my hand.

S.

Qu. Wt mean you by my perceptions, my volitions? Both all the perceptions I perceive or conceive, &c. are mine; all the volitions I am conscious to are mine.

S.

Homo est agens liberum. What mean they by homo and agens in this place?

E.

Will any man say that brutes have ideas of Unity & Existence? I believe not. Yet if they are suggested by all the ways of sensation, ’tis strange they should want them.

I.

It is a strange thing and deserves our attention, that the more time and pains men have consum’d in the study of philosophy, by so much the more they look upon themselves to be ignorant & weak creatures. They discover flaws and imperfections in their faculties wch other men never spy out. They find themselves under a necessity of admitting many inconsistent, irreconcilable opinions for true. There is nothing they touch with their hand, or behold with their eyes, but has its dark sides much larger and more numerous than wt is perceived, & at length turn scepticks, at least in most things. I imagine all this proceeds from, &c. Exord. Introd.

I.

These men with a supercilious pride disdain the common single information of sense. They grasp at knowledge by sheafs & bundles. (’Tis well if, catching at too much at once, they hold nothing but emptiness & air.) They in the depth of their understanding contemplate abstract ideas.

It seems not improbable that the most comprehensive & sublime intellects see more m.v.’s at once, i.e. that their visual systems are the largest.

Words (by them meaning all sorts of signs) are so necessary that, instead of being (wn  duly us’d or in their own nature) prejudicial to the advancement of knowledge,  or an hindrance to knowledge, without them there could in mathematiques themselves be no demonstration.

 

Mem. To be eternally banishing Metaphisics, &c., and recalling men to Common Sense.

 

S.

We cannot conceive other minds besides our own but as so many selves. We suppose ourselves affected wth such & such thoughts & such and such sensations.

S.

Qu. whether composition of ideas be not that faculty which chiefly serves to discriminate us from brutes? I question whether a brute does or can imagine a blue horse or chimera.

Naturalists do not distinguish betwixt cause and occasion. Useful to enquire after co-existing ideas or occasions.

Mo.

Morality may be demonstrated as mixt mathematics.

S.

Perception is passive, but this not distinct from idea. Therefore there can be no idea of volition.

Algebraic species or letters are denominations of denominations. Therefore Arithmetic to be treated of before Algebra.

2 crowns are called ten shillings. Hence may appear the value of numbers.

Complex ideas are the creatures of the mind. Hence may appear the nature of numbers. This to be deeply discuss’d.

I am better informed & shall know more by telling me there are 10,000 men, than by shewing me them all drawn up. I shall better be able to judge of the bargain you’d have me make wn you tell me how much (i.e. the name of ye ) money lies on the table, than by offering and shewing it without naming. I regard not the idea, the looks, but the names. Hence may appear the nature of numbers.

 Children are unacquainted with numbers till they have made some progress in language. This could not be if they were ideas suggested by all the senses.

 

Numbers are nothing but names — never words.

Mem. Imaginary roots — to unravel that mystery.

Ideas of utility are annexed to numbers.

In arithmetical problems men seek not any idea of number. They only seek a denomination. This is all can be of use to them.

Take away the signs from Arithmetic and Algebra, and pray wt remains?

These are sciences purely verbal, and entirely useless but for practice in societies of men. No speculative knowledge, no comparing of ideas in them.

Qu. whether Geometry may not properly be reckon’d amongst the mixt mathematics — Arithmetic & Algebra being the only abstracted pure, i.e. entirely nominal — Geometry being an application of these to points?

 

Mo.

Locke of Trifling Propositions. [b. 4. c. 8] Mem. Well to observe & con over that chapter.

E.

Existence, Extension, &c. are abstract, i.e. no ideas. They are words, unknown and useless to the vulgar.

 

Mo.

Sensual pleasure is the summum bonum . This the great principle of morality. This once rightly understood, all the doctrines, even the severest of the Gospels, may clearly be demonstrated.

Mo.

Sensual pleasure, quâ pleasure, is good & desirable by a wise man. But if it be contemptible, ’tis not quâ pleasure but quâ pain, or cause of pain, or (which is the same thing) of loss of greater pleasure.

 

I.

Wn I consider, the more objects we see at once the more distant they are, and that eye which beholds a great many things can see none of them near.

I.

By idea I mean any sensible or imaginable thing.

M. S.

To be sure or certain of wt  we do not actually perceive (I say perceive, not imagine), we must not be altogether  passive; there must be a disposition to act; there must be assent, wch is active. Nay, what do I talk; there must be actual volition.

What do we demonstrate in Geometry but that lines are equal or unequal? i.e. may not be called by the same name.

 

I. M.

I approve of this axiom of the Schoolmen, “Nihil est in intellectu quod non prius fuit in sensu.” I wish they had stuck to it. It had never taught them the doctrine of abstract ideas.

S. G.

“Nihil dat quod non habet,” or, the effect is contained in the cause, is an axiom I do not understand or believe to be true.

 

E.

Whoever shall cast his eyes on the writings of old or new philosophers, and see the noise is made about formal and objective Being, Will, &c.

G.

Absurd to argue the existence of God from his idea. We have no idea of God. ’Tis impossible.

M. E.

Cause of much errour & confusion that men knew not what was meant by Reality.

I.

Des Cartes, in Med. 2, says the notion of this particular wax is less clear than that of wax in general; and in the same Med., a little before, he forbears to consider bodies in general, because (says he) these general conceptions are usually confused.

M. S.

Des Cartes, in Med. 3, calls himself a thinking substance, and a stone an extended substance; and adds that they both agree in this, that they are substances. And in the next paragraph he calls extension a mode of substance.

S.

 ’Tis commonly said by the philosophers, that if the soul of man were self-existent it would have given itself all possible perfection. This I do not understand.

 

Mo.

Mem. To excite men to the pleasures of the eye & the ear, which surfeit not, nor bring those evils after them, as others.

S.

We see no variety or difference betwixt volitions, only between their effects. ’Tis one Will, one Act — distinguished by the effects. This Will, this Act, is the Spirit, i.e. operative principle, soul, &c. No mention of fears and jealousies, nothing like a party.

M.

Locke in his 4th Book, and Des Cartes in Med. 6, use the same argument for the existence of objects, viz. that sometimes we see, feel, &c. against our will.

S.

While I exist or have any idea, I am eternally, constantly willing; my acquiescing in the present state is willing.

E.

The existence of any thing imaginable is nothing different from imagination or perception. Volition or Will, Wch is not imaginable, regard must not be had to its existence(?) ... First Book.

Mo.

There are four sorts of propositions:— “Gold is a metal;” “Gold is yellow;” “Gold is fixt;” “Gold is not a stone” — of which the first, second, and third are only nominal, and have no mental propositions answering them.

M.

Mem. In vindication of the senses effectually to confute what Des Cartes saith in the last par. of the last Med., viz. that the senses oftener inform him falsely than truely — that sense of pain tells me not my foot is bruised or broken, but I, having frequently observed these two ideas, viz. of that peculiar pain and bruised foot go together, do erroneously take them to be inseparable by a necessity of Nature — as if Nature were anything but the ordinance of the free will of God.

M. S.

Des Cartes owns we know not a substance immediately by itself, but by this alone, that it is the subject of several acts. Ans. to 2d objection of Hobbs.

S.

Hobbs in some degree falls in with Locke, saying thought is to the mind or himself as dancing to the dancer. Object.

S.

 Hobbs in his Object. 3 ridicules those expressions of  the scholastiques— “the will wills,” &c. So does Locke. I am of another mind.

S.

Des Cartes, in answer to Object. 3 of Hobbs, owns he is distinct from thought as a thing from its modus or manner.

 

E. S.

Opinion that existence was distinct from perception of horrible consequence. It is the foundation of Hobbs’s doctrine, &c.

M. P. E.

Malbranch in his illustration differs widely from me. He doubts of the existence of bodies. I doubt not in the least of this.

P.

I differ from Cartesians in that I make extension, colour, &c. to exist really in bodies independent of our mind. All ye carefully and lucidly to be set forth.

M. P.

Not to mention the combinations of powers, but to say the things — the effects themselves — do really exist, even wn not actually perceived; but still with relation to perception.

 

The great use of the Indian figures above the Roman shews arithmetic to be about signs, not ideas — or at least not ideas different from the characters themselves.

M. N.

Reasoning there may be about things or ideas, or about actions; but demonstration can be only verbal. I question, no matter &c.

G.

Quoth Des Cartes, The idea of God is not made by me, for I can neither add to nor subtract from it. No more can he add to or take from any other idea, even of his own making.

S.

The not distinguishing ‘twixt Will and ideas is a grand mistake with Hobbs. He takes those things for nothing which are not ideas.

M.

 Say you, At this rate all’s nothing but idea — mere phantasm. I answer, Everything as real as ever. I hope to call a thing idea makes it not the less real. Truly I should perhaps have stuck to the word thing, and not mentioned  the word idea, were it not for a reason, and I think a good one too, which I shall give in the Second Book.

I. S.

Idea is the object of thought. Yt I think on, whatever it be, I call idea. Thought itself, or thinking, is no idea. ’Tis an act — i.e. volition, i.e. as contradistinguished to effects — the Will.

I. Mo.

Locke, in B. 4. c. 5, assigns not the right cause why mental propositions are so difficult. It is not because of complex but because of abstract ideas. Ye idea of a horse is as complex as that of fortitude. Yet in saying the “horse is white” I form a mental proposition with ease. But when I say “fortitude is a virtue” I shall find a mental proposition hard, or not at all to be come at.

S.

Pure intellect I understand not.

Locke is in ye right in those things wherein he differs from ye Cartesians, and they cannot but allow of his opinions, if they stick to their own principles or causes of Existence & other abstract ideas.

G. S.

The properties of all things are in God, i.e. there is in the Deity Understanding as well as Will. He is no blind agent, and in truth a blind agent is a contradiction.

G.

I am certain there is a God, tho’ I do not perceive Him — have no intuition of Him. This not difficult if we rightly understand wt is meant by certainty.

S.

It seems that the Soul, taken for the Will, is immortal, incorruptible.

S.

Qu. whether perception must of necessity precede volition?

S. Mo.

Error is not in the Understanding, but in the Will. What I understand or perceive, that I understand. There can be no errour in this.

Mo. N.

Mem. To take notice of Locke’s woman afraid of a wetting, in the Introd., to shew there may be reasoning about ideas or things.

M.

 Say Des Cartes & Malbranch, God hath given us strong inclinations to think our ideas proceed from bodies, or that  bodies do exist. Pray wt mean they by this? Would they have it that the ideas of imagination are images of, and proceed from, the ideas of sense? This is true, but cannot be their meaning; for they speak of ideas of sense as themselves proceeding from, being like unto — I know not wt .

M. S.

Cartesius per ideam vult omne id quod habet esse objectivum in intellectu. V. Tract. de Methodo.

S.

Qu. May there not be an Understanding without a Will?

S.

Understanding is in some sort an action.

S.

Silly of Hobbs, &c. to speak of the Will as if it were motion, with which it has no likeness.

 

M.

Ideas of Sense are the real things or archetypes. Ideas of imagination, dreams, &c. are copies, images, of these.

 

M.

My doctrines rightly understood, all that philosophy of Epicurus, Hobbs, Spinosa, &c., which has been a declared enemy of religion, comes to the ground.

G.

Hobbs & Spinosa make God extended. Locke also seems to do the same.

I. E.

Ens, res, aliquid dicuntur termini transcendentales. Spinosa, , pro, Eth. part 2, gives an odd account of their original. Also of the original of all universals — Homo, Canis, &c.

G.

Spinosa (vid. Præf. Opera Posthum.) will have God to be “omnium rerum causa immanens,” and to countenance this produces that of St. Paul, “in Him we live,” &c. Now this of St. Paul may be explained by my doctrine as well as Spinosa’s, or Locke’s, or Hobbs’s, or Raphson’s, &c.

 

S.

The Will is purus actus  , or rather pure spirit not imaginable,  not sensible, not intelligible, in no wise the object of the understanding, no wise perceivable.

S.

Substance of a spirit is that it acts, causes, wills, operates, or if you please (to avoid the quibble yt may be made of the word “it”) to act, cause, will, operate. Its substance is not knowable, not being an idea.

 

G.

Why may we not conceive it possible for God to create things out of nothing? Certainly we ourselves create in some wise whenever we imagine.

E. N.

“Ex nihilo nihil fit.” This (saith Spinoza, Opera Posth. ) and the like are called veritates æternæ , because “nullam fidem habent extra mentem.” To make this axiom have a positive signification, one should express it thus: Every idea has a cause, i.e. is produced by a Will.

 

P.

The philosophers talk much of a distinction ‘twixt absolute & relative things, or ‘twixt things considered in their own nature & the same things considered with respect to us. I know not wt they mean by “things considered in themselves.” This is nonsense, jargon.

 

S.

It seems there can be no perception — no idea — without Will, seeing there are no ideas so indifferent but one had rather have them than annihilation, or annihilation than them. Or if there be such an equal balance, there must be an equal mixture of pleasure and pain to cause it; there being no ideas perfectly void of all pain & uneasiness, but wt are preferable to annihilation.

Recipe in animum tuum, per cogitationem vehementem, rerum ipsarum, non literarum aut sonorum imagines. Hobbs against Wallis.

’Tis a perfection we may imagine in superior spirits, that they can see a great deal at once with the utmost clearness and distinction; whereas we can only see a point.

Mem. Wn I treat of mathematiques to enquire into the controversy ‘twixt Hobbes and Wallis.

G.

Every sensation of mine, which happens in consequence of the general known laws of nature, & is from without, i.e. independent of my will, demonstrates the being of a God, i.e. of an unextended, incorporeal spirit, which is omnipresent, omnipotent, &c.

 

M.

I say not with J.S. [John Sergeant] that we see solids. I reject his “solid philosophy” — solidity being only perceived by touch.

 

S.

It seems to me that will and understanding — volitions and ideas — cannot be separated, that either cannot be possibly without the other.

E. S.

Some ideas or other I must have, so long as I exist or will. But no one idea or sort of ideas being essential.

M.

The distinction between idea and ideatum I cannot otherwise conceive than by making one the effect or consequence of dream, reverie, imagination — the other of sense and the constant laws of nature.

 

P.

Dico quod extensio non concipitur in se et per se, contra quam dicit Spinoza in Epist. 2a ad Oldenburgium.

G.

My definition of the word God I think much clearer than those of Des Cartes & Spinoza, viz. “Ens summe perfectum & absolute infinitum,” or “Ens constans infinitis attributis, quorum unumquodque est infinitum.”

 

’Tis chiefly the connexion betwixt tangible and visible ideas that deceives, and not the visible ideas themselves.

 

S.

But the grand mistake is that we know not what we mean by “we,” or “selves,” or “mind,” &c. ’Tis most sure & certain that our ideas are distinct from the mind, i.e. the Will, the Spirit.

S.

 I must not mention the understanding as a faculty or  part of the mind. I must include understanding & will in the word Spirit — by which I mean all that is active. I must not say that the understanding diners not from the particular ideas, or the will from particular volitions.

S.

The Spirit, the Mind, is neither a volition nor an idea.

N. S.

I say there are no causes (properly speaking) but spiritual, nothing active but Spirit. Say you, This is only verbal; ’tis only annexing a new sort of signification to the word cause, & why may not others as well retain the old one, and call one idea the cause of another which always follows it? I answer, If you do so I shall drive you into many absurditys: you cannot avoid running into opinions you’ll be glad to disown, if you stick firmly to that signification of the word Cause.

 

Mo.

In valuing good we reckon too much on the present & our own.

Mo.

There be two sorts of pleasure. The one is ordained as a spur or incitement to somewhat else, & has a visible relation and subordination thereto; the other is not. Thus the pleasure of eating is of the former sort, of musick of the later sort. These may be used for recreation, those not but in order to their end.

Mo. N.

Three sorts of useful knowledge — that of Coexistence, to be treated of in our Principles of Natural Philosophy; that of Relation, in Mathematiques; that of Definition, or inclusion, or words (which perhaps differs not from that of relation), in Morality.

 

S.

Will, understanding, desire, hatred, &c., so far forth as they are acts or active, differ not. All their difference consists in their objects, circumstances, &c.

N.

We must carefully distinguish betwixt two sorts of causes — physical & spiritual.

N.

The physical may more properly be called occasions. Yet (to comply) we may call them causes — but then we must mean causes yt do nothing.

 

S.

 According to Locke, we must be in an eternal uneasiness  so long as we live, bating the time of sleep or trance, &c.; for he will have even the continuance of an action to be in his sense an action, & so requires a volition, & this an uneasiness.

 

I.

I must not pretend to promise much of demonstration. I must cancell all passages that look like that sort of pride, that raising of expectation in my friend.

I.

If this be the case, surely a man had better not philosophize at all: no more than a deformed person ought to cavil to behold himself by the reflex light of a mirrour.

I.

Or thus, like deformed persons who, having beheld themselves by the reflex light of a mirrour, are displeased with their diseases.

M.

What can an idea be like but another idea? We can compare it with nothing else — a sound like a sound, a colour like a colour.

M.

Is it not nonsense to say a smell is like a thing which cannot be smelt, a colour is like a thing wh cannot be seen?

 

M. S.

Bodies exist without the mind, i.e. are not the mind, but distinct from it. This I allow, the mind being altogether different therefrom.

 

P.

Certainly we should not see motion if there was no diversity of colours.

P.

Motion is an abstract idea, i.e. there is no such idea that can be conceived by itself.

I.

Contradictions cannot be both true. Men are obliged to answer objections drawn from consequences. Introd.

S.

The Will and Volition are words not used by the vulgar. The learned are bantered by their meaning abstract ideas.

Speculative Math, as if a man was all day making hard knots on purpose to unty them again.

Tho’ it might have been otherwise, yet it is convenient the same thing wch is M.V. should be also M.T., or very near it.

S.

 I must not give the soul or mind the scholastique name “pure act,” but rather pure spirit, or active being.

 

S.

I must not say the Will or Understanding are all one, but that they are both abstract ideas, i.e. none at all — they not being even ratione different from the Spirit, quâ faculties, or active.

S.

Dangerous to make idea & thing terms convertible. That were the way to prove spirits are nothing.

Mo.

Qu. whether veritas stands not for an abstract idea?

 

M.

’Tis plain the moderns must by their own principles own there are no bodies, i.e. no sort of bodies without the mind, i.e. unperceived.

 

S. G.

Qu. whether the Will can be the object of prescience or any knowledge?

P.

If there were only one ball in the world, it could not be moved. There could be no variety of appearance.

According to the doctrine of infinite divisibility, there must be some smell of a rose, v. g. at an infinite distance from it.

M.

Extension, tho’ it exist only in the mind, yet is no property of the mind. The mind can exist without it, tho’ it cannot without the mind. But in Book II. I shall at large shew the difference there is betwixt the Soul and Body or extended being.

S.

’Tis an absurd question wch Locke puts, whether man be free to will?

Mem. To enquire into the reason of the rule for determining questions in Algebra.

It has already been observed by others that names are nowhere of more necessary use than in numbering.

M. P.

I will grant you that extension, colour, &c. may be said to be without the mind in a double respect, i.e. as independent of our will, and as distinct from the mind.

Mo. N.

 Certainly it is not impossible but a man may arrive at the knowledge of all real truth as well without as with signs, had he a memory and imagination most strong and capacious. Therefore reasoning & science doth not altogether depend upon words or names.

 

N.

I think not that things fall out of necessity. The connexion of no two ideas is necessary; ’tis all the result of freedom, i.e. ’tis all voluntary.

M. S.

If a man with his eyes shut imagines to himself the sun & firmament, you will not say he or his mind is the sun, or is extended, tho’ neither sun or firmament be without mind.

S.

’Tis strange to find philosophers doubting & disputing whether they have ideas of spiritual things or no. Surely ’tis easy to know. Vid. De Vries, De Ideis Innatis , .

S.

De Vries will have it that we know the mind agrees with things not by idea but sense or conscientia. So will Malbranch. This a vain distinction.

August 28th, 1708. The Adventure of the [Shirt?].

It were to be wished that persons of the greatest birth, honour, & fortune, would take that care of themselves, by education, industry, literature, & a love of virtue, to surpass all other men in knowledge & all other qualifications necessary for great actions, as far as they do in quality & titles; that princes out of them might always chose men fit for all employments and high trusts. Clov. B. 7.

 

One eternity greater than another of the same kind.

In what sense eternity may be limited.

G. T.

Whether succession of ideas in the Divine intellect?

T.

Time is the train of ideas succeeding each other.

Duration not distinguish’d from existence.

Succession explain’d by before, between, after, & numbering.

Why time in pain longer than time in pleasure?

 Duration infinitely divisible, time not so.

 

T.

The same τὸ νῦν not common to all intelligences.

Time thought infinitely divisible on account of its measure.

Extension not infinitely divisible in one sense.

Revolutions immediately measure train of ideas, mediately duration.

T.

Time a sensation; therefore onely in ye mind.

Eternity is onely a train of innumerable ideas. Hence the immortality of ye soul easily conceiv’d, or rather the immortality of the person, that of ye soul not being necessary for ought we can see.

Swiftness of ideas compar’d with yt of motions shews the wisdom of God.

Wt if succession of ideas were swifter, wt if slower?

M.

Fall of Adam, use of idolatry, use of Epicurism & Hobbism, dispute about divisibility of matter, &c. expounded by material substances.

Extension a sensation, therefore not without the mind.

M.

In the immaterial hypothesis, the wall is white, fire hot, &c.

Primary ideas prov’d not to exist in matter; after the same manner yt secondary ones are prov’d not to exist therein.

Demonstrations of the infinite divisibility of extension suppose length without breadth, or invisible length, wch is absurd.

M.

World wth out thought is nec quid , nec quantum , nec quale , &c.

M.

’Tis wondrous to contemplate ye World empty’d of all intelligences.

Nothing properly but Persons, i.e. conscious things, do exist. All other things are not so much existences as manners of ye existence of persons.

Qu. about the soul, or rather person, whether it be not compleatly known?

 

Infinite divisibility of extension does suppose the external existence of extension; but the later is false, ergo ye former also.

Qu. Blind man made to see, would he know motion at 1st sight?

 Motion, figure, and extension perceivable by sight are  different from those ideas perceived by touch wch goe by the same name.

Diagonal incommensurable wth ye side. Quære how this can be in my doctrine?

N.

Qu. how to reconcile Newton’s 2 sorts of motion with my doctrine?

Terminations of surfaces & lines not imaginable per se .

Molyneux’s blind man would not know the sphere or cube to be bodies or extended at first sight.

Extension so far from being incompatible wth , yt ’tis impossible it should exist without thought.

M. S.

Extension itself or anything extended cannot think — these being meer ideas or sensations, whose essence we thoroughly know.

No extension but surface perceivable by sight.

M.

Wn we imagine 2 bowls v. g. moving in vacuo, ’tis only conceiving a person affected with these sensations.

M.

Extension to exist in a thoughtless thing [or rather in a thing void of perception — thought seeming to imply action], is a contradiction.

Qu. if visible motion be proportional to tangible motion?

T.

In some dreams succession of ideas swifter than at other times.

M.

If a piece of matter have extension, that must be determined to a particular bigness & figure, but &c.

Nothing wth out corresponds to our primary ideas but powers. Hence a direct & brief demonstration of an active powerfull Being, distinct from us, on whom we depend.

The name of colours actually given to tangible qualities, by the relation of ye story of the German Count.

Qu. How came visible & tangible qualities by the same name in all languages?

 

Qu. Whether Being might not be the substance of the soul, or (otherwise thus) whether Being, added to ye faculties, compleat the real essence and adequate definition of the soul?

N.

 Qu. Whether, on the supposition of external bodies, it be possible for us to know that any body is absolutely  at rest, since that supposing ideas much slower than at present, bodies now apparently moving wd then be apparently at rest?

M.

Qu. What can be like a sensation but a sensation?

Qu. Did ever any man see any other things besides his own ideas, that he should compare them to these, and make these like unto them?

 

T.

The age of a fly, for ought that we know, may be as long as yt of a man.

 

Visible distance heterogeneous from tangible distance demonstrated 3 several ways: —

1st . If a tangible inch be equal or in any other reason to a visible inch, thence it will follow yt unequals are equals, wch is absurd: for at what distance would the visible inch be placed to make it equal to the tangible inch?

2d . One made to see that had not yet seen his own limbs, or any thing he touched, upon sight of a foot length would know it to be a foot length, if tangible foot & visible foot were the same idea — sed falsum id, ergo et hoc.

3dly . From Molyneux’s problem, wch otherwise is falsely solv’d by Locke and him.

 

M.

Nothing but ideas perceivable.

A man cannot compare 2 things together without perceiving them each. Ergo, he cannot say anything wch is not an idea is like or unlike an idea.

Bodies &c. do exist even wn not perceived — they being powers in the active being.

 

Succession a simple idea, [succession is an abstract, i.e. an inconceivable idea,] Locke says.

 

 Visible extension is [proportional to tangible extension, also is] encreated & diminish’d by parts. Hence taken for the same.

 

If extension be without the mind in bodies. Qu. whether tangible or visible, or both?

Mathematical propositions about extension & motion true in a double sense.

Extension thought peculiarly inert, because not accompany’d wth pleasure & pain: hence thought to exist in matter; as also for that it was conceiv’d common to 2 senses, [as also the constant perception of ’em].

Blind at 1st sight could not tell how near what he saw was to him, nor even whether it be wth out him or in his eye. Qu. Would he not think the later?

Blind at 1st sight could not know yt wt he saw was extended, until he had seen and touched some one self-same thing — not knowing how minimum tangibile would look in vision.

M.

Mem. That homogeneous particles be brought in to answer the objection of God’s creating sun, plants, &c. before animals.

In every bodie two infinite series of extension — the one of tangible, the other of visible.

All things to a blind [man] at first seen in a point.

Ignorance of glasses made men think extension to be in bodies.

M.

Homogeneous portions of matter — useful to contemplate them.

Extension if in matter changes its relation wth minimum visibile , wch seems to be fixt.

Qu. whether m.v. be fix’d?

M.

Each particle of matter if extended must be infinitely extended, or have an infinite series of extension.

M.

If the world be granted to consist of Matter, ’tis the mind gives it beauty and proportion.

Wt I have said onely proves there is no proportion at all times and in all men between a visible & tangible inch.

Tangible and visible extension heterogeneous, because they have no common measure; also because their simplest constituent parts or elements are specifically different, viz. punctum visibile & tangibile  . N. B. The former seems to be no good reason.

 

M. N.

By immateriality is solv’d the cohesion of bodies, or rather the dispute ceases.

Our idea we call extension neither way capable of infinity, i.e. neither infinitely small or great.

Greatest possible extension seen under an angle wch will be less than 180 degrees, the legs of wch angle proceed from the ends of the extension.

N.

Allowing there be extended, solid, &c. substances without the mind, ’tis impossible the mind should know or perceive them; the mind, even according to the materialists, perceiving onely the impressions made upon its brain, or rather the ideas attending these impressions.

Unity in abstracto not at all divisible, it being as it were a point, or with Barrow nothing at all; in concreto not divisible ad infinitum , there being no one idea demonstrable ad infinitum .

M.

Any subject can have of each sort of primary qualities but one particular at once. Locke, b. 4. c. 3. s. 15.

Qu. whether we have clear ideas of large numbers themselves, or onely of their relations?

M.

Of solidity see L. b. 2. c. 4. s. 1, 5, 6. If any one ask wt solidity is, let him put a flint between his hands and he will know. Extension of body is continuity of solid, &c.; extension of space is continuity of unsolid, &c.

Why may not I say visible extension is a continuity of visible points, tangible extension is a continuity of tangible points?

 

M.

Mem. That I take notice that I do not fall in wth sceptics, Fardella, &c., in that I make bodies to exist certainly, wch they doubt of.

M.

I am more certain of ye existence & reality of bodies than Mr. Locke; since he pretends onely to wt  he calls sensitive knowledge, whereas I think I have demonstrative  knowledge of their existence — by them meaning combinations of powers in an unknown substratum.

 

M.

Our ideas we call figure & extension, not images of the figure and extension of matter; these (if such there be) being infinitely divisible, those not so.

’Tis impossible a material cube should exist, because the edges of a cube will appear broad to an acute sense.

 

Men die, or are in [a] state of annihilation, oft in a day.

 

S.

Powers. Qu. whether more or one onely?

 

Lengths abstract from breadths are the work of the mind. Such do intersect in a point at all angles. After the same way colour is abstract from extension.

Every position alters the line.

Qu. whether ideas of extension are made up of other ideas, v.g. idea of a foot made up of general ideas of an inch?

The idea of an inch length not one determin’d idea. Hence enquire the reason why we are out in judging of extension by the sight; for which purpose ’tis meet also to consider the frequent & sudden changes of extension by position.

No stated ideas of length without a minimum.

M.

Material substance banter’d by Locke, b. 2. c. 13. s. 19.

M.

In my doctrine all absurdities from infinite space &c. cease.

Qu. whether if (speaking grossly) the things we see were all of them at all times too small to be felt, we should have confounded tangible & visible extension and figure?

 

T.

Qu. whether if succession of ideas in the Eternal Mind, a day does not seem to God a 1000 years, rather than a 1000 years a day?

 

 But one only colour & its degrees.

 

Enquiry about a grand mistake in writers of dioptricks in assigning the cause of microscopes magnifying objects.

Qu. whether a born-blind [man] made to see would at 1st give the name of distance to any idea intromitted by sight; since he would take distance yt that he had perceived by touch to be something existing without his mind, but he would certainly think that nothing seen was without his mind?

S.

Space without any bodies existing in rerum natura would not be extended, as not having parts — in that parts are assigned to it wth respect to body; from whence also the notion of distance is taken. Now without either parts or distance or mind, how can there be Space, or anything beside one uniform Nothing?

Two demonstrations that blind made to see would not take all things he saw to be without his mind, or not in a point — the one from microscopic eyes, the other from not perceiving distance, i.e. radius of the visual sphere.

 

M.

The trees are in the park, i.e. whether I will or no, whether I imagine anything about them or no. Let me but go thither and open my eyes by day, & I shall not avoid seeing them.

 

By extension blind [man] would mean either the perception caused in his touch by something he calls extended, or else the power of raising that perception; wch power is without, in the thing termed extended. Now he could not know either of these to be in things visible till he had try’d.

Geometry seems to have for its object tangible extension, figures, & motion — and not visible.

A man will say a body will seem as big as before, tho’ the visible idea it yields be less than wt it was; therefore the bigness or tangible extension of the body is different from the visible extension.

 Extension or space no simple idea — length, breadth, & solidity being three several ideas.

 

Depth or solidity now perceived by sight.

 

Strange impotence of men. Man without God wretcheder than a stone or tree; he having onely the power to be miserable by his unperformed wills, these having no power at all.

 

Length perceivable by hearing — length & breadth by sight — length, breadth, & depth by touch.

G.

Wt affects us must be a thinking thing, for wt thinks not cannot subsist.

Number not in bodies, it being the creature of the mind, depending entirely on its consideration, & being more or less as the mind pleases.

Mem. Quære whether extension be equally a sensation with colour? The mob use not the word extension. ’Tis an abstract term of the Schools.

P.

Round figure a perception or sensation in the mind, but in the body is a power. L[ocke], b. 2. c. 8. s. 8.

Mem. Mark well the later part of the last cited section.

Solids, or any other tangible things, are no otherwise seen than colours felt by the German Count.

M.

“Of” and “thing” causes of mistake.

The visible point of he who has microscopical eyes will not be greater or less than mine.

Qu. Whether the propositions & even axioms of geometry do not divers of them suppose the existence of lines &c. without the mind?

T.

Whether motion be the measure of duration? Locke, b. 2. c. 14. s. 19.

Lines & points conceiv’d as terminations different ideas from those conceiv’d absolutely.

Every position alters a line.

S.

Blind man at 1st would not take colours to be without his mind; but colours would seem to be in the same place with the coloured extension: therefore extension wd  not seem to be without the mind.

 

All visible concentric circles whereof the eye is the centre are absolutely equal.

Infinite number — why absurd — not rightly solv’d by Locke.

Qu. how ’tis possible we should see flats or right lines?

Qu. why the moon appears greatest in the horizon?

Qu. why we see things erect when painted inverted?

 

T.

Question put by Mr. Deering touching the thief and paradise.

 

M.

Matter tho’ allowed to exist may be no greater than a pin’s head.

Motion is proportionable to space described in given time.

Velocity not proportionable to space describ’d in given time.

 

M.

No active power but the Will: therefore Matter, if it exists, affects us not.

 

Magnitude when barely taken for the ratio partium extra partes , or rather for co-existence & succession, without considering the parts co-existing & succeeding, is infinitely, or rather indefinitely, or not at all perhaps, divisible, because it is itself infinite or indefinite. But definite, determined magnitudes, i.e. lines or surfaces consisting of points whereby (together wth distance & position) they are determin’d, are resoluble into those points.

Again. Magnitude taken for co-existence and succession is not all divisible, but is one simple idea.

Simple ideas include no parts nor relations — hardly separated and considered in themselves — nor yet rightly singled by any author. Instance in power, red, extension, &c.

M.

Space not imaginable by any idea received from sight — not imaginable without body moving. Not even then necessarily existing (I speak of infinite space) — for wt  the body has past may be conceiv’d annihilated.

 

M.

Qu. What can we see beside colours? what can we feel beside hard, soft, cold, warm, pleasure, pain?

Qu. Why not taste & smell extension?

Qu. Why not tangible & visible extensions thought heterogeneous extensions, so well as gustable & olefactible perceptions thought heterogeneous perceptions? or at least why not as heterogeneous as blue & red?

Moon wn horizontal does not appear bigger as to visible extension than at other times; hence difficulties and disputes about things seen under equal angles &c. cease.

 

All potentiæ alike indifferent.

A. B. Wt does he mean by his potentia ? Is it the will, desire, person, or all or neither, or sometimes one, sometimes t’other?

No agent can be conceiv’d indifferent as to pain or pleasure.

We do not, properly speaking, in a strict philosophical sense, make objects more or less pleasant; but the laws of nature do that.

Mo. S.

A finite intelligence might have foreseen 4 thousand years agoe the place and circumstances, even the most minute & trivial, of my present existence. This true on supposition that uneasiness determines the will.

S.

Doctrines of liberty, prescience, &c. explained by billiard balls.

 

Wt judgement would he make of uppermost and lowermost who had always seen through an inverting glass?

All lines subtending the same optic angle congruent (as is evident by an easy experiment); therefore they are equal.

We have not pure simple ideas of blue, red, or any other colour (except perhaps black) because all bodies reflect heterogeneal light.

Qu. Whether this be true as to sounds (& other sensations), there being, perhaps, rays of air wch will onely exhibit one particular sound, as rays of light one particular colour.

 Colours not definable, not because they are pure unmixt thoughts, but because we cannot easily distinguish & separate the thoughts they include, or because we want names for their component ideas.

 

S.

By Soul is meant onely a complex idea, made up of existence, willing, & perception in a large sense. Therefore it is known and it may be defined.

We cannot possibly conceive any active power but the Will.

S.

In moral matters men think (’tis true) that they are free; but this freedom is only the freedom of doing as they please; wch freedom is consecutive to the Will, respecting only the operative faculties.

Men impute their actions to themselves because they will’d them, and that not out of ignorance, but whereas they have the consequences of them, whether good or bad.

This does not prove men to be indifferent in respect of desiring.

If anything is meant by the potentia of A. B. it must be desire; but I appeal to any man if his desire be indifferent, or (to speak more to the purpose) whether he himself be indifferent in respect of wt he desires till after he has desired it; for as for desire itself, or the faculty of desiring, that is indifferent, as all other faculties are.

Actions leading to heaven are in my power if I will them: therefore I will will them.

Qu. concerning the procession of Wills in infinitum .

Herein mathematiques have the advantage over metaphysiques and morality. Their definitions, being of words not yet known to ye learner, are not disputed; but words in metaphysiques & morality, being mostly known to all, the definitions of them may chance to be contraverted.

M.

The short jejune way in mathematiques will not do in metaphysiques & ethiques: for yt  about mathematical propositions men have no prejudices, no anticipated opinions to be encounter’d; they not having yet thought on such matters. ’Tis not so in the other 2 mentioned sciences. A man must [there] not onely demonstrate the truth, he must also vindicate it against scruples and established opinions which contradict it. In short, the dry, strigose, rigid way will not suffice. He must be more ample & copious, else his demonstration, tho’ never so exact, will not go down with most.

 

Extension seems to consist in variety of homogeneal thoughts co-existing without mixture.

Or rather visible extension seems to be the co-existence of colour in the mind.

 

S. Mo.

Enquiring and judging are actions which depend on the operative faculties, wch depend on the Will, wch is determin’d by some uneasiness; ergo &c. Suppose an agent wch is finite perfectly indifferent, and as to desiring not determin’d by any prospect or consideration of good, I say, this agent cannot do an action morally good. Hence ’tis evident the suppositions of A. B. are insignificant.

Extension, motion, time, number are no simple ideas, but include succession to them, which seems to be a simple idea.

Mem. To enquire into the angle of contact, & into fluxions, &c.

The sphere of vision is equal whether I look onely in my hand or on the open firmament, for 1st , in both cases the retina is full; 2d , the radius’s of both spheres are equall or rather nothing at all to the sight; 3dly , equal numbers of points in one & t’other.

In the Barrovian case purblind would judge aright.

Why the horizontal moon greater?

Why objects seen erect?

N.

To what purpose certain figure and texture connected wth other perceptions?

Men estimate magnitudes both by angles and distance. Blind at 1st could not know distance; or by pure sight, abstracting from experience of connexion of sight and tangible ideas, we can’t perceive distance. Therefore by pure sight we cannot perceive or judge of extension.

Qu. Whether it be possible to enlarge our sight or make us see at once more, or more points, than we do, by diminishing the punctum visibile below 30 minutes?

 

I. S.

Speech metaphorical more than we imagine; insensible things, & their modes, circumstances, &c. being exprest for the most part by words borrow’d from things sensible. Hence manyfold mistakes.

S.

The grand mistake is that we think we have ideas  of the  operations of our minds. Certainly this metaphorical dress is an argument we have not.

Qu. How can our idea of God be complex & compounded, when his essence is simple & uncompounded? V. Locke, b. 2. c. 23. s. 35.

G.

The impossibility of defining or discoursing clearly of such things proceeds from the fault & scantiness of language, as much perhaps as from obscurity & confusion of thought. Hence I may clearly and fully understand my own soul, extension, &c., and not be able to define them.

M.

The substance wood a collection of simple ideas. See Locke, b. 2. c. 26. s. 1.

 

Mem. concerning strait lines seen to look at them through an orbicular lattice.

Qu. Whether possible that those visible ideas wch are now connected with greater tangible extensions could have been connected with lesser tangible extensions, — there seeming to be no necessary connexion between those thoughts?

Speculums seem to diminish or enlarge objects not by altering the optique angle, but by altering the apparent distance.

Hence Qu. if blind would think things diminish’d by convexes, or enlarg’d by concaves?

P.N.

Motion not one idea. It cannot be perceived at once.

M. P.

Mem. To allow existence to colours in the dark, persons not thinking, &c. — but not an actual existence. ’Tis prudent to correct men’s mistakes without altering their language. This makes truth glide into their souls insensibly.

M. P.

Colours in ye dark do exist really, i.e. were there light; or as soon as light comes, we shall see them, provided we open our eyes; and that whether we will or no.

How the retina is fill’d by a looking-glass?

Convex speculums have the same effect wth  concave glasses.

 

Qu. Whether concave speculums have the same effect wth convex glasses?

The reason why convex speculums diminish & concave magnify not yet fully assign’d by any writer I know.

Qu. Why not objects seen confus’d when that they seem inverted through a convex lens?

Qu. How to make a glass or speculum which shall magnify or diminish by altering the distance without altering the angle?

 

No identity (other than perfect likeness) in any individuals besides persons.

N.

As well make tastes, smells, fear, shame, wit, virtue, vice, & all thoughts move wth local motion as immaterial spirit.

On account of my doctrine, the identity of finite substances must consist in something else than continued existence, or relation to determined time & place of beginning to exist — the existence of our thoughts (which being combined make all substances) being frequently interrupted, & they having divers beginnings & endings.

S.

Qu. Whether identity of person consists not in the Will?

 

No necessary connexion between great or little optique angles and great or little extension.

Distance is not perceived: optique angles are not perceived. How then is extension perceiv’d by sight?

Apparent magnitude of a line is not simply as the optique angle, but directly as the optique angle, & reciprocally as the confusion, &c. (i.e. the other sensations, or want of sensation, that attend near vision). Hence great mistakes in assigning the magnifying power of glasses. Vid. Moly[neux], .

Glasses or speculums may perhaps magnify or lessen without altering the optique angle, but to no purpose.

Qu. Whether purblind would think objects so much diminished by a convex speculum as another?

 

Qu. Wherein consists identity of person? Not in actual consciousness; for then I’m not the same person I was this day twelvemonth but while I think of wt  I then  did. Not in potential; for then all persons may be the same, for ought we know.

Mem. Story of Mr. Deering’s aunt.

Two sorts of potential consciousness — natural & præternatural. In the last § but one, I mean the latter.

 

If by magnitude be meant the proportion anything bears to a determined tangible extension, as inch, foot, &c., this, ’tis plain, cannot be properly & per se perceived by sight; & as for determin’d visible inches, feet, &c., there can be no such thing obtain’d by the meer act of seeing — abstracted from experience, &c.

The greatness per se perceivable by the sight is onely the proportion any visible appearance bears to the others seen at the same time; or (which is the same thing) the proportion of any particular part of the visual orb to the whole. But mark that we perceive not it is an orb, any more than a plain, but by reasoning.

This is all the greatness the pictures have per se .

Hereby meere seeing cannot at all judge of the extension of any object, it not availing to know the object makes such a part of a sphærical surface except we also know the greatness of the sphærical surface; for a point may subtend the same angle wth a mile, & so create as great an image in the retina, i.e. take up as much of the orb.

Men judge of magnitude by faintness and vigorousness, by distinctness and confusion, with some other circumstances, by great & little angles.

Hence ’tis plain the ideas of sight which are now connected with greatness might have been connected wth smallness, and vice versâ: there being no necessary reason why great angles, faintness, and distinctness without straining, should stand for great extension, any more than a great angle, vigorousness, and confusion.

My end is not to deliver metaphysiques altogether in a general scholastic way, but in some measure to accommodate them to the sciences, and shew how they may be useful in optiques, geometry, &c.

Qu. Whether per se  proportion of visible magnitudes be perceivable by sight? This is put on account of distinctness and confusedness, the act of perception seeming to be  as great in viewing any point of the visual orb distinctly, as in viewing the whole confusedly.

Mem. To correct my language & make it as philosophically nice as possible — to avoid giving handle.

If men could without straining alter the convexity of their crystallines, they might magnify or diminish the apparent diameters of objects, the same optic angle remaining.

The bigness in one sense of the pictures in the fund is not determin’d; for the nearer a man views them, the images of them (as well as other objects) will take up the greater room in the fund of his eye.

Mem. Introduction to contain the design of the whole, the nature and manner of demonstrating, &c.

Two sorts of bigness accurately to be distinguished, they being perfectly and toto cælo different — the one the proportion that any one appearance has to the sum of appearances perceived at the same time wth it, wch is proportional to angles, or, if a surface, to segments of sphærical surfaces; — the other is tangible bigness.

Qu. wt would happen if the sphæræ of the retina were enlarged or diminish’d?

We think by the meer act of vision we perceive distance from us, yet we do not; also that we perceive solids, yet we do not; also the inequality of things seen under the same angle, yet we do not.

Why may I not add, We think we see extension by meer vision? Yet we do not.

Extension seems to be perceived by the eye, as thought by the ear.

As long as the same angle determines the minimum visibile to two persons, no different conformation of the eye can make a different appearance of magnitude in the same thing. But, it being possible to try the angle, we may certainly know whether the same thing appears differently big to two persons on account of their eyes.

If a man could see ... objects would appear larger to him than to another; hence there is another sort of purely visible magnitude beside the proportion any appearance bears to the visual sphere, viz. its proportion to the M. V.

 Were there but one and the same language in the world, and did children speak it naturally as soon as born, and  were it not in the power of men to conceal their thoughts or deceive others, but that there were an inseparable connexion between words & thoughts, so yt posito uno, ponitur alterum by the laws of nature; Qu. would not men think they heard thoughts as much as that they see extension?

 

All our ideas are adæquate: our knowledge of the laws of nature is not perfect & adæquate.

 

M. P.

Men are in the right in judging their simple ideas to be in the things themselves. Certainly heat & colour is as much without the mind as figure, motion, time, &c.

 

We know many things wch we want words to express. Great things discoverable upon this principle. For want of considering wch divers men have run into sundry mistakes, endeavouring to set forth their knowledge by sounds; wch foundering them, they thought the defect was in their knowledge, while in truth it was in their language.

Qu. Whether the sensations of sight arising from a man’s head be liker the sensations of touch proceeding from thence or from his legs?

Or, Is it onely the constant & long association of ideas entirely different that makes me judge them the same?

Wt I see is onely variety of colours & light. Wt I feel is hard or soft, hot or cold, rough or smooth, &c. Wt resemblance have these thoughts with those?

A picture painted wth great variety of colours affects the touch in one uniform manner. I cannot therefore conclude that because I see 2, I shall feel 2; because I see angles or inequalities, I shall feel angles or inequalities. How therefore can I — before experience teaches me — know that the visible leggs are (because 2) connected wth the tangible ones, or the visible head (because one) connected wth  the tangible head?

 

M.

All things by us conceivable are —

1st, thoughts;

2ndly, powers to receive thoughts;

3rdly, powers to cause thoughts; neither of all wch can possibly exist in an inert, senseless thing.

 

An object wth out a glass may be seen under as great an angle as wth a glass. A glass therefore does not magnify the appearance by the angle.

S.

Absurd that men should know the soul by idea — ideas being inert, thoughtless. Hence Malbranch confuted.

I saw gladness in his looks. I saw shame in his face. So I see figure or distance.

Qu. Why things seen confusedly thro’ a convex glass are not magnify’d?

Tho’ we should judge the horizontal moon to be more distant, why should we therefore judge her to be greater? What connexion betwixt the same angle, further distant, and greaterness?

N.

My doctrine affects the essences of the Corpuscularians.

Perfect circles, &c. exist not without (for none can so exist, whether perfect or no), but in the mind.

Lines thought divisible ad infinitum , because they are suppos’d to exist without. Also because they are thought the same when view’d by the naked eye, & wn view’d thro’ magnifying glasses.

They who knew not glasses had not so fair a pretence for the divisibility ad infinitum .

No idea of circle, &c. in abstract.

Metaphysiques as capable of certainty as ethiques, but not so capable to be demonstrated in a geometrical way; because men see clearer & have not so many prejudices in ethiques.

Visible ideas come into the mind very distinct. So do tangible ideas. Hence extension seen & felt. Sounds, tastes, &c. are more blended.

 Qu. Why not extension intromitted by the taste in conjunction with the smell — seeing tastes & smells are very distinct ideas?

 

Blew and yellow particles mixt, while they exhibit an uniform green, their extension is not perceiv’d; but as soon as they exhibit distinct sensations of blew and yellow, then their extension is perceiv’d.

Distinct perception of visible ideas not so perfect as of tangible — tangible ideas being many at once equally vivid. Hence heterogeneous extension.

Object. Why a mist increases not the apparent magnitude of an object, in proportion to the faintness?

Mem. To enquire touching the squaring of the circle, &c.

That wch seems smooth & round to the touch may to sight seem quite otherwise. Hence no necessary connexion betwixt visible ideas and tangible ones.

In geometry it is not prov’d that an inch is divisible ad infinitum .

Geometry not conversant about our compleat determined ideas of figures, for these are not divisible ad infinitum .

Particular circles may be squar’d, for the circumference being given a diameter may be found betwixt wch & the true there is not any perceivable difference. Therefore there is no difference — extension being a perception; & a perception not perceivd is contradiction, nonsense, nothing. In vain to alledge the difference may be seen by magnifying-glasses, for in yt case there is (’tis true) a difference perceiv’d, but not between the same ideas, but others much greater, entirely different therefrom.

Any visible circle possibly perceivable of any man may be squar’d, by the common way, most accurately; or even perceivable by any other being, see he never so acute, i.e. never so small an arch of a circle; this being wt makes the distinction between acute & dull sight, and not the m.v., as men are perhaps apt to think.

The same is true of any tangible circle. Therefore further enquiry of accuracy in squaring or other curves is perfectly needless, & time thrown away.

Mem. To press wt last precedes more homely, & so think on’t again.

 A meer line or distance is not made up of points, does  not exist, cannot be imagin’d, or have an idea framed thereof, — no more than meer colour without extension.

Mem. A great difference between considering length wth out breadth, & having an idea of, or imagining , length without breadth.

Malbranch out touching the crystallines diminishing, L. 1. c. 6.

’Tis possible (& perhaps not very improbable, that is, is sometimes so) we may have the greatest pictures from the least objects. Therefore no necessary connexion betwixt visible & tangible ideas. These ideas, viz. great relation to sphæra visualis , or to the m. v. (wch is all that I would have meant by having a greater picture) & faintness, might possibly have stood for or signify’d small tangible extensions. Certainly the greater relation to s. v. and m. v. does frequently, in that men view little objects near the eye.

Malbranch out in asserting we cannot possibly know whether there are 2 men in the world that see a thing of the same bigness. V. L. 1. c. 6.

Diagonal of particular square commensurable wth its side, they both containing a certain number of m. v.

I do not think that surfaces consist of lines, i.e. meer distances. Hence perhaps may be solid that sophism wch would prove the oblique line equal to the perpendicular between 2 parallels.

Suppose an inch represent a mile. 1/1000 of an inch is nothing, but 1/1000 of ye mile represented is something: therefore 1/1000 an inch, tho’ nothing, is not to be neglected, because it represents something, i.e. 1/1000 of a mile.

Particular determin’d lines are not divisible ad infinitum , but lines as us’d by geometers are so, they not being determin’d to any particular finite number of points. Yet a geometer (he knows not why) will very readily say he can demonstrate an inch line is divisible ad infinitum .

 A body moving in the optique axis not perceiv’d to move by sight merely, and without experience. There is (’tis  true) a successive change of ideas, — it seems less and less. But, besides this, there is no visible change of place.

Mem. To enquire most diligently concerning the incommensurability of diagonale & side — whether it does not go on the supposition of units being divisible ad infinitum , i.e. of the extended thing spoken of being divisible ad infinitum (unit being nothing; also v. Barrow, Lect. Geom.), & so the infinite indivisibility deduced therefrom is a petitio principii ?

The diagonal is commensurable with the side.

M. P.

From Malbranch, Locke, & my first arguings it can’t be prov’d that extension is not in matter. From Locke’s arguings it can’t be proved that colours are not in bodies.

 

Mem. That I was distrustful at 8 years old; and consequently by nature disposed for these new doctrines.

 

Qu. How can a line consisting of an unequal number of points be divisible [ad infinitum ] in two equals?

Mem. To discuss copiously how & why we do not see the pictures.

M. P.

Allowing extensions to exist in matter, we cannot know even their proportions — contrary to Malbranch.

 

M.

I wonder how men cannot see a truth so obvious, as that extension cannot exist without a thinking substance.

 

M.

Species of all sensible things made by the mind. This prov’d either by turning men’s eyes into magnifyers or diminishers.

Yr m. v. is, suppose, less than mine. Let a 3rd person have perfect ideas of both our m. vs . His idea of my m. v. contains his idea of yours, & somewhat more. Therefore ’tis made up of parts: therefore his idea of my m. v. is not perfect or just, which diverts the hypothesis.

Qu. Whether a m. v. or t. be extended?

 Mem. The strange errours men run into about the pictures. We think them small because should a man be suppos’d to see them their pictures would take up but little room in the fund of his eye.

 

It seems all lines can’t be bisected in 2 equall parts. Mem. To examine how the geometers prove the contrary.

’Tis impossible there should be a m. v. less than mine. If there be, mine may become equal to it (because they are homogeneous) by detraction of some part or parts. But it consists not of parts, ergo &c.

Suppose inverting perspectives bound to ye eyes of a child, & continu’d to the years of manhood — when he looks up, or turns up his head, he shall behold wt we call under . Qu. What would he think of up and down ?

 

M.

I wonder not at my sagacity in discovering the obvious tho’ amazing truth. I rather wonder at my stupid inadvertency in not finding it out before— ’tis no witchcraft to see.

 

M.

Our simple ideas are so many simple thoughts or perceptions; a perception cannot exist without a thing to perceive it, or any longer than it is perceiv’d; a thought cannot be in an unthinking thing; one uniform simple thought can be like to nothing but another uniform simple thought. Complex thoughts or ideas are onely an assemblage of simple ideas, and can be the image of nothing, or like unto nothing, but another assemblage of simple ideas, &c.

M.

The Cartesian opinion of light & colours &c. is orthodox enough even in their eyes who think the Scripture expression may favour the common opinion. Why may not mine also? But there is nothing in Scripture that can possibly be wrested to make against me, but, perhaps, many things for me.

 

M.

Bodies &c. do exist whether we think of ’em or no, they being taken in a twofold sense —

1. Collections of thoughts.

2. Collections of powers to cause those thoughts.

These later exist; tho’ perhaps a parte rei it may be one simple perfect power.

 

 Qu. whether the extension of a plain, look’d at straight and slantingly, survey’d minutely & distinctly, or in the bulk and confusedly at once, be the same? N. B. The plain is suppos’d to keep the same distance.

 

The ideas we have by a successive, curious inspection of ye minute parts of a plain do not seem to make up the extension of that plain view’d & consider’d all together.

 

Ignorance in some sort requisite in ye person that should disown the Principle.

Thoughts do most properly signify, or are mostly taken for the interior operations of the mind, wherein the mind is active. Those yt obey not the acts of volition, and in wch the mind is passive, are more properly call’d sensations or perceptions. But yt is all a case of words.

 

Extension being the collection or distinct co-existence of minimums, i.e. of perceptions intromitted by sight or touch, it cannot be conceiv’d without a perceiving substance.

P.

Malbranch does not prove that the figures & extensions exist not when they are not perceiv’d. Consequently he does not prove, nor can it be prov’d on his principles, that the sorts are the work of the mind, and onely in the mind.

M. P.

The great argument to prove that extension cannot be in an unthinking substance is, that it cannot be conceiv’d distinct from or without all tangible or visible quality.

M.

Tho’ matter be extended wth an indefinite extension, yet the mind makes the sorts. They were not before the mind perceiving them, & even now they are not without the mind. Houses, trees, &c., tho’ indefinitely extended matter do exist, are not without the mind.

M.

The great danger of making extension exist without the mind is, that if it does it must be acknowledg’d infinite, immutable, eternal, &c.; — wch will be to make either God extended (wch I think dangerous), or an eternal, immutable, infinite, increate Being beside God.

I.

Finiteness of our minds no excuse for the geometers.

 

M.

The Principle easily proved by plenty of arguments ad absurdum .

 

The twofold signification of Bodies, viz.

1. Combinations of thoughts;

 2. Combinations of powers to raise thoughts.

 

These, I say, in conjunction with homogeneous particles, may solve much better the objections from the creation than the supposition that Matter does exist. Upon wch supposition I think they cannot be solv’d.

Bodies taken for powers do exist wn not perceiv’d; but this existence is not actual. Wn I say a power exists, no more is meant than that if in the light I open my eyes, and look that way, I shall see it, i.e. the body, &c.

 

Qu. whether blind before sight may not have an idea of light and colours & visible extension, after the same manner as we perceive them wth eyes shut, or in the dark — not imagining, but seeing after a sort?

Visible extension cannot be conceiv’d added to tangible extension. Visible and tangible points can’t make one sum. Therefore these extensions are heterogeneous.

A probable method propos’d whereby one may judge whether in near vision there is a greater distance between the crystalline & fund than usual, or whether the crystalline be onely render’d more convex. If the former, then the v. s. is enlarg’d, & the m. v. corresponds to less than 30 minutes, or wt ever it us’d to correspond to.

Stated measures, inches, feet, &c., are tangible not visible extensions.

 

M.

Locke, More, Raphson, &c. seem to make God extended. ’Tis nevertheless of great use to religion to take extension out of our idea of God, & put a power in its place. It seems dangerous to suppose extension, wch is manifestly inert, in God.

M.

But, say you, The thought or perception I call extension is not itself in an unthinking thing or Matter — but it is like something wch is in Matter. Well, say I, Do you apprehend or conceive wt  you say extension is like unto, or do you not? If the later, how know you they are alike? How can you compare any things besides your own ideas? If the former, it must be an idea, i.e. perception, thought,  or sensation — wch to be in an unperceiving thing is a contradiction.

 

I.

I abstain from all flourish & powers of words & figures, using a great plainness & simplicity of simile, having oft found it difficult to understand those that use the lofty & Platonic, or subtil & scholastique strain.

 

M.

Whatsoever has any of our ideas in it must perceive; it being that very having, that passive recognition of ideas, that denominates the mind perceiving — that being the very essence of perception, or that wherein perception consists.

 

The faintness wch alters the appearance of the horizontal moon, rather proceeds from the quantity or grossness of the intermediate atmosphere, than from any change of distance, wch is perhaps not considerable enough to be a total cause, but may be a partial of the phenomenon. N. B. The visual angle is less in cause the horizon.

We judge of the distance of bodies, as by other things, so also by the situation of their pictures in the eye, or (wch is the same thing) according as they appear higher or lower. Those wch seem higher are farther off.

Qu. why we see objects greater in ye dark? whether this can be solv’d by any but my Principles?

 

M.

The reverse of ye Principle introduced scepticism.

M.

N. B. On my Principles there is a reality: there are things: there is a rerum natura .

Mem. The surds, doubling the cube, &c.

We think that if just made to see we should judge of the distance & magnitude of things as we do now; but this is false. So also wt we think so positively of the situation of objects.

Hays’s, Keill’s, &c. method of proving the infinitesimals of the 3d  order absurd, & perfectly contradictions.

 

Angles of contact, & verily all angles comprehended by a right line & a curve, cannot be measur’d, the arches intercepted not being similar.

 

The danger of expounding the H. Trinity by extension.

 

M. P.

Qu. Why should the magnitude seen at a near distance be deem’d the true one rather than that seen at a farther distance? Why should the sun be thought many 1000 miles rather than one foot in diameter — both being equally apparent diameters? Certainly men judg’d of the sun not in himself, but wth relation to themselves.

 

M.

4 Principles whereby to answer objections, viz.

1. Bodies do really exist, tho’ not perceiv’d by us.

2. There is a law or course of nature.

3. Language & knowledge are all about ideas; words stand for nothing else.

4. Nothing can be a proof against one side of a contradiction that bears equally hard upon the other.

 

What shall I say? Dare I pronounce the admired ἀκρίβεια mathematica, that darling of the age, a trifle?

Most certainly no finite extension divisible ad infinitum .

M.

Difficulties about concentric circles.

N.

Mem. To examine & accurately discuss the scholium of the 8th definition of Mr. Newton’s Principia.

Ridiculous in the mathematicians to despise Sense.

Qu. Is it not impossible there should be abstract general ideas?

All ideas come from without. They are all particular. The mind, ’tis true, can consider one thing wth  out another; but then, considered asunder, they make not 2 ideas. Both together can make but one, as for instance colour & visible extension.

 

The end of a mathematical line is nothing. Locke’s argument that the end of his pen is black or white concludes nothing here.

Mem. Take care how you pretend to define extension, for fear of the geometers.

Qu. Why difficult to imagine a minimum? Ans. Because we are not used to take notice of ’em singly; they not being able singly to pleasure or hurt us, thereby to deserve our regard.

Mem. To prove against Keill yt the infinite divisibility of matter makes the half have an equal number of equal parts with the whole.

Mem. To examine how far the not comprehending infinites may be admitted as a plea.

Qu. Why may not the mathematicians reject all the extensions below the M. as well as the dd, &c., wch are allowed to be something, & consequently may be magnify’d by glasses into inches, feet, &c., as well as the quantities next below the M.?

Big, little, and number are the works of the mind. How therefore can ye extension you suppose in Matter be big or little? How can it consist of any number of points?

P.

Mem. Strictly to remark L[ocke], b. 2. c. 8. s. 8.

Schoolmen compar’d with the mathematicians.

Extension is blended wth tangible or visible ideas, & by the mind præscinded therefrom.

Mathematiques made easy — the scale does almost all. The scale can tell us the subtangent in ye parabola is double the abscisse.

Wt need of the utmost accuracy wn the mathematicians own in rerum natura they cannot find anything corresponding wth their nice ideas.

One should endeavour to find a progression by trying wth the scale.

Newton’s fluxions needless. Anything below an M might serve for Leibnitz’s Differential Calculus.

How can they hang together so well, since there are in them (I mean the mathematiques) so many contradictoriæ argutiæ . V. Barrow, Lect.

 A man may read a book of Conics with ease, knowing how to try if they are right. He may take ’em on the credit of the author.

 

Where’s the need of certainty in such trifles? The thing that makes it so much esteem’d in them is that we are thought not capable of getting it elsewhere. But we may in ethiques and metaphysiques.

The not leading men into mistakes no argument for the truth of the infinitesimals. They being nothings may perhaps do neither good nor harm, except wn they are taken for something, & then the contradiction begets a contradiction.

a + 500 nothings = a + 50 nothings — an innocent silly truth.

 

M.

My doctrine excellently corresponds wth the creation. I suppose no matter, no stars, sun, &c. to have existed before.

 

It seems all circles are not similar figures, there not being the same proportion betwixt all circumferences & their diameters.

When a small line upon paper represents a mile, the mathematicians do not calculate the 1/10000 of the paper line, they calculate the 1/10000 of the mile. ’Tis to this they have regard, ’tis of this they think; if they think or have any idea at all. The inch perhaps might represent to their imaginations the mile, but ye 1/10000 of the inch cannot be made to represent anything, it not being imaginable.

But the 1/10000 of a mile being somewhat, they think the 1/10000 inch is somewhat: wn they think of yt they imagine they think on this.

3 faults occur in the arguments of the mathematicians for divisibility ad infinitum —

1. They suppose extension to exist without the mind, or not perceived.

2. They suppose that we have an idea of length without breadth, or that length without breadth does exist.

3. That unity is divisible ad infinitum .

 To suppose a M. S. divisible is to say there are distinguishable ideas where there are no distinguishable ideas.

 

The M. S. is not near so inconceivable as the signum in magnitudine individuum .

Mem. To examine the math, about their point — what it is — something or nothing; and how it differs from the M. S.

All might be demonstrated by a new method of indivisibles, easier perhaps and juster than that of Cavalierius.

 

M.

Unperceivable perception a contradiction.

P. G.

Proprietates reales rerum omnium in Deo, tam corporum quum spirituum continentur. Clerici, Log. ca.

Let my adversaries answer any one of mine, I’ll yield. If I don’t answer every one of theirs, I’ll yield.

The loss of the excuse may hurt Transubstantiation, but not the Trinity.

 

We need not strain our imaginations to conceive such little things. Bigger may do as well for infinitesimals, since the integer must be an infinite.

Evident yt wch has an infinite number of parts must be infinite.

Qu. Whether extension be resoluble into points it does not consist of?

Nor can it be objected that we reason about numbers, wch are only words & not ideas; for these infinitesimals are words of no use, if not supposed to stand for ideas.

Axiom. No reasoning about things whereof we have no idea. Therefore no reasoning about infinitesimals.

Much less infinitesimals of infinitesimals, &c.

Axiom. No word to be used without an idea.

 

M. P.

 Our eyes and senses inform us not of the existence of matter or ideas existing without the mind. They are not to be blam’d for the mistake.

 

I defy any man to assign a right line equal to a paraboloid, but wn look’d at thro’ a microscope they may appear unequall.

M.

Newton’s harangue amounts to no more than that gravity is proportional to gravity.

One can’t imagine an extended thing without colour. V. Barrow, L. G.

P.

Men allow colours, sounds, &c. not to exist without the mind, tho’ they have no demonstration they do not. Why may they not allow my Principle with a demonstration?

M. P.

Qu. Whether I had not better allow colours to exist without the mind; taking the mind for the active thing wch I call “I,” “myself” — yt seems to be distinct from the understanding?

P.

The taking extension to be distinct from all other tangible & visible qualities, & to make an idea by itself, has made men take it to be without the mind.

 

I see no wit in any of them but Newton. The rest are meer triflers, mere Nihilarians.

The folly of the mathematicians in not judging of sensations by their senses. Reason was given us for nobler uses.

M.

Keill’s filling the world with a mite. This follows from the divisibility of extension ad infinitum .

Extension, or length without breadth, seems to be nothing save the number of points that lie betwixt any 2 points. It seems to consist in meer proportion — meer reference of the mind.

To what purpose is it to determine the forms of glasses geometrically?

Sir Isaac owns his book could have been demonstrated on the supposition of indivisibles.

M.

Innumerable vessels of matter. V. Cheyne.

I’ll not admire the mathematicians. ’Tis wt  any one of  common sense might attain to by repeated acts. I prove it by experience. I am but one of human sense, and I &c.

Mathematicians have some of them good parts — the more is the pity. Had they not been mathematicians they had been good for nothing. They were such fools they knew not how to employ their parts.

The mathematicians could not so much as tell wherein truth & certainty consisted, till Locke told ’em. I see the best of ’em talk of light and colours as if wth out the mind.

By thing I either mean ideas or that wch has ideas.

Nullum præclarum ingenium unquam fuit magnus mathematicus. Scaliger.

A great genius cannot stoop to such trifles & minutenesses as they consider.

 

1. All significant words stand for ideas.

2. All knowledge about our ideas.

3. All ideas come from without or from within.

4. If from without it must be by the senses, & they are call’d sensations.

5. If from within they are the operations of the mind, & are called thoughts.

6. No sensation can be in a senseless thing.

7. No thought can be in a thoughtless thing.

8. All our ideas are either sensations or thoughts, by 3, 4, 5.

9. None of our ideas can be in a thing wch is both thoughtless & senseless, by 6, 7, 8.

10. The bare passive recognition or having of ideas is called perception.

 11. Whatever has in it an idea, tho’ it be never so passive, tho’ it exert no manner of act about it, yet it must perceive. 10.

 

12. All ideas either are simple ideas, or made up of simple ideas.

13. That thing wch is like unto another thing must agree wth it in one or more simple ideas.

14. Whatever is like a simple idea must either be another simple idea of the same sort, or contain a simple idea of the same sort. 13.

15. Nothing like an idea can be in an unperceiving thing. 11, 14. Another demonstration of the same thing.

16. Two things cannot be said to be alike or unlike till they have been compar’d.

17. Comparing is the viewing two ideas together, & marking wt they agree in and wt they disagree in.

18. The mind can compare nothing but its own ideas. 17.

19. Nothing like an idea can be in an unperceiving thing. 11, 16, 18.

 

N. B. Other arguments innumerable, both a priori & a posteriori , drawn from all the sciences, from the clearest, plainest, most obvious truths, whereby to demonstrate the Principle, i.e. that neither our ideas, nor anything like our ideas, can possibly be in an unperceiving thing.

N. B. Not one argument of any kind wt soever, certain or probable, a priori or a posteriori , from any art or science, from either sense or reason, against it.

 

Mathematicians have no right idea of angles. Hence angles of contact wrongly apply’d to prove extension divisible ad infinitum .

We have got the Algebra of pure intelligences.

We can prove Newton’s propositions more accurately, more easily, & upon truer principles than himself.

Barrow owns the downfall of geometry. However I’ll endeavour to rescue it — so far as it is useful, or real, or imaginable, or intelligible. But for the nothings  , I’ll leave them to their admirers.

 

I’ll teach any one the whole course of mathematiques in 1/100 part the time that another will.

Much banter got from the prefaces of the mathematicians.

P.

Newton says colour is in the subtil matter. Hence Malbranch proves nothing, or is mistaken, in asserting there is onely figure & motion.

I can square the circle, &c.; they cannot. Wch goes on the best principles?

 

The Billys use a finite visible line for an 1/m.

T.

Marsilius Ficinus — his appearing the moment he died solv’d by my idea of time.

M.

The philosophers lose their abstract or unperceived Matter. The mathematicians lose their insensible sensations. The profane [lose] their extended Deity. Pray wt do the rest of mankind lose? As for bodies, &c., we have them still.

N. B. The future nat. philosoph. & mathem. get vastly by the bargain.

P.

There are men who say there are insensible extensions. There are others who say the wall is not white, the fire is not hot, &c. We Irishmen cannot attain to these truths.

The mathematicians think there are insensible lines. About these they harangue: these cut in a point at all angles: these are divisible ad infinitum . We Irishmen can conceive no such lines.

The mathematicians talk of wt they call a point. This, they say, is not altogether nothing, nor is it downright something. Now we Irishmen are apt to think something & nothing are next neighbours.

Engagements to P. on account of ye  Treatise that grew up under his eye; on account also of his approving my  harangue. Glorious for P. to be the protector of usefull tho’ newly discover’d truths.

How could I venture thoughts into the world before I knew they would be of use to the world? and how could I know that till I had try’d how they suited other men’s ideas?

I publish not this so much for anything else as to know whether other men have the same ideas as we Irishmen. This is my end, & not to be inform’d as to my own particular.

 

My speculations have the same effect as visiting foreign countries: in the end I return where I was before, but my heart at ease, and enjoying life with new satisfaction.

Passing through all the sciences, though false for the most part, yet it gives us the better insight and greater knowledge of the truth.

 

He that would bring another over to his opinion, must seem to harmonize with him at first, and humour him in his own way of talking.

From my childhood I had an unaccountable turn of thought that way.

 

It doth not argue a dwarf to have greater strength than a giant, because he can throw off the molehill which is upon him, while the other struggles beneath a mountain.

 

The whole directed to practise and morality — as appears 1st , from making manifest the nearness and omnipresence of God; 2dly  , from cutting off the useless labour of sciences, and so forth.

  An Essay towards a New Theory of Vision (1709) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

OXFORD CLARENDON PRESS 1901 TEXT

In 1709, Berkeley published his first major work, An Essay towards a New Theory of Vision , in which he discusses the limitations of human vision and advances the theory that the proper objects of sight are not material objects, but light and colour. This treatise would foreshadow his chief philosophical work, A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge , which would appear the following year.

The question concerning the visibility of space was central to the Renaissance perspective tradition and its reliance on classical optics in the development of pictorial representations of spatial depth. In the treatise Berkeley frequently criticises the views of the Optic Writers, including William Molyneux, Wallis, Malebranche and Descartes. At first Berkeley argues against the classical scholars of optics, suggesting that spatial depth, as the distance that separates the perceiver from the perceived object is itself invisible. He argues that we do not see space directly or deduce its form logically using the laws of optics. Space for Berkeley is no more than a contingent expectation that visual and tactile sensations will follow one another in regular sequences, which we come to expect through habit.

Berkeley goes on to suggest that visual cues, such as the perceived extension or ‘confusion’ of an object, can only be used to indirectly judge distance, since the viewer learns to associate visual cues with tactile sensations. He gives the following analogy regarding indirect distance perception: one perceives distance indirectly just as one perceives a person’s embarrassment indirectly. When we are looking at someone that is feeling embarrassed, we infer indirectly that the person is embarrassed by observing the red colour on their face. We know through experience that a red face signals embarrassment, as we have learned to associate the two.

 [image "img58.jpg" file=Image00057.jpg] 

William Molyneux (1656-1698) was an Irish writer on science, politics and natural philosophy. He is noted as a close friend of fellow philosopher John Locke, and for proposing Molyneux’s Problem, a thought experiment widely discussed.

CONTENTSEditor’s Preface To The Essay Towards A New Theory Of Vision

Dedication

An Essay Towards A New Theory Of Vision

An Appendix To The Essay On Vision

 

 Editor’s Preface To The Essay Towards A New Theory Of Vision [image "img56.jpg" file=Image00055.jpg] 

B ERKELEY ’ S E SSAY TOWARDS a New Theory of Vision was meant to prepare the way for the exposition and defence of the new theory of the material world, its natural order, and its relation to Spirit, that is contained in his book of Principles and in the relative Dialogues , which speedily followed. The Essay was the firstfruits of his early philosophical studies at Dublin. It was also the first attempt to show that our apparently immediate Vision of Space and of bodies extended in three-dimensioned space, is either tacit or conscious inference, occasioned by constant association of the phenomena of which alone we are visually percipient with assumed realities of our tactual and locomotive experience.

The first edition of the Essay  appeared early in 1709, when its author was about twenty-four years of age. A second edition, with a few verbal changes and an Appendix, followed before the end of that year. Both were issued in Dublin, “printed by Aaron Rhames, at the back of  Dick’s Coffeehouse, for Jeremy Pepyat, bookseller in Skinner Row.” In March, 1732, a third edition, without the Appendix, was annexed to Alciphron, on account of its relation to the Fourth Dialogue in that book. This was the author’s last revision.

In the present edition the text of this last edition is adopted, after collation with those preceding. The Appendix has been restored, and also the Dedication to Sir John Percival, which appeared only in the first edition.

 

A due appreciation of Berkeley’s theory of seeing, and his conception of the visible world, involves a study, not merely of this tentative juvenile Essay , but also of its fuller development and application in his more matured works. This has been commonly forgotten by his critics.

Various circumstances contribute to perplex and even repel the reader of the Essay , making it less fit to be an easy avenue of approach to Berkeley’s Principles .

Its occasion and design, and its connexion with his spiritual conception of the material world, are suggested in Sections 43 and 44 of the Principles . Those sections are a key to the Essay . They inform us that in the Essay the author intentionally uses language which seems to attribute a reality independent of all percipient spirit to the ideas or phenomena presented in Touch; it being beside his purpose, he says, to “examine and refute” that “vulgar error” in “a work on Vision.” This studied reticence of a verbally paradoxical conception of Matter, in reasonings about vision which are fully intelligible only under that conception, is one cause of a want of philosophical lucidity in the Essay .

Another circumstance adds to the embarrassment of those who approach the Principles and the three Dialogues through the Essay on Vision . The Essay  offers no exception to the lax employment of equivocal words familiar in the early literature of English philosophy,  but which is particularly inconvenient in the subtle discussions to which we are here introduced. At the present day we are perhaps accustomed to more precision and uniformity in the philosophical use of language; at any rate we connect other meanings than those here intended with some of the leading words. It is enough to refer to such terms as idea , notion , sensation , perception , touch , externality , distance , and their conjugates. It is difficult for the modern reader to revive and remember the meanings which Berkeley intends by idea and notion — so significant in his vocabulary; and touch with him connotes muscular and locomotive experience as well as the pure sense of contact. Interchange of the terms outward , outness , externality , without the mind , and without the eye is confusing, if we forget that Berkeley implies that percipient mind is virtually coextensive with our bodily organism, so that being “without” or “at a distance from” our bodies is being at a distance from the percipient mind. I have tried in the annotations to relieve some of these ambiguities, of which Berkeley himself warns us (cf. sect. 120).

The Essay moreover abounds in repetitions, and interpolations of antiquated optics and physiology, so that its logical structure and even its supreme generalisation are not easily apprehended. I will try to disentangle them.

 

The reader must remember that this Essay on Vision  is professedly an introspective appeal to human consciousness. It is an analysis of what human beings are conscious of when they see, the results being here and there applied, partly by way of verification, to solve some famous optical or physiological puzzle. The aim is to present the facts, the whole facts, and nothing but the facts of our internal visual experience, as distinguished from supposed facts and empty abstractions, which an irregular exercise of imagination, or abuse of words, had put in their place.  The investigation, moreover, is not concerned with Space in its metaphysical infinity, but with finite sections of Space and their relations, which concern the sciences, physical and mathematical, and with real or tangible Distance, Magnitude, and Place, in their relation to seeing.

From the second section onwards the Essay naturally falls into six Parts, devoted successively to the proof of the six following theses regarding the relation of Sight to finite spaces and to things extended: —

I. (Sect. 2-51.) Distance, or outness from the eye in the line of vision, is not seen: it is only suggested to the mind by visible phenomena and by sensations felt in the eye, all which are somehow its arbitrarily constituted and non-resembling Signs.

II. (Sect. 52-87.) Magnitude, or the amount of space that objects of sense occupy, is really invisible: we only see a greater or less quantity of colour, and colour depends upon percipient mind: our supposed visual perceptions of real magnitude are only our own interpretations of the tactual meaning of the colours we see, and of sensations felt in the eye, which are its Signs.

III. (Sect. 88-120.) Situation of objects of sense, or their real relation to one another in ambient space, is invisible: what we see is variety in the relations of colours to one another: our supposed vision of real tangible locality is only our interpretation of its visual non-resembling Signs.

IV. (Sect. 121-46.) There is no object that is presented in common to Sight and Touch: space or extension, which has the best claim to be their common object, is specifically as well as numerically different in Sight and in Touch.

 V. (Sect. 147-48.) The explanation of the tactual significance of the visible and visual Signs, upon which human experience proceeds, is offered in the Theory that all visible phenomena are arbitrary signs in what is virtually  the Language of Nature, addressed by God to the senses and intelligence of Man.

VI. (Sect. 149-60.) The true object studied in Geometry is the kind of Extension given in Touch, not that given in Sight: real Extension in all its phases is tangible, not visible: colour is the only immediate object of Sight, and colour being mind-dependent sensation, cannot be realised without percipient mind. These concluding sections are supplementary to the main argument.

 

The fact that distance or outness is invisible is sometimes regarded as Berkeley’s contribution to the theory of seeing. It is rather the assumption on which the Essay proceeds (sect. 2). The Essay does not prove this invisibility, but seeks to shew how, notwithstanding, we learn to find outness through seeing. That the relation between the visual signs of outness, on the one hand, and the real distance which they signify, on the other, is in all cases arbitrary, and discovered through experience, is the burden of sect. 2-40. The previously recognised signs of “considerably remote” distances, are mentioned (sect. 3). But near distance was supposed to be inferred by a visual geometry — and to be “suggested,” not signified by arbitrary signs. The determination of the visual signs which suggest outness, near and remote, is Berkeley’s professed discovery regarding vision.

An induction of the visual signs which “suggest” distance, is followed (sect. 43) by an assertion of the wholly sensuous reality of colour , which is acknowledged to be the only immediate object of sight. Hence visible extension, consisting in colour, must be dependent for its realisation upon sentient or percipient mind. It is then argued (sect. 44) that this mind-dependent visible outness has no resemblance to the tangible reality (sect. 45). This is the first passage in the Essay  in which Touch and its data are formally brought into view. Tactual or  locomotive experience, it is implied, is needed to infuse true reality into our conceptions of distance or outness. This cannot be got from seeing any more than from hearing, or tasting, or smelling. It is as impossible to see and touch the same object as it is to hear and touch the same object. Visible objects and ocular sensations can only be ideal signs of real things .

The sections in which Touch is thus introduced are among the most important in the Essay . They represent the outness given in hearing as wholly sensuous, ideal, or mind-dependent: they recognise as more truly real that got by contact and locomotion. But if this is all that man can see, it follows that his visible world, at any rate, becomes real only in and through percipient mind. The problem of an Essay on Vision is thus, to explain how the visible world of extended colour can inform us of tangible realities, which it does not in the least resemble, and with which it has no necessary connexion. That visible phenomena, or else certain organic sensations involved in seeing (sect. 3, 16, 21, 27), gradually suggest the real or tangible outness with which they are connected in the divinely constituted system of nature, is the explanation which now begins to dawn upon us.

Here an ambiguity in the Essay appears. It concludes that the visible world cannot be real without percipient realising mind, i.e. not otherwise than ideally: yet the argument seems to take for granted that we are percipient of a tangible world that is independent of percipient realising mind. The reader is apt to say that the tangible world must be as dependent on percipient mind for its reality as the visible world is concluded to be, and for the same reason. This difficulty was soon afterwards encountered in the book of Principles  , where the worlds of sight and touch are put on the same level; and the possibility of unperceived reality in both cases is denied; on the ground that a material world cannot be realised in the total  absence of Spirit — human and divine. The term “external” may still be applied to tactual and locomotive phenomena alone, if men choose; but this not because of the ideal character of what is seen, and the unideal reality of what is touched, but only because tactual perceptions are found to be more firm and steady than visual. Berkeley preferred in this way to insinuate his new conception of the material world by degrees, at the risk of exposing this juvenile and tentative Essay on Vision to a charge of incoherence.

 

The way in which visual ideas or phenomena “suggest” the outness or distance of things from the organ of sight having been thus explained, in what I call the First Part of the Essay  , the Second and Third Parts (sect. 52-120) argue for the invisibility of real extension in two other relations, viz. magnitude and locality or situation. An induction of the visual signs of tangible size and situation is given in those sections. The result is applied to solve two problems then notable in optics, viz. (1) the reason for the greater visible size of the horizontal moon than of the moon in its meridian (sect. 67-87); and (2) the fact that objects are placed erect in vision only on condition that their images on the retina are inverted (sect. 88-120). Here the antithesis between the ideal world of coloured extension, and the real world of resistant extension is pressed with vigour. The “high” and “low” of the visible world is not the “high” and “low” of the tangible world (sect. 91-106). There is no resemblance and no necessary relation, between those two so-called extensions; not even when the number of visible objects happen to coincide with the number of tangible objects of which they are the visual signs, e.g. the visible and tangible fingers on the hand: for the born-blind, on first receiving sight, could not parcel out the visible phenomena in correspondence with the tangible.

 

The next Part of the Essay (sect. 121-45) argues for a specific as well as a numerical difference between the original data of sight and the data of touch and locomotion. Sight and touch perceive nothing in common. Extension in its various relations differs in sight from extension in touch. Coloured extension, which alone is visible, is found to be different in kind from resistant extension, which alone is tangible. And if actually perceived or concrete extensions differ thus, the question is determined. For all extension with which man can be concerned must be concrete (sect. 23). Extension in the abstract is meaningless (sect. 124-25). What remains is to marshal the scattered evidence, and to guard the foregoing conclusions against objections. This is attempted in sections 128-46.

 

The enunciation of the summary generalisation, which forms the “New Theory of Vision” (sect. 147-8), may be taken as the Fifth and culminating Part of the Essay .

 

The closing sections (149-60), as I have said, are supplementary, and profess to determine the sort of extension — visible or tangible — with which Geometry is concerned. In concluding that it is tangible, he tries to picture the mental state of Idominians, or unbodied spirits, endowed with visual perceptions only , and asks what their conception of outness and solid extension must be. Here further refinements in the interpretation of visual perception, and its organic conditions, which have not escaped the attention of latter psychologists and biologists, are hinted at.

 

 Whether the data of sight consist of non-resembling arbitrary Signs of the tactual distances, sizes, and situations of things, is a question which some might prefer to deal with experimentally — by trial of the experience of persons in circumstances fitted to supply an answer.  Of this sort would be the experience of the born-blind, immediately after their sight has been restored; the conception of extension and its relations found in persons who continue from birth unable to see; the experience (if it could be got) of persons always destitute of all tactual and locomotive perceptions, but familiar with vision; and the facts of seeing observed in infants of the human species, and in the lower animals.

Berkeley did not try to verify his conclusions in this way. Here and there (sect. 41, 42, 79, 92-99, 103, 106, 110, 128, 132-37), he conjectures what the first visual experience of those rescued from born-blindness is likely to be; he also speculates, as we have seen, about the experience of unbodied spirits supposed to be able to see, but unable to touch or move (sect. 153-59); and in the Appendix he refers, in confirmation of his New Theory, to a reported case of one born blind who had obtained sight. But he forms his Theory independently of those delicate and difficult investigations. His testing facts were sought introspectively. Indeed those physiologists and mental philosophers who have since tried to determine what vision in its purity is, by cases either of communicated sight or of continued born-blindness, have illustrated the truth of Diderot’s remark— “préparer et interroger un aveugle-né n’eût point été une occupation indigne des talens réunis de Newton, Des Cartes, Locke, et Leibniz.”

 

Berkeley’s New Theory has been quoted as a signal example of discovery in metaphysics. The subtle analysis which distinguishes seeing  strictly so called, from judgments about extended things, suggested by what we see,  appears to have been imperfectly known to the ancient philosophers. Aristotle, indeed, speaks of colour as the only proper object of sight; but, in passages of the De Anima where he names properties peculiar to particular senses, he enumerates others, such as motion, figure, and magnitude, which belong to all the senses in common. His distinction of Proper and Common Sensibles appears at first to contradict Berkeley’s doctrine of the heterogeneity of the ideal visible and the real tangible worlds. Aristotle, however, seems to question the immediate perceptibility of Common Sensibles, and to regard them as realised through the activity of intelligence.

Some writers in Optics, in mediaeval times, and in early modern philosophy, advanced beyond Aristotle, in explaining the relation of our matured notion of distance to what we originally perceive in seeing, and in the fifteenth century it was discovered by Maurolyco that the rays of light from the object converge to a focus in the eye; but I have not been able to trace even the germ of the New Theory in these speculations.

 Excepting some hints by Descartes, Malebranche was among the first dimly to anticipate Berkeley, in resolving our supposed power of seeing outness into an interpretation  of visual signs which we learn by experience to understand. The most important part of Malebranche’s account of seeing is contained in the Recherche de la Vérité (Liv. I. ch. 9), in one of those chapters in which he discusses the frequent fallaciousness of the senses, and in particular of our visual perceptions of extension. He accounts for their inevitable uncertainty by assigning them not to sense but to misinterpretation of what is seen. He also enumerates various visual signs of distance.

That the Recherche of Malebranche, published more than thirty years before the Essay , was familiar to Berkeley before the publication of his New Theory , is proved by internal evidence, and by his juvenile Commonplace Book . I am not able to discover signs of a similar connexion between the New Theory and the chapter on the mystery of sensation in Glanvill’s Scepsis Scientifica (ch. 5), published some years before the Recherche of Malebranche, where Glanvill refers to “a secret deduction,” through which — from motions, &c., of which we are immediately percipient — we “spell out” figures, distances, magnitudes, and colours, which have no resemblance to them.

An approach to the New Theory is found in a passage which first appeared in the second edition of Locke’s Essay , published in 1694, to which Berkeley refers in his own Essay (sect. 132-35), and which, on account of its relative importance, I shall here transcribe at length: —

 “We are further to consider concerning Perception that the ideas we receive by sensation are often, in grown people, altered by the judgment, without our taking notice of it. When we set before our eyes a round globe of any uniform colour, e.g. gold, alabaster, or jet, it is certain that the idea thereby imprinted in our mind is of a flat circle, variously shadowed, with several degrees of light and brightness coming to our eyes. But, we having by use been accustomed to perceive what kind of appearance convex bodies are wont to make in us, what alterations are made  in the reflection of light by the difference in the sensible figures of bodies — the judgment presently, by an habitual custom, alters the appearances into their causes; so that, from that which is truly variety of shadow or colour, collecting the figure, it makes it pass for a mark of figure, and frames to itself the perception of a convex figure and an uniform colour, when the idea we receive from them is only a plane variously coloured, as is evident in painting.

“To which purpose I shall here insert a problem of that very ingenious and studious promoter of real knowledge, the learned and worthy Mr. Molyneux, which he was pleased to send me in a letter some months since, and it is this: — Suppose a man born blind, and now adult, and taught by his touch to distinguish between a cube and a sphere of the same metal, and nighly of the same bigness, so as to tell, when he felt the one and the other, which is the cube and which the sphere. Suppose then the cube and the sphere placed on a table, and the blind man be made to see: quere, whether, by his sight, before he touched them, he could not distinguish and tell, which is the globe and which the cube? To which the acute and judicious proposer answers: ‘Not.’ For, though he has obtained the experience of how a globe, how a cube affects his touch; yet he has not obtained the experience that what affects his touch so and so, must affect his sight so and so; so that a protuberant angle in the cube, that pressed his hand unequally, shall appear to his eye as it does in the cube. — I agree with this thinking gentleman, whom I am proud to call my friend, in his answer to this his problem, and am of opinion that the blind man, at first sight, would not be able to say with certainty which was the globe and which the cube, whilst he only saw them; though he would unerringly name them by his touch, and certainly distinguish them by the difference in their figures felt.

 “This I have set down, and leave with my reader, as an  occasion for him to consider how much he may be beholden to experience, improvement, and acquired notions, where he thinks he had not the least use of, or help from them: and the rather because this observing gentleman further adds that, having, upon the occasion of my book, proposed this problem to divers very ingenious men, he hardly ever met with one that at first gave the answer to it which he thinks true, till by hearing his reasons they were convinced.

“But this is not I think usual in any of our ideas but those received by sight: because sight, the most comprehensive of the senses, conveying to our minds the ideas of light and colours, which are peculiar only to that sense; and also the far different ideas of space, figure, and motion, the several varieties of which change the appearance of its proper object, i.e. light and colours; we bring ourselves by use to judge of the one by the other. This, in many cases, by a settled habit, in things whereof we have frequent experience, is performed so constantly and so quick, that we take that for the perception of our sensation, which is an idea formed by our judgment; so that one, i.e. that of sensation, serves only to excite the other, and is scarce taken notice of itself; as a man who reads or hears with attention and understanding takes little notice of the character or sounds, but of the ideas that are excited in him by them.

 “Nor need we wonder that this is done with so little notice, if we consider how very quick the actions of the mind are performed; for, as itself is thought to take up no space, to have no extension, so its actions seem to require no time, but many of them seem to be crowded into an instant. I speak this in comparison of the actions of the body.... Secondly, we shall not be much surprised that this is done with us in so little notice, if we consider how the facility we get of doing things, by a custom of doing, makes them often pass in us without notice. Habits,  especially such as are begun very early, come at last to produce actions in us which often escape our observation.... And therefore it is not so strange that our mind should often change the idea of its sensation into that of its judgment, and make the one serve only to excite the other, without our taking notice of it.” (Essay concerning Human Understanding , Book II. ch. 9. § 8.)

This remarkable passage anticipates by implication the view of an interpretation of materials originally given in the visual sense, which, under the name of “suggestion,” is the ruling factor in the New Theory of Vision .

The following sentences relative to the invisibility of distances, contained in the Treatise of Dioptrics (published in 1690) of Locke’s friend and correspondent William Molyneux, whose son was Berkeley’s pupil, illustrate Locke’s statements, and may be compared with the opening sections of the Essay on Vision : —

“In plain vision the estimate we make of the distance of objects (especially when so far removed that the interval between our two eyes bears no sensible proportion thereto, or when looked upon with one eye only) is rather the act of our judgment than of sense; and acquired by exercise, and a faculty of comparing, rather than natural. For, distance of itself is not to be perceived; for, ’tis a line (or a length) presented to our eye with its end toward us, which must therefore be only a point, and that is invisible. Wherefore distance is chiefly perceived by means of interjacent bodies, as by the earth, mountains, hills, fields, trees, houses, &c. Or by the estimate we make of the comparative magnitude of bodies, or of their faint colours, &c. These I say are the chief means of apprehending the distance of objects that are considerably remote. But as to nigh objects — to whose distance the interval of the eyes bears a sensible proportion — their distance is perceived by the turn of the eyes, or by the angle of the optic axes (Gregorii Opt. Promot.  pro). This was the opinion of the ancients,  Alhazen, Vitellio, &c. And though the ingenious Jesuit Tacquet (Opt. Lib. I. pro) disapprove thereof, and objects against it a new notion of Gassendus (of a man’s seeing only with one eye at a time one and the same object), yet this notion of Gassendus being absolutely false (as I could demonstrate were it not beside my present purpose), it makes nothing against this opinion.

“Wherefore, distance being only a line and not of itself perceivable, if an object were conveyed to the eye by one single ray only, there were no other means of judging of its distance but by some of those hinted before. Therefore when we estimate the distance of nigh objects, either we take the help of both eyes; or else we consider the pupil of one eye as having breadth, and receiving a parcel of rays from each radiating point. And, according to the various inclinations of the rays from one point on the various parts of the pupil, we make our estimate of the distance of the object. And therefore (as is said before), by one single eye we can only judge of the distance of such objects to whose distance the breadth of the pupil has a sensible proportion.... For, it is observed before (pro, sec. 2, see also Gregorii Opt. Promot. pro) that for viewing objects remote and nigh, there are requisite various conformations of the eye — the rays from nigh objects that fall on the eye diverging more than those from more remote objects.” (Treatise of Dioptrics , Part I. pro.)

 

All this helps to shew the state of science regarding vision about the time Berkeley’s Essay appeared, especially among those with whose works he was familiar. I shall next refer to illustrations of the change which the Essay produced.

The New Theory  has occasioned some interesting criticism  since its appearance in 1709. At first it drew little attention. For twenty years after its publication the allusions to it were few. The account of Cheselden’s experiment upon one born blind, published in 1728, in the Philosophical Transactions , which seemed to bring the Theory to the test of scientific experiment, recalled attention to Berkeley’s reasonings. The state of religious thought about the same time confirmed the tendency to discuss a doctrine which represented human vision as interpretation of a natural yet divine language, thus suggesting Omnipresent Mind.

Occasional discussions of the New Theory may be found in the Gentleman’s Magazine , from 1732 till Berkeley’s death in 1753. Some criticisms may also be found in Smith’s Optics , published in 1738.

Essential parts of Berkeley’s analysis are explained by Voltaire, in his Élémens de la Philosophie de Newton . The following from that work is here given on its own account, and also as a prominent recognition of the new doctrine in France, within thirty years from its first promulgation: —

“Il faut absolument conclure de tout ceci, que les distances, les grandeurs, les situations, ne sont pas, à proprement parler, des choses visibles, c’est-à-dire, ne sont pas les objets propres et immédiats de la vue. L’objet propre et immédiat de la vue n’est autre chose que la lumière colorée: tout le reste, nous ne le sentons qu’à la longue et par expérience. Nous apprenons à voir précisément comme nous apprenons à parler et à lire. La différence est, que l’art de voir est plus facile, et que la nature est également à tous notre maître.

 “Les jugements soudains, presque uniformes, que toutes nos âmes, à un certain âge, portent des distances, des grandeurs, des situations, nous font penser qu’il n’y a qu’à ouvrir les yeux pour voir la manière dont nous voyons. On se trompe; il y faut le secours des autres sens. Si les hommes n’avaient que le sens de la vue, ils n’auraient aucun moyen pour connaître l’étendue en longueur, largeur et profondeur; et un pur esprit ne la connaîtrait pas peutêtre, à moins que Dieu ne la lui révélât. Il est très difficile de séparer dans notre entendement l’extension d’un objet d’avec les couleurs de cet objet. Nous ne voyons jamais rien que d’étendu, et de là nous sommes tous portés à croire que nous voyons en effet l’étendue.” (Élémens de la Philos. de Newton , Seconde Partie, ch. 7.)

Condillac, in his Essais sur l’Origine des Connaissances Humaines (Part I. sect. 6), published in 1746, combats Berkeley’s New Theory , and maintains that an extension exterior to the eye is immediately discernible by sight; the eye being naturally capable of judging at once of figures, magnitudes, situations, and distances. His reasonings in support of this “prejudice,” as he afterwards allowed it to be, may be found in the section entitled “De quelques jugemens qu’on a attribués à l’âme sans fondement, ou solution d’un problème de métaphysique.” Here Locke, Molyneux, Berkeley, and Voltaire are criticised, and Cheselden’s experiment is referred to. Condillac’s subsequent recantation is contained in his Traité des Sensations , published in 1754, and in his L’Art de Penser . In the Traité des Sensations (Troisième Partie, ch. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, &c.) the whole question is discussed at length, and Condillac vindicates what he allows must appear a marvellous paradox to the uninitiated — that we only gradually learn to see, hear, smell, taste, and touch. He argues in particular that the eye cannot originally perceive an extension that is beyond itself, and that perception of trinal space is due to what we experience in touch.

Voltaire and Condillac gave currency to the New Theory  in France, and it soon became a commonplace with D’Alembert, Diderot, Buffon, and other French philosophers. In Germany we have allusions to it in the Berlin Memoirs and elsewhere; but, although known by name, if not in its distinctive principle and latent idealism, it has not obtained  the consideration which its author’s developed theory of the material as well as the visible world has received. The Kantian a priori criticism of our cognition of Space, and of our mathematical notions, subsequently indisposed the German mind to the a posteriori reasoning of Berkeley’s Essay .

Its influence is apparent in British philosophy. The following passages in Hartley’s Observations on Man , published in 1749, illustrate the extent to which some of the distinctive parts of the new doctrine were at that time received by an eminent English psychologist: —

“Distance is judged of by the quantity of motion, and figure by the relative quantity of distance.... And, as the sense of sight is much more extensive and expedite than feeling, we judge of tangible qualities chiefly by sight, which therefore may be considered, agreeably to Bishop Berkeley’s remark, as a philosophical language for the ideas of feeling; being, for the most part, an adequate representative of them, and a language common to all mankind, and in which they all agree very nearly, after a moderate degree of experience.

 “However, if the informations from touch and sight disagree at any time, we are always to depend upon touch, as that which, according to the usual ways of speaking upon these subjects, is the true representation of the essential properties, i.e. as the earnest and presage of what other tangible impressions the body under consideration will make upon our feeling in other circumstances; also what changes it will produce in other bodies; of which again we are to determine by our feeling, if the visual language should not happen to correspond to it exactly. And it is from this difference that we call the touch the reality, light the representative — also that a person born blind may foretell with certainty, from his present tangible impressions, what others would follow upon varying the circumstances; whereas, if we could suppose a person to be born without  feeling, and to arrive at man’s estate, he could not, from his present visible impressions, judge what others would follow upon varying the circumstances. Thus the picture of a knife, drawn so well as to deceive his eye, would not, when applied to another body, produce the same change of visible impressions as a real knife does, when it separates the parts of the body through which it passes. But the touch is not liable to these deceptions. As it is therefore the fundamental source of information in respect of the essential properties of matter, it may be considered as our first and principal key to the knowledge of the external world.” (Pro.)

In other parts of Hartley’s book (e.g. Pro) the relation of our visual judgments of magnitude, figure, motion, distance, and position to the laws of association is explained, and the associating circumstances by which these judgments are formed are enumerated in detail.

Dr. Porterfield of Edinburgh, in his Treatise on the Eye, or the Manner and Phenomena of Vision (Edinburgh, 1759), is an exception to the consent which the doctrine had then widely secured. He maintains, in opposition to Berkeley, that “the judgments we form of the situation and distance of visible objects, depend not on custom and experience, but on original instinct, to which mind is subject in our embodied state.”

Berkeley’s Theory of Vision, in so far as it resolves our visual perceptions of distance into interpretation of arbitrary signs, received the qualified approbation of Reid, in his Inquiry into the Human Mind on the Principles of Common Sense (1764). He criticises it in the Inquiry  , where the doctrine of visual signs, of which Berkeley’s whole philosophy is a development, is accepted, and to some extent applied. With Reid it is divorced, however, from the Berkeleian conception of the material world,  although the Theory of Vision was the seminal principle of Berkeley’s Theory of Matter.

This Theory of Matter was imperfectly conceived and then rejected by Reid and his followers, while the New Theory of Vision obtained the general consent of the Scottish metaphysicians. Adam Smith refers to it in his Essays (published in 1795) as “one of the finest examples of philosophical analysis that is to be found either in our own or in any other language.” Dugald Stewart characterises it in his Elements as “one of the most beautiful, and at the same time one of the most important theories of modern philosophy.” “The solid additions,” he afterwards remarks in his Dissertation , “made by Berkeley to the stock of human knowledge, were important and brilliant. Among these the first place is unquestionably due to his New Theory of Vision , a work abounding with ideas so different from those commonly received, and at the same time so profound and refined, that it was regarded by all but a few accustomed to deep metaphysical reflection, rather in the light of a philosophical romance than of a sober inquiry after truth. Such, however, has since been the progress and diffusion of this sort of knowledge, that the leading and most abstracted doctrines contained in it form now an essential part of every elementary treatise on optics, and are adopted by the most superficial smatterers in science as fundamental articles of their faith.” The New Theory is accepted by Thomas Brown, who proposes (Lectures , 29) to extend the scope of its reasonings. With regard to perceptions of sight, Young, in his Lectures on Intellectual Philosophy  (), says that “it has been universally admitted, at least since the days of Berkeley, that many of those which appear to us at present to be instantaneous and primitive, can yet be shewn to be  acquired; that most of the adult perceptions of sight are founded on the previous information of touch; that colour can give us no conception originally of those qualities of bodies which produce it in us; and that primary vision gives us no notion of distance, and, as I believe, no notion of magnitude.” Sir James Mackintosh, in his Dissertation , characterises the New Theory of Vision as “a great discovery in Mental Philosophy.” “Nothing in the compass of inductive reasoning,” remarks Sir William Hamilton (Reid’s Works , , note), “appears more satisfactory than Berkeley’s demonstration of the necessity and manner of our learning, by a slow process of observation and comparison alone, the connexion between the perceptions of vision and touch, and, in general, all that relates to the distance and magnitude of external things.”

  The New Theory of Vision has in short been generally accepted, so far as it was understood, alike by the followers of Hartley and by the associates and successors of Reid. Among British psychologists, it has recommended itself to rationalists and sensationalists, to the advocates of innate principles, and to those who would explain by accidental association what their opponents attribute to reason originally latent in man. But this wide conscious assent is I think chiefly confined to the proposition that distance is invisible, and hardly reaches the deeper implicates of the theory, on its extension to all the senses, leading to a perception of the final unity  of the natural and the supernatural, and the ultimate spirituality of the universe.

 Dedication [image "img56.jpg" file=Image00055.jpg] 

T O THE RT. HON. SIR JOHN PERCIVALE, BART.,

ONE OF HER MAJESTY’S MOST HONOURABLE PRIVY COUNCIL

IN THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND.

Sir,

  I could not, without doing violence to myself, forbear upon this occasion to give some public testimony of the great and well-grounded esteem I have conceived for you, ever since I had the honour and happiness of your acquaintance. The outward advantages of fortune, and the early honours with which you are adorned, together with the reputation you are known to have amongst the best and most considerable men, may well imprint veneration and esteem on the minds of those who behold you from a distance. But these are not the chief motives that inspire me with the respect I bear you. A nearer approach has given me the view of something in your person infinitely beyond the external ornaments of honour and estate. I mean, an intrinsic stock of virtue and good sense, a true concern for religion, and disinterested love of your country. Add to these an uncommon proficiency in the best and most useful parts of knowledge; together with (what in my mind is  a perfection of the first rank) a surpassing goodness of nature. All which I have collected, not from the uncertain reports of fame, but from my own experience. Within these few months that I have the honour to be known unto you, the many delightful hours I have passed in your agreeable and improving conversation have afforded me the opportunity of discovering in you many excellent qualities, which at once fill me with admiration and esteem. That one at those years, and in those circumstances of wealth and greatness, should continue proof against the charms of luxury and those criminal pleasures so fashionable and predominant in the age we live in; that he should preserve a sweet and modest behaviour, free from that insolent and assuming air so familiar to those who are placed above the ordinary rank of men; that he should manage a great fortune with that prudence and inspection, and at the same time expend it with that generosity and nobleness of mind, as to shew himself equally remote from a sordid parsimony and a lavish inconsiderate profusion of the good things he is intrusted with — this, surely, were admirable and praiseworthy. But, that he should, moreover, by an impartial exercise of his reason, and constant perusal of the sacred Scriptures, endeavour to attain a right notion of the principles of natural and revealed religion; that he should with the concern of a true patriot have the interest of the public at heart, and omit no means of informing himself what may be prejudicial or advantageous to his country, in order to prevent the one and promote the other; in fine, that, by a constant application to the most severe and useful studies, by a strict observation of the rules of honour and virtue, by frequent and serious reflections on the mistaken measures of the world, and the true end and happiness of mankind, he should in all respects qualify himself bravely to run the race that is set before him, to deserve the character of great and good in this life, and be ever happy hereafter — this were amazing and almost incredible. Yet all this, and more than this, Sir, might I justly say of you, did either your modesty permit, or your character stand in need of it. I know it might deservedly be thought a vanity in me to imagine that anything coming from so obscure a hand as mine could add a lustre to your reputation. But, I am withal sensible how  far I advance the interest of my own, by laying hold on this opportunity to make it known that I am admitted into some degree of intimacy with a person of your exquisite judgment. And, with that view, I have ventured to make you an address of this nature, which the goodness I have ever experienced in you inclines me to hope will meet with a favourable reception at your hands. Though I must own I have your pardon to ask, for touching on what may possibly be offensive to a virtue you are possessed of in a very distinguishing degree. Excuse me, Sir, if it was out of my power to mention the name of Sir John Percivale without paying some tribute to that extraordinary and surprising merit whereof I have so clear and affecting an idea, and which, I am sure, cannot be exposed in too full a light for the imitation of others,

 Of late I have been agreeably employed in considering the most noble, pleasant, and comprehensive of all the senses. The fruit of that (labour shall I call it or) diversion is what I now present you with, in hopes it may give some entertainment to one who, in the midst of business and vulgar enjoyments, preserves a relish for the more refined pleasures of thought and reflexion. My thoughts concerning Vision have led me into some notions so far out of the common road that it had been improper to address them to one of a narrow and contracted genius. But, you, Sir, being master of a large and free understanding, raised above the power of those prejudices that enslave the far greater part of mankind, may deservedly be thought a proper patron for an attempt of this kind. Add to this, that you are no less disposed to forgive than qualified to discern whatever faults may occur in it. Nor do I think  you defective in any one point necessary to form an exact judgment on the most abstract and difficult things, so much as in a just confidence of your own abilities. And, in this one instance, give me leave to say, you shew a manifest weakness of judgment. With relation to the following Essay , I shall only add that I beg your pardon for laying a trifle of that nature in your way, at a time when you are engaged in the important affairs of the nation, and desire you to think that I am, with all sincerity and respect,

Sir,

Your most faithful and most humble servant,

 GEORGE BERKELEY.

 An Essay Towards A New Theory Of Vision [image "img56.jpg" file=Image00055.jpg] 

1. M Y DESIGN is to shew the manner wherein we perceive by Sight the Distance, Magnitude, and Situation of objects: also to consider the difference there is betwixt the ideas of Sight and Touch, and whether there be any idea common to both senses.

 

 2. It is, I think, agreed by all that Distance, of itself and immediately, cannot be seen. For, distance being a line directed endwise to the eye, it projects only one point in the fund of the eye, which point remains invariably the same, whether the distance be longer or shorter.

 

3. I find it also acknowledged that the estimate we make of the distance of objects considerably remote is rather an act of judgment grounded on experience than of sense. For example, when I perceive a great number of intermediate objects, such as houses, fields, rivers, and the like, which I have experienced to take up a considerable space, I thence form a judgment or conclusion, that the object I see beyond them is at a great distance. Again, when an object appears faint and small which at a near distance I have experienced to make a vigorous and large appearance, I instantly conclude it to be far off. And this, it is evident, is the result of experience; without which, from the faintness and littleness, I should not have inferred anything concerning the distance of objects.

4. But, when an object is placed at so near a distance as that the interval between the eyes bears any sensible proportion to it, the opinion of speculative men is, that the two optic axes (the fancy that we see only with one eye at once being exploded), concurring at the object, do there make an angle, by means of which, according as it is greater or lesser, the object is perceived to be nearer or farther off.

5. Betwixt which and the foregoing manner of estimating distance there is this remarkable difference: — that, whereas there was no apparent necessary  connexion between small distance and a large and strong appearance, or between great distance and a little and faint appearance, there  appears a very necessary connexion between an obtuse angle and near distance, and an acute angle and farther distance. It does not in the least depend upon experience, but may be evidently known by any one before he had experienced it, that the nearer the concurrence of the optic axes the greater the angle, and the remoter their concurrence is, the lesser will be the angle comprehended by them.

6. There is another way, mentioned by optic writers, whereby they will have us judge of those distances in respect of which the breadth of the pupil hath any sensible bigness. And that is the greater or lesser divergency of the rays which, issuing from the visible point, do fall on the pupil — that point being judged nearest which is seen by most diverging rays, and that remoter which is seen by less diverging rays, and so on; the apparent distance still increasing, as the divergency of the rays decreases, till at length it becomes infinite, when the rays that fall on the pupil are to sense parallel. And after this manner it is said we perceive distance when we look only with one eye.

7. In this case also it is plain we are not beholden to experience: it being a certain necessary truth that, the nearer the direct rays falling on the eye approach to a parallelism, the farther off is the point of their intersection, or the visible point from whence they flow.

 

8. Now, though the accounts here given of perceiving near distance by sight are received for true, and accordingly made use of in determining the apparent places of objects, they do nevertheless seem to me very unsatisfactory, and that for these following reasons: —

9. [First  ,] It is evident that, when the mind perceives any idea not immediately and of itself, it must be by the means of some other idea. Thus, for instance, the passions which are in the mind of another are of themselves to me invisible. I may nevertheless perceive them  by sight; though not immediately, yet by means of the colours they produce in the countenance. We often see shame or fear in the looks of a man, by perceiving the changes of his countenance to red or pale.

10. Moreover, it is evident that no idea which is not itself perceived can be to me the means of perceiving any other idea. If I do not perceive the redness or paleness of a man’s face themselves, it is impossible I should perceive by them the passions which are in his mind.

11. Now, from sect. ii., it is plain that distance is in its own nature imperceptible, and yet it is perceived by sight. It remains, therefore, that it be brought into view by means of some other idea, that is itself immediately perceived in the act of vision.

12. But those lines and angles, by means whereof some men pretend to explain the perception of distance, are themselves not at all perceived; nor are they in truth ever thought of by those unskilful in optics. I appeal to any one’s experience, whether, upon sight of an object, he computes its distance by the bigness of the angle made by the meeting of the two optic axes? or whether he ever thinks of the greater or lesser divergency of the rays which arrive from any point to his pupil? nay, whether it be not perfectly impossible for him to perceive by sense the various angles wherewith the rays, according to their greater or lesser divergence, do fall on the eye? Every one is himself the best judge of what he perceives, and what not. In vain shall any man tell me, that I perceive certain lines and angles, which introduce into my mind the various ideas of distance, so long as I myself am conscious of no such thing.

 13. Since therefore those angles and lines are not themselves  perceived by sight, it follows, from sect. x., that the mind does not by them judge of the distance of objects.

14. [Secondly ,] The truth of this assertion will be yet farther evident to any one that considers those lines and angles have no real existence in nature, being only an hypothesis framed by the mathematicians, and by them introduced into optics, that they might treat of that science in a geometrical way.

15. The [third and] last reason I shall give for rejecting that doctrine is, that though we should grant the real existence of those optic angles, &c., and that it was possible for the mind to perceive them, yet these principles would not be found sufficient to explain the phenomena of distance, as shall be shewn hereafter.

 

16. Now it being already shewn that distance is suggested to the mind, by the mediation of some other idea which is itself perceived in the act of seeing, it remains that we inquire, what ideas or sensations there be that attend vision, unto which we may suppose the ideas of distance are connected, and by which they are introduced into the mind.

And, first  , it is certain by experience, that when we look at a near object with both eyes, according as it approaches or recedes from us, we alter the disposition of our eyes, by lessening or widening the interval between the pupils. This disposition or turn of the eyes is attended with a sensation, which seems to me to be that which in this case brings the idea of greater or lesser distance into the mind.

 

17. Not that there is any natural or necessary connexion between the sensation we perceive by the turn of the eyes and greater or lesser distance. But — because the mind has, by constant experience, found the different sensations corresponding to the different dispositions of the eyes to be attended each with a different degree of distance in the object — there has grown an habitual or customary connexion between those two sorts of ideas: so that the mind no sooner perceives the sensation arising from the different turn it gives the eyes, in order to bring the pupils nearer or farther asunder, but it withal perceives the different idea of distance which was wont to be connected with that sensation. Just as, upon hearing a certain sound, the idea is immediately suggested to the understanding which custom had united with it.

18. Nor do I see how I can easily be mistaken in this matter. I know evidently that distance is not perceived of itself; that, by consequence, it must be perceived by means of some other idea, which is immediately perceived, and varies with the different degrees of distance. I know also that the sensation arising from the turn of the eyes is of itself immediately perceived; and various degrees thereof are connected with different distances, which never fail to accompany them into my mind, when I view an object distinctly with both eyes whose distance is so small that in respect of it the interval between the eyes has any considerable magnitude.

 19. I know it is a received opinion that, by altering the disposition of the eyes, the mind perceives whether the angle of the optic axes, or the lateral angles comprehended between the interval of the eyes or the optic axes, are made greater or lesser; and that, accordingly, by a kind of natural geometry, it judges the point of their intersection to be nearer or farther off. But that this is not true I am  convinced by my own experience; since I am not conscious that I make any such use of the perception I have by the turn of my eyes. And for me to make those judgments, and draw those conclusions from it, without knowing that I do so, seems altogether incomprehensible.

20. From all which it follows, that the judgment we make of the distance of an object viewed with both eyes is entirely the result of experience. If we had not constantly found certain sensations, arising from the various disposition of the eyes, attended with certain degrees of distance, we should never make those sudden judgments from them concerning the distance of objects; no more than we would pretend to judge of a man’s thoughts by his pronouncing words we had never heard before.

21. Secondly , an object placed at a certain distance from the eye, to which the breadth of the pupil bears a considerable proportion, being made to approach, is seen more confusedly. And the nearer it is brought the more confused appearance it makes. And this being found constantly to be so, there arises in the mind an habitual connexion between the several degrees of confusion and distance; the greater confusion still implying the lesser distance, and the lesser confusion the greater distance of the object.

 22. This confused appearance of the object doth therefore seem to be the medium whereby the mind judges of distance, in those cases wherein the most approved writers of optics will have it judge by the different divergency with which the rays flowing from the radiating point fall on the pupil. No man, I believe, will pretend to see or feel those imaginary angles that the rays are supposed to form, according to their various inclinations on his eye. But he cannot choose seeing whether the object appear more or less confused. It is therefore a manifest consequence from what has been demonstrated that, instead of the greater or lesser divergency of the rays, the mind makes use of the  greater or lesser confusedness of the appearance, thereby to determine the apparent place of an object.

23. Nor doth it avail to say there is not any necessary connexion between confused vision and distance great or small. For I ask any man what necessary connexion he sees between the redness of a blush and shame? And yet no sooner shall he behold that colour to arise in the face of another but it brings into his mind the idea of that passion which hath been observed to accompany it.

24. What seems to have misled the writers of optics in this matter is, that they imagine men judge of distance as they do of a conclusion in mathematics; betwixt which and the premises it is indeed absolutely requisite there be an apparent necessary connexion. But it is far otherwise in the sudden judgments men make of distance. We are not to think that brutes and children, or even grown reasonable men, whenever they perceive an object to approach or depart from them, do it by virtue of geometry and demonstration.

25. That one idea may suggest another to the mind, it will suffice that they have been observed to go together, without any demonstration of the necessity of their coexistence, or without so much as knowing what it is that makes them so to coexist. Of this there are innumerable instances, of which no one can be ignorant.

26. Thus, greater confusion having been constantly attended with nearer distance, no sooner is the former idea perceived but it suggests the latter to our thoughts. And, if it had been the ordinary course of nature that the farther off an object were placed the more confused it should appear, it is certain the very same perception that now makes us think an object approaches would then have made us to imagine it went farther off; that perception, abstracting from custom and experience, being equally fitted to produce the idea of great distance, or small distance, or no distance at all.

27. Thirdly  , an object being placed at the distance above specified, and brought nearer to the eye, we may nevertheless prevent, at least for some time, the appearance’s  growing more confused, by straining the eye. In which case that sensation supplies the place of confused vision, in aiding the mind to judge of the distance of the object; it being esteemed so much the nearer by how much the effort or straining of the eye in order to distinct vision is greater.

 

28. I have here set down those sensations or ideas that seem to be the constant and general occasions of introducing into the mind the different ideas of near distance. It is true, in most cases, that divers other circumstances contribute to frame our idea of distance, viz. the particular number, size, kind, &c. of the things seen. Concerning which, as well as all other the forementioned occasions which suggest distance, I shall only observe, they have none of them, in their own nature, any relation or connexion with it: nor is it possible they should ever signify the various degrees thereof, otherwise than as by experience they have been found to be connected with them.

 

29. I shall proceed upon these principles to account for a phenomenon which has hitherto strangely puzzled the writers of optics, and is so far from being accounted for by any of their theories of vision, that it is, by their own confession, plainly repugnant to them; and of consequence, if nothing else could be objected, were alone sufficient to bring their credit in question. The whole difficulty I shall lay before you in the words of the learned Doctor Barrow, with which he concludes his Optic Lectures : —

 [image "img59.png" file=Image00058.gif] 

 “Hæc sunt, quæ circa partem opticæ præcipue mathematicam dicenda mihi suggessit meditatio. Circa reliquas (quæ φυσικώτεραι sunt, adeoque sæpiuscule pro certis principiis plausibiles conjecturas venditare necessum habent) nihil fere quicquam admodum verisimile succurrit, a pervulgatis (ab iis, inquam, quæ Keplerus, Scheinerus, Cartesius, et post illos alii tradiderunt) alienum aut diversum. Atqui tacere malo, quam toties oblatam cramben reponere. Proinde receptui cano; nee ita tamen ut prorsus discedam, anteaquam improbam quandam difficultatem (pro sinceritate quam et vobis et veritati debeo minime dissimulandam) in medium protulero, quæ doctrinæ nostræ, hactenus inculcatæ, se objicit adversam, ab ea saltem nullam admittit solutionem. Illa, breviter, talis est. Lenti vel speculo cavo EBF exponatur punctum visibile A , ita distans, ut radii ex A manantes ex inflectione versus axem AB cogantur. Sitque radiationis limes (seu puncti A imago, qualem supra passim statuimus) punctum Z . Inter hoc autem et inflectentis verticem B uspiam positus concipiatur oculus. Quæri jam potest, ubi loci debeat punctum A apparere? Retrorsum ad punctum Z videri non fert natura (cum omnis impressio sensum afficiens proveniat a partibus A ) ac experientia reclamat. Nostris autem e placitis consequi videtur, ipsum ad partes anticas apparens, ab intervallo longissime dissito (quod et maximum sensibile quodvis intervallum quodammodo exsuperet), apparere. Cum enim quo radiis minus divergentibus attingitur objectum, eo (seclusis utique prænotionibus et præjudiciis) longius abesse sentiatur; et quod parallelos ad oculum radios projicit, remotissime positum æstimetur: exigere ratio videtur, ut quod convergentibus radiis apprehenditur, adhuc magis, si fieri posset, quoad apparentiam elongetur. Quin et circa casum hunc generatim inquiri possit, quidnam omnino sit, quod apparentem puncti A  locum determinet, faciatque quod constanti ratione nunc propius, nunc remotius appareat? Cui itidem dubio nihil quicquam ex hactenus dictorum analogia responderi posse videtur, nisi debere punctum A perpetuo longissime semotum videri. Verum experientia secus attestatur, illud pro diversa oculi inter puncta B , Z , positione varie distans, nunquam fere (si unquam) longinquius ipso A libere spectato, subinde vero multo propinquius adparere; quinimo, quo oculum appellentes radii magis convergunt, eo speciem objecti propius accedere. Nempe, si puncto B admoveatur oculus, suo (ad lentem) fere nativo in loco conspicitur punctum A (vel æque distans, ad speculum); ad O reductus oculus ejusce speciem appropinquantem cernit; ad P adhuc vicinius ipsum existimat; ac ita sensim, donec alicubi tandem, velut ad Q , constituto oculo, objectum summe propinquum apparens in meram confusionem incipiat evanescere. Quæ sane cuncta rationibus atque decretis nostris repugnare videntur, aut cum iis saltem parum amice conspirant. Neque nostram tantum sententiam pulsat hoc experimentum, at ex æquo cæteras quas norim omnes: veterem imprimis ac vulgatam, nostræ præ reliquis affinem, ita convellere videtur, ut ejus vi coactus doctissimus A. Tacquetus isti principio (cui pene soli totam inædificaverat Catoptricam suam) ceu infido ac inconstanti renunciarit, adeoque suam ipse doctrinam labefactarit? id tamen, opinor, minime facturus, si rem totam inspexissit penitius, atque difficultatis fundum attigissit. Apud me vero non ita pollet hæc, nec eousque præpollebit ulla difficultas, ut ab iis quæ manifeste rationi consentanea video, discedam; præsertim quum, ut his accidit, ejusmodi difficultas in singularis cujuspiam casus disparitate fundetur. Nimirum in præsente casu peculiare quiddam, naturæ subtilitati involutum, delitescit, ægre fortassis, nisi perfectius explorato videndi modo, detegendum. Circa quod nil, fateor, hactenus excogitare potui, quod adblandiretur animo meo, nedum plane satisfaceret. Vobis itaque nodum hunc, utinam feliciore conatu, resolvendum committo.”

In English as follows :

 “I have here delivered what my thoughts have suggested to me concerning that part of optics which is more properly mathematical. As for the other parts of that science (which, being rather physical, do consequently abound with plausible conjectures instead of certain principles), there has in them scarce anything occurred to my observation different from what has been already said by Kepler, Scheinerus, Des Cartes, &c. And methinks I had better say nothing at all than repeat that which has been so often said by others. I think it therefore high time to take my leave of this subject. But, before I quit it for good and all, the fair and ingenuous dealing that I owe both to you and to truth obliges me to acquaint you with a certain untoward difficulty, which seems directly opposite to the doctrine I have been hitherto inculcating, at least admits of no solution from it. In short it is this. Before the double convex glass or concave speculum EBF , let the point A be placed at such a distance that the rays proceeding from A , after refraction or reflection, be brought to unite somewhere in the axis AB . And suppose the point of union (i.e. the image of the point A , as hath been already set forth) to be Z ; between which and B , the vertex of the glass or speculum, conceive the eye to be anywhere placed. The question now is, where the point A ought to appear. Experience shews that it doth not appear behind at the point Z ; and it were contrary to nature that it should; since all the impression which affects the sense comes from towards A . But, from our tenets it should seem to follow that it would appear before the eye at a vast distance off, so great as should in some sort surpass all sensible distance. For since, if we exclude all anticipations and prejudices, every object appears by so much the farther off by how much the rays it sends to the eye are less diverging; and that object is thought to be most remote from which parallel rays proceed unto the eye; reason would make one think that object should appear at yet a greater distance which is seen by converging rays. Moreover, it may in general be asked concerning this case, what it is that determines the apparent place of the point A  , and maketh it to appear after a constant manner, sometimes nearer, at other times farther off? To which doubt I see nothing that can be answered agreeable to the principles we have laid down, except only that the point A ought always to appear extremely remote. But, on the contrary, we are assured by experience, that the point A appears variously distant, according to the different situations of the eye between the points B and Z . And that it doth almost never (if at all) seem farther off than it would if it were beheld by the naked eye; but, on the contrary, it doth sometimes appear much nearer. Nay, it is even certain that by how much the rays falling on the eye do more converge, by so much the nearer does the object seem to approach. For, the eye being placed close to the point B , the object A appears nearly in its own natural place, if the point B is taken in the glass, or at the same distance, if in the speculum. The eye being brought back to O , the object seems to draw near; and, being come to P , it beholds it still nearer: and so on by little and little, till at length the eye being placed somewhere, suppose at Q , the object appearing extremely near begins to vanish into mere confusion. All which doth seem repugnant to our principles; at least, not rightly to agree with them. Nor is our tenet alone struck at by this experiment, but likewise all others that ever came to my knowledge are every whit as much endangered by it. The ancient one especially (which is most commonly received, and comes nearest to mine) seems to be so effectually overthrown thereby that the most learned Tacquet has been forced to reject that principle, as false and uncertain, on which alone he had built almost his whole Catoptrics  , and consequently, by taking away the foundation, hath himself pulled down the superstructure he had raised on it. Which, nevertheless, I do not believe he would have done, had he but considered the whole matter more thoroughly, and examined the difficulty to the bottom. But as for me, neither this nor any other difficulty shall have so great an influence on me, as to make me renounce that which I know to be manifestly agreeable to reason. Especially when, as it here falls out, the difficulty is founded in the peculiar nature of a certain odd and particular case. For, in the present case something peculiar lies hid, which, being involved in the subtilty of nature, will perhaps hardly be discovered till such time as the manner of vision is more perfectly made known. Concerning which, I must own I have hitherto been able to find out nothing that has the least show of probability, not to mention certainty. I shall therefore leave this knot to be untied by you, wishing you may have better success in it than I have had.”

 

30. The ancient and received principle, which Dr. Barrow here mentions as the main foundation of Tacquet’s Catoptrics , is, that every “visible point seen by reflection from a speculum shall appear placed at the intersection of the reflected ray and the perpendicular of incidence.” Which intersection in the present case happening to be behind the eye, it greatly shakes the authority of that principle whereon the aforementioned author proceeds throughout his whole Catoptrics , in determining the apparent place of objects seen by reflection from any kind of speculum.

31. Let us now see how this phenomenon agrees with our tenets. The eye, the nearer it is placed to the point B in the above figures, the more distinct is the appearance of the object: but, as it recedes to O , the appearance grows more confused; and at P it sees the object yet more confused; and so on, till the eye, being brought back to Z , sees the object in the greatest confusion of all. Wherefore, by sect. 21, the object should seem to approach the eye gradually, as it recedes from the point B ; that is, at O it should (in consequence of the principle I have laid down in the aforesaid section) seem nearer than it did at B , and at P nearer than at O , and at Q nearer than at P , and so on, till it quite vanishes at Z . Which is the very matter of fact, as any one that pleases may easily satisfy himself by experiment.

 32. This case is much the same as if we should suppose an Englishman to meet a foreigner who used the same words with the English, but in a direct contrary  signification. The Englishman would not fail to make a wrong judgment of the ideas annexed to those sounds, in the mind of him that used them. Just so in the present case, the object speaks (if I may so say) with words that the eye is well acquainted with, that is, confusions of appearance; but, whereas heretofore the greatest confusions were always wont to signify nearer distances, they have in this case a direct contrary signification, being connected with the greater distances. Whence it follows that the eye must unavoidably be mistaken, since it will take the confusions in the sense it has been used to, which is directly opposed to the true.

33. This phenomenon, as it entirely subverts the opinion of those who will have us judge of distance by lines and angles, on which supposition it is altogether inexplicable, so it seems to me no small confirmation of the truth of that principle whereby it is explained. But, in order to a more full explication of this point, and to shew how far the hypothesis of the mind’s judging by the various divergency of rays may be of use in determining the apparent place of an object, it will be necessary to premise some few things, which are already well known to those who have any skill in Dioptrics.

34. First , Any radiating point is then distinctly seen when the rays proceeding from it are, by the refractive power of the crystalline, accurately reunited in the retina or fund of the eye. But if they are reunited either before they arrive at the retina, or after they have passed it, then there is confused vision.

 [image "img60.png" file=Image00059.gif] 

Figure 1

 [image "img61.png" file=Image00060.gif] 

Figure 2

 [image "img62.png" file=Image00061.gif] 

Figure 3

35. Secondly , Suppose, in the adjacent figures, NP represent an eye duly framed, and retaining its natural figure. In fig. 1 the rays falling nearly parallel on the eye, are, by the crystalline AB , refracted, so as their focus, or point of union F , falls exactly on the retina. But, if the rays fall sensibly diverging on the eye, as in fig. 2, then their focus falls beyond the retina; or, if the rays are made to converge by the lens QS , before they come at the eye, as in fig. 3, their focus F  will fall before the retina. In which two last cases it is  evident, from the foregoing section, that the appearance of the point Z is confused. And, by how much the greater is the convergency or divergency of the rays falling on the pupil, by so much the farther will the point of their reunion be from the retina, either before or behind it, and consequently the point Z  will appear by so much the more confused. And this, by the bye, may shew us the difference between confused and faint vision. Confused vision is, when the rays proceeding from each distinct point of the object are not accurately re-collected in one corresponding point on the retina, but take up some space thereon — so that rays from different points become mixed and confused together. This is opposed to a distinct vision, and attends near objects. Faint vision is when, by reason of the distance of the object, or grossness of the interjacent medium, few rays arrive from the object to the eye.  This is opposed to vigorous or clear vision, and attends remote objects. But to return.

36. The eye, or (to speak truly) the mind, perceiving only the confusion itself, without ever considering the cause from which it proceeds, doth constantly annex the same degree of distance to the same degree of confusion. Whether that confusion be occasioned by converging or by diverging rays it matters not. Whence it follows that the eye, viewing the object Z through the glass QS (which by refraction causeth the rays ZQ , ZS , &c. to converge), should judge it to be at such a nearness, at which, if it were placed, it would radiate on the eye, with rays diverging to that degree as would produce the same confusion which is now produced by converging rays, i.e. would cover a portion of the retina equal to DC. (Vid. fig. 3, sup. ) But then this must be understood (to use Dr. Barrow’s phrase) “seclusis prænotionibus et præjudiciis,” in case we abstract from all other circumstances of vision, such as the figure, size, faintness, &c. of the visible objects — all which do ordinarily concur to form our idea of distance, the mind having, by frequent experience, observed their several sorts or degrees to be connected with various distances.

37. It plainly follows from what has been said, that a person perfectly purblind (i.e. that could not see an object distinctly but when placed close to his eye) would not make the same wrong judgment that others do in the forementioned case. For, to him, greater confusions constantly suggesting greater distances, he must, as he recedes from the glass, and the object grows more confused, judge it to be at a farther distance; contrary to what they do who have had the perception of the objects growing more confused connected with the idea of approach.

 38. Hence also it doth appear, there may be good use of computation, by lines and angles, in optics; not that the mind judges of distance immediately by them, but because it judges by somewhat which is connected with them, and to the determination whereof they may be subservient. Thus, the mind judging of the distance  of an object by the confusedness of its appearance, and this confusedness being greater or lesser to the naked eye, according as the object is seen by rays more or less diverging, it follows that a man may make use of the divergency of the rays, in computing the apparent distance, though not for its own sake, yet on account of the confusion with which it is connected. But so it is, the confusion itself is entirely neglected by mathematicians, as having no necessary relation with distance, such as the greater or lesser angles of divergency are conceived to have. And these (especially for that they fall under mathematical computation) are alone regarded, in determining the apparent places of objects, as though they were the sole and immediate cause of the judgments the mind makes of distance. Whereas, in truth, they should not at all be regarded in themselves, or any otherwise than as they are supposed to be the cause of confused vision.

 39. The not considering of this has been a fundamental and perplexing oversight. For proof whereof, we need go no farther than the case before us. It having been observed that the most diverging rays brought into the mind the idea of nearest distance, and that still as the divergency decreased the distance increased, and it being thought the connexion between the various degrees of divergency and distance was immediate — this naturally leads one to conclude, from an ill-grounded analogy, that converging rays shall make an object appear at an immense distance, and that, as the convergency increases, the distance (if it were possible) should do so likewise. That this was the cause of Dr. Barrow’s mistake is evident from his own words which we have quoted. Whereas had the learned Doctor observed that diverging and converging rays, how opposite soever they may seem, do nevertheless agree in producing the same effect, to wit, confusedness of vision, greater degrees whereof are produced indifferently, either as the divergency or convergency of the rays increaseth; and that it is by this effect, which is the same in both, that either the divergency or convergency is perceived by the eye — I say, had he but considered this, it is certain he would have made a quite contrary judgment, and rightly concluded  that those rays which fall on the eye with greater degrees of convergency should make the object from whence they proceed appear by so much the nearer. But it is plain it was impossible for any man to attain to a right notion of this matter so long as he had regard only to lines and angles, and did not apprehend the true nature of vision, and how far it was of mathematical consideration.

40. Before we dismiss this subject, it is fit we take notice of a query relating thereto, proposed by the ingenious Mr. Molyneux, in his Treatise of Dioptrics (par. i. pro. sect. 9), where, speaking of the difficulty we have been explaining, he has these words: “And so he (i.e. Dr. Barrow) leaves this difficulty to the solution of others, which I (after so great an example) shall do likewise; but with the resolution of the same admirable author, of not quitting the evident doctrine which we have before laid down, for determining the locus objecti , on account of being pressed by one difficulty, which seems inexplicable till a more intimate knowledge of the visive faculty be obtained by mortals. In the meantime I propose it to the consideration of the ingenious, whether the locus apparens of an object placed as in this ninth section be not as much before the eye as the distinct base is behind the eye?” To which query we may venture to answer in the negative. For, in the present case, the rule for determining the distance of the distinct base, or respective focus from the glass is this: As the difference between the distance of the object and focus is to the focus or focal length, so the distance of the object from the glass is to the distance of the respective focus or distinct base from the glass. (Molyneux, Dioptr.  , par. i. pro.) Let us now suppose the object to be placed at the distance of the focal length, and one-half of the focal length from the glass, and the eye close to the glass. Hence it will follow, by the rule, that the distance of the distinct base behind the eye is double the true distance of the object before the eye. If, therefore, Mr. Molyneux’s conjecture held good, it would follow that the eye should see the object twice as far off as it really is; and in other cases at three or four times its due distance, or more. But this manifestly contradicts experience, the object never appearing, at farthest, beyond its due distance. Whatever, therefore, is built on this supposition  (vid. corol. i. pro. ibid.) comes to the ground along with it.

 

41. From what hath been premised, it is a manifest consequence, that a man born blind, being made to see, would at first have no idea of distance by sight: the sun and stars, the remotest objects as well as the nearer, would all seem to be in his eye, or rather in his mind. The objects intromitted by sight would seem to him (as in truth they are) no other than a new set of thoughts or sensations, each whereof is as near to him as the perceptions of pain or pleasure, or the most inward passions of his soul. For, our judging objects perceived by sight to be at any distance, or without the mind, is (vid. sect, xxviii.) entirely the effect of experience; which one in those circumstances could not yet have attained to.

42. It is indeed otherwise upon the common supposition — that men judge of distance by the angle of the optic axes, just as one in the dark, or a blind man by the angle comprehended by two sticks, one whereof he held in each hand. For, if this were true, it would follow that one blind from his birth, being made to see, should stand in need of no new experience, in order to perceive distance by sight. But that this is false has, I think, been sufficiently demonstrated.

 43. And perhaps, upon a strict inquiry, we shall not find that even those who from their birth have grown up in a continued habit of seeing are irrecoverably prejudiced on the other side, to wit, in thinking what they see to be at a distance from them. For, at this time it seems agreed on all hands, by those who have had any thoughts of that matter, that colours, which are the proper and immediate object of sight, are not without the mind. — But then, it will be said, by sight we have also the ideas of extension, and figure, and motion; all which may well be thought without and at some distance from the mind, though colour should  not. In answer to this, I appeal to any man’s experience, whether the visible extension of any object do not appear as near to him as the colour of that object; nay, whether they do not both seem to be in the very same place. Is not the extension we see coloured, and is it possible for us, so much as in thought, to separate and abstract colour from extension? Now, where the extension is, there surely is the figure, and there the motion too. I speak of those which are perceived by sight.

 44. But for a fuller explication of this point, and to shew that the immediate objects of sight are not so much as the ideas or resemblances of things placed at a distance, it is requisite that we look nearer into the matter, and carefully observe what is meant in common discourse when one says, that which he sees is at a distance from him. Suppose, for example, that looking at the moon I should say it were fifty or sixty semidiameters of the earth distant from me. Let us see what moon this is spoken of. It is plain it cannot be the visible moon, or anything like the visible moon, or that which I see — which is only a round luminous plain, of about thirty visible points in diameter. For, in case I am carried from the place where I stand directly towards the moon, it is manifest the object varies still as I go on; and, by the time that I am advanced fifty or sixty semidiameters of the earth, I shall be so far from being near a small, round, luminous flat that I shall perceive nothing like it — this object having long since disappeared, and, if I would recover it, it must be by going back to the earth from whence I set out. Again, suppose I perceive by sight the faint and obscure idea of something, which I doubt whether it be a man, or a tree, or a tower, but  judge it to be at the distance of about a mile. It is plain I cannot mean that what I see is a mile off, or that it is the image or likeness of anything which is a mile off; since that every step I take towards it the appearance alters, and from being obscure, small, and faint, grows clear, large, and vigorous. And when I come to the mile’s end, that which I saw first is quite lost, neither do I find anything in the likeness of it.

 45. In these and the like instances, the truth of the matter, I find, stands thus: — Having of a long time experienced certain ideas perceivable by touch — as distance, tangible figure, and solidity — to have been connected with certain ideas of sight, I do, upon perceiving these ideas of sight, forthwith conclude what tangible ideas are, by the wonted ordinary course of nature, like to follow. Looking at an object, I perceive a certain visible figure and colour, with some degree of faintness and other circumstances, which, from what I have formerly observed, determine me to think that if I advance forward so many paces, miles, &c., I shall be affected with such and such ideas of touch. So that, in truth and strictness of speech, I neither see distance itself, nor anything that I take to be at a distance. I say, neither distance nor things placed at a distance are themselves, or their ideas, truly perceived by sight. This I am persuaded of, as to what concerns myself. And I believe whoever will look narrowly into his own thoughts, and examine what he means by saying he sees this or that thing at a distance, will agree with me, that what he sees  only suggests to his understanding that, after having passed a certain distance, to be measured by the motion of his body, which is perceivable by touch, he shall come to perceive such and such tangible ideas, which have been usually connected with such and such visible ideas. But, that one might be deceived by these suggestions of sense, and that there is no necessary connexion between visible and tangible ideas suggested by them, we need go no farther than the next looking-glass or picture to be convinced. Note that, when I speak of tangible ideas, I take the word idea for any the immediate object of sense, or understanding — in which large signification it is commonly used by the moderns.

46. From what we have shewn, it is a manifest consequence that the ideas of space, outness, and things placed at a distance are not, strictly speaking, the object of sight; they are not otherwise perceived by the eye than by the ear. Sitting in my study I hear a coach drive along the street; I look through the casement and see it; I walk out and enter into it. Thus, common speech would incline one to think I heard, saw, and touched the same thing, to wit, the coach. It is nevertheless certain the ideas intromitted by each sense are widely different, and distinct from each other; but, having been observed constantly to go together, they are spoken of as one and the same thing. By the variation of the noise, I perceive the different distances of the coach, and know that it approaches before I look out. Thus, by the ear I perceive distance just after the same manner as I do by the eye.

 47. I do not nevertheless say I hear distance, in like  manner as I say that I see it — the ideas perceived by hearing not being so apt to be confounded with the ideas of touch as those of sight are. So likewise a man is easily convinced that bodies and external things are not properly the object of hearing, but only sounds, by the mediation whereof the idea of this or that body, or distance, is suggested to his thoughts. But then one is with more difficulty brought to discern the difference there is betwixt the ideas of sight and touch: though it be certain, a man no more sees and feels the same thing, than he hears and feels the same thing.

48. One reason of which seems to be this. It is thought a great absurdity to imagine that one and the same thing should have any more than one extension and one figure. But, the extension and figure of a body being let into the mind two ways, and that indifferently, either by sight or touch, it seems to follow that we see the same extension and the same figure which we feel.

49. But, if we take a close and accurate view of the matter, it must be acknowledged that we never see and feel one and the same object. That which is seen is one thing, and that which is felt is another. If the visible figure and extension be not the same with the tangible figure and extension, we are not to infer that one and the same thing has divers extensions. The true consequence is that the objects of sight and touch are two distinct things. It may perhaps require some thought rightly to conceive this distinction. And the difficulty seems not a little increased, because the combination of visible ideas hath constantly the same name as the combination of tangible ideas wherewith it is connected — which doth of necessity arise from the use and end of language.

 50. In order, therefore, to treat accurately and unconfusedly of vision, we must bear in mind that there are two sorts of objects apprehended by the eye — the one primarily and immediately, the other secondarily and by intervention of the former. Those of the first sort neither are nor appear to be without the mind, or at any distance off.  They may, indeed, grow greater or smaller, more confused, or more clear, or more faint. But they do not, cannot approach, [or even seem to approach ] or recede from us. Whenever we say an object is at a distance, whenever we say it draws near, or goes farther off, we must always mean it of the latter sort, which properly belong to the touch, and are not so truly perceived as suggested by the eye, in like manner as thoughts by the ear.

 51. No sooner do we hear the words of a familiar language pronounced in our ears but the ideas corresponding thereto present themselves to our minds: in the very same instant the sound and the meaning enter the understanding: so closely are they united that it is not in our power to keep out the one except we exclude the other also. We even act in all respects as if we heard the very thoughts themselves. So likewise the secondary objects, or those which are only suggested by sight, do often more strongly affect us, and are more regarded, than the proper objects of that sense; along with which they enter into the mind, and with which they have a far more strict connexion than ideas have with words. Hence it is we find it so difficult to discriminate between the immediate and mediate objects of sight, and are so prone to attribute to the former what belongs only to the latter. They are, as it were, most closely twisted, blended, and incorporated together. And the prejudice is confirmed and riveted in our thoughts by a long tract of time, by the use of language, and want of reflection. However, I doubt not but anyone that shall attentively consider what we have already said, and shall say upon this subject before we have done (especially if he pursue it in his own thoughts), may be able to deliver himself from that prejudice. Sure I am, it is worth some  attention to whoever would understand the true nature of vision.

 

52. I have now done with Distance, and proceed to shew how it is that we perceive by sight the Magnitude of objects. It is the opinion of some that we do it by angles, or by angles in conjunction with distance. But, neither angles nor distance being perceivable by sight, and the things we see being in truth at no distance from us, it follows that, as we have shewn lines and angles not to be the medium the mind makes use of in apprehending the apparent place, so neither are they the medium whereby it apprehends the apparent magnitude of objects.

53. It is well known that the same extension at a near distance shall subtend a greater angle, and at a farther distance a lesser angle. And by this principle (we are told) the mind estimates the magnitude of an object, comparing the angle under which it is seen with its distance, and thence inferring the magnitude thereof. What inclines men to this mistake (beside the humour of making one see by geometry) is, that the same perceptions or ideas which suggest distance do also suggest magnitude. But, if we examine it, we shall find they suggest the latter as immediately as the former. I say, they do not first suggest distance and then leave it to the judgment to use that as a medium whereby to collect the magnitude; but they have as close and immediate a connexion with the magnitude as with the distance; and suggest magnitude as independently of distance, as they do distance independently of magnitude. All which will be evident to whoever considers what has been already said and what follows.

 54. It has been shewn there are two sorts of objects apprehended by sight, each whereof has its distinct magnitude, or extension — the one, properly tangible, i.e. to be perceived and measured by touch, and not immediately falling under the sense of seeing; the other, properly and immediately visible, by mediation of which the former is brought in view. Each of these magnitudes are greater or  lesser, according as they contain in them more or fewer points, they being made up of points or minimums. For, whatever may be said of extension in abstract, it is certain sensible extension is not infinitely divisible. There is a minimum tangibile , and a minimum visibile , beyond which sense cannot perceive. This every one’s experience will inform him.

55. The magnitude of the object which exists without the mind, and is at a distance, continues always invariably the same: but, the visible object still changing as you approach to or recede from the tangible object, it hath no fixed and determinate greatness. Whenever therefore we speak of the magnitude of any thing, for instance a tree or a house, we must mean the tangible magnitude; otherwise there can be nothing steady and free from ambiguity spoken of it. Now, though the tangible and visible magnitude do in truth belong to two distinct objects, I shall nevertheless (especially since those objects are called by the same name, and are observed to coexist), to avoid tediousness and singularity of speech, sometimes speak of them as belonging to one and the same thing.

56. Now, in order to discover by what means the magnitude of tangible objects is perceived by sight, I need only reflect on what passes in my own mind, and observe what those things be which introduce the ideas of greater or lesser into my thoughts when I look on any object. And these I find to be, first , the magnitude or extension of the visible object, which, being immediately perceived by sight, is connected with that other which is tangible and placed at a distance: secondly , the confusion or distinctness: and thirdly  , the vigorousness or faintness of the aforesaid  visible appearance. Cæteris paribus , by how much the greater or lesser the visible object is, by so much the greater or lesser do I conclude the tangible object to be. But, be the idea immediately perceived by sight never so large, yet, if it be withal confused, I judge the magnitude of the thing to be but small. If it be distinct and clear, I judge it greater. And, if it be faint, I apprehend it to be yet greater. What is here meant by confusion and faintness has been explained in sect. 35.

57. Moreover, the judgments we make of greatness do, in like manner as those of distance, depend on the disposition of the eye; also on the figure, number, and situation of intermediate objects, and other circumstances that have been observed to attend great or small tangible magnitudes. Thus, for instance, the very same quantity of visible extension which in the figure of a tower doth suggest the idea of great magnitude shall in the figure of a man suggest the idea of much smaller magnitude. That this is owing to the experience we have had of the usual bigness of a tower and a man, no one, I suppose, need be told.

58. It is also evident that confusion or faintness have no more a necessary connexion with little or great magnitude than they have with little or great distance. As they suggest the latter, so they suggest the former to our minds. And, by consequence, if it were not for experience, we should no more judge a faint or confused appearance to be connected with great or little magnitude than we should that it was connected with great or little distance.

 59. Nor will it be found that great or small visible magnitude hath any necessary relation to great or small tangible magnitude — so that the one may certainly and infallibly be inferred from the other. But, before we come to the proof of this, it is fit we consider the difference there is betwixt the extension and figure which is the proper object of touch, and that other which is termed visible; and how the former is principally, though not immediately, taken notice of when we look at any object. This has been before mentioned, but we shall here inquire into the cause thereof. We regard the objects that environ us in proportion as they are adapted to benefit or injure our own  bodies, and thereby produce in our minds the sensations of pleasure or pain. Now, bodies operating on our organs by an immediate application, and the hurt and advantage arising therefrom depending altogether on the tangible, and not at all on the visible, qualities of any object — this is a plain reason why those should be regarded by us much more than these. And for this end [chiefly] the visive sense seems to have been bestowed on animals, to wit, that, by the perception of visible ideas (which in themselves are not capable of affecting or anywise altering the frame of their bodies), they may be able to foresee (from the experience they have had what tangible ideas are connected with such and such visible ideas) the damage or benefit which is like to ensue upon the application of their own bodies to this or that body which is at a distance. Which foresight, how necessary it is to the preservation of an animal, every one’s experience can inform him. Hence it is that, when we look at an object, the tangible figure and extension thereof are principally attended to; whilst there is small heed taken of the visible figure and magnitude, which, though more immediately perceived, do less sensibly affect us, and are not fitted to produce any alteration in our bodies.

60. That the matter of fact is true will be evident to any one who considers that a man placed at ten foot distance is thought as great as if he were placed at the distance only of five foot; which is true, not with relation to the visible, but tangible greatness of the object: the visible magnitude being far greater at one station than it is at the other.

 61. Inches, feet, &c. are settled, stated lengths, whereby we measure objects and estimate their magnitude. We say, for example, an object appears to be six inches, or six foot long. Now, that this cannot be meant of visible inches, &c. is evident, because a visible inch is itself no constant determinate magnitude, and cannot therefore serve to mark out and determine the magnitude of any  other thing. Take an inch marked upon a ruler; view it successively, at the distance of half a foot, a foot, a foot and a half, &c. from the eye: at each of which, and at all the intermediate distances, the inch shall have a different visible extension, i.e. there shall be more or fewer points discerned in it. Now, I ask which of all these various extensions is that stated determinate one that is agreed on for a common measure of other magnitudes? No reason can be assigned why we should pitch on one more than another. And, except there be some invariable determinate extension fixed on to be marked by the word inch, it is plain it can be used to little purpose; and to say a thing contains this or that number of inches shall imply no more than that it is extended, without bringing any particular idea of that extension into the mind. Farther, an inch and a foot, from different distances, shall both exhibit the same visible magnitude, and yet at the same time you shall say that one seems several times greater than the other. From all which it is manifest, that the judgments we make of the magnitude of objects by sight are altogether in reference to their tangible extension. Whenever we say an object is great or small, of this or that determinate measure, I say, it must be meant of the tangible and not the visible extension, which, though immediately perceived, is nevertheless little taken notice of.

62. Now, that there is no necessary connexion between these two distinct extensions is evident from hence — because our eyes might have been framed in such a manner as to be able to see nothing but what were less than the minimum tangibile  . In which case it is not impossible we might have perceived all the immediate objects of sight the very same that we do now; but unto those visible appearances there would not be connected those different tangible magnitudes that are now. Which shews the judgments we make of the magnitude of things placed at a distance, from the various greatness of the immediate objects of sight, do not  arise from any essential or necessary, but only a customary, tie which has been observed betwixt them.

63. Moreover, it is not only certain that any idea of sight might not have been connected with this or that idea of touch we now observe to accompany it, but also that the greater visible magnitudes might have been connected with and introduced into our minds lesser tangible magnitudes, and the lesser visible magnitudes greater tangible magnitudes. Nay, that it actually is so, we have daily experience — that object which makes a strong and large appearance not seeming near so great as another the visible magnitude whereof is much less, but more faint, and the appearance upper, or which is the same thing, painted lower on the retina, which faintness and situation suggest both greater magnitude and greater distance.

64. From which, and from sect. 57 and 58, it is manifest that, as we do not perceive the magnitude of objects immediately by sight, so neither do we perceive them by the mediation of anything which has a necessary connexion with them. Those ideas that now suggest unto us the various magnitudes of external objects before we touch them might possibly have suggested no such thing; or they might have signified them in a direct contrary manner, so that the very same ideas on the perception whereof we judge an object to be small might as well have served to make us conclude it great; — those ideas being in their own nature equally fitted to bring into our minds the idea of small or great, or no size at all, of outward objects, just as the words of any language are in their own nature indifferent to signify this or that thing, or nothing at all.

 65. As we see distance so we see magnitude. And we see both in the same way that we see shame or anger in the looks of a man. Those passions are themselves invisible; they are nevertheless let in by the eye along with colours and alterations of countenance which are the immediate object of vision, and which signify them for no other reason than barely because they have been observed to accompany them. Without which experience we should  no more have taken blushing for a sign of shame than of gladness.

66. We are nevertheless exceedingly prone to imagine those things which are perceived only by the mediation of others to be themselves the immediate objects of sight, or at least to have in their own nature a fitness to be suggested by them before ever they had been experienced to coexist with them. From which prejudice every one perhaps will not find it easy to emancipate himself, by any the clearest convictions of reason. And there are some grounds to think that, if there was one only invariable and universal language in the world, and that men were born with the faculty of speaking it, it would be the opinion of some, that the ideas in other men’s minds were properly perceived by the ear, or had at least a necessary and inseparable tie with the sounds that were affixed to them. All which seems to arise from want of a due application of our discerning faculty, thereby to discriminate between the ideas that are in our understandings, and consider them apart from each other; which would preserve us from confounding those that are different, and make us see what ideas do, and what do not, include or imply this or that other idea.

 

 67. There is a celebrated phenomenon the solution whereof I shall attempt to give, by the principles that have been laid down, in reference to the manner wherein we apprehend by sight the magnitude of objects. — The apparent magnitude of the moon, when placed in the horizon, is much greater than when it is in the meridian, though the angle under which the diameter of the moon is seen be not observed greater in the former case than in the latter; and  the horizontal moon doth not constantly appear of the same bigness, but at some times seemeth far greater than at others.

68. Now, in order to explain the reason of the moon’s appearing greater than ordinary in the horizon, it must be observed that the particles which compose our atmosphere do intercept the rays of light proceeding from any object to the eye; and, by how much the greater is the portion of atmosphere interjacent between the object and the eye, by so much the more are the rays intercepted, and, by consequence, the appearance of the object rendered more faint — every object appearing more vigorous or more faint in proportion as it sendeth more or fewer rays into the eye. Now, between the eye and the moon when situated in the horizon there lies a far greater quantity of atmosphere than there does when the moon is in the meridian. Whence it comes to pass, that the appearance of the horizontal moon is fainter, and therefore, by sect. 56, it should be thought bigger in that situation than in the meridian, or in any other elevation above the horizon.

69. Farther, the air being variously impregnated, sometimes more and sometimes less, with vapours and exhalations fitted to retund and intercept the rays of light, it follows that the appearance of the horizontal moon hath not always an equal faintness, and, by consequence, that luminary, though in the very same situation, is at one time judged greater than at another.

70. That we have here given the true account of the phenomena of the horizontal moon, will, I suppose, be farther evident to any one from the following considerations: — First , it is plain, that which in this case suggests the idea of greater magnitude, must be something which is itself perceived; for, that which is unperceived cannot suggest to our perception any other thing. Secondly , it must be something that does not constantly remain the same, but is subject to some change or variation; since the appearance of the horizontal moon varies, being at one time greater than at another. [Thirdly  , it must not lie in the circumjacent or intermediate objects, such as mountains, houses, fields, &c.; because that when all those objects are  excluded from sight the appearance is as great as ever.] And yet, thirdly , it cannot be the visible figure or magnitude; since that remains the same, or is rather lesser, by how much the moon is nearer to the horizon. It remains therefore, that the true cause is that affection or alteration of the visible appearance, which proceeds from the greater paucity of rays arriving at the eye, and which I term faintness: since this answers all the forementioned conditions, and I am not conscious of any other perception that does.

71. Add to this that in misty weather it is a common observation, that the appearance of the horizontal moon is far larger than usual, which greatly conspires with and strengthens our opinion. Neither would it prove in the least irreconcilable with what we have said, if the horizontal moon should chance sometimes to seem enlarged beyond its usual extent, even in more serene weather. For, we must not only have regard to the mist which happens to be in the place where we stand; we ought also to take into our thoughts the whole sum of vapours and exhalations which lie betwixt the eye and the moon: all which co-operating to render the appearance of the moon more faint, and thereby increase its magnitude, it may chance to appear greater than it usually does even in the horizontal position, at a time when, though there be no extraordinary fog or haziness just in the place where we stand, yet the air between the eye and the moon, taken altogether, may be loaded with a greater quantity of interspersed vapours and exhalations than at other times.

 72. It may be objected that, in consequence of our principles, the interposition of a body in some degree opaque, which may intercept a great part of the rays of light, should render the appearance of the moon in the meridian as large as when it is viewed in the horizon. To which I answer, it is not faintness anyhow applied that suggests  greater magnitude; there being no necessary, but only an experimental, connexion between those two things. It follows that the faintness which enlarges the appearance must be applied in such sort, and with such circumstances, as have been observed to attend the vision of great magnitudes. When from a distance we behold great objects, the particles of the intermediate air and vapours, which are themselves unperceivable, do interrupt the rays of light, and thereby render the appearance less strong and vivid. Now, faintness of appearance, caused in this sort, hath been experienced to co-exist with great magnitude. But when it is caused by the interposition of an opaque sensible body, this circumstance alters the case; so that a faint appearance this way caused does not suggest greater magnitude, because it hath not been experienced to co-exist with it.

  73. Faintness, as well as all other ideas or perceptions which suggest magnitude or distance, does it in the same way that words suggest the notions to which they are annexed. Now, it is known a word pronounced with certain circumstances, or in a certain context with other words, hath not always the same import and signification that it hath when pronounced in some other circumstances, or different context of words. The very same visible appearance, as to faintness and all other respects, if placed on high, shall not suggest the same magnitude that it would if it were seen at an equal distance on a level with the eye. The reason whereof is, that we are rarely accustomed to view objects at a great height; our concerns lie among things situated rather before than above us; and accordingly our eyes are not placed on the top of our heads, but in such a position as is most convenient for us to see distant objects standing in our way. And, this situation of them being a circumstance which usually attends the vision of distant objects, we may from hence account for (what is commonly observed) an object’s appearing of different magnitude, even with respect to its horizontal extension, on the top of a steeple, e.g. a hundred feet high, to one standing below, from what it would if placed at a hundred feet distance, on a level with his eye. For, it hath been shewn that the judgment we make on the magnitude of a thing depends not on the visible appearance only, but also on divers other circumstances, any  one of which being omitted or varied may suffice to make some alteration in our judgment. Hence, the circumstance of viewing a distant object in such a situation as is usual and suits with the ordinary posture of the head and eyes, being omitted, and instead thereof a different situation of the object, which requires a different posture of the head, taking place — it is not to be wondered at if the magnitude be judged different. But it will be demanded, why a high object should constantly appear less than an equidistant low object of the same dimensions; for so it is observed to be. It may indeed be granted that the variation of some circumstances may vary the judgment made on the magnitude of high objects, which we are less used to look at; but it does not hence appear why they should be judged less rather than greater? I answer, that in case the magnitude of distant objects was suggested by the extent of their visible appearance alone, and thought proportional thereto, it is certain they would then be judged much less than now they seem to be. (Vid. sect. 79.) But, several circumstances concurring to form the judgment we make on the magnitude of distant objects, by means of which they appear far larger than others whose visible appearance hath an equal or even greater extension, it follows that upon the change or omission of any of those circumstances which are wont to attend the vision of distant objects, and so come to influence the judgments made on their magnitude, they shall proportionally appear less than otherwise they would. For, any of those things that caused an object to be thought greater than in proportion to its visible extension being either omitted, or applied without the usual circumstances, the judgment depends more entirely on the visible extension; and consequently the object must be judged less. Thus, in the present case the situation of the thing seen being different from what it usually is in those objects we have occasion to view, and whose magnitude we observe, it follows that the very same object being a hundred feet high, should seem less than if it was a hundred feet off, on (or nearly on) a level with the eye. What has been here set forth seems to me to have no small share in contributing to magnify the appearance of the horizontal moon, and deserves not to be passed over in the explication of it.

 

 74. If we attentively consider the phenomenon before us, we shall find the not discerning between the mediate and immediate objects of sight to be the chief cause of the difficulty that occurs in the explication of it. The magnitude of the visible moon, or that which is the proper and immediate object of vision, is no greater when the moon is in the horizon than when it is in the meridian. How comes it, therefore, to seem greater in one situation than the other? What is it can put this cheat on the understanding? It has no other perception of the moon than what it gets by sight. And that which is seen is of the same extent — I say, the visible appearance hath the very same, or rather a less, magnitude, when the moon is viewed in the horizontal than when in the meridional position. And yet it is esteemed greater in the former than in the latter. Herein consists the difficulty; which doth vanish and admit of the most easy solution, if we consider that as the visible moon is not greater in the horizon than in the meridian, so neither is it thought to be so. It hath been already shewn that, in any act of vision, the visible object absolutely, or in itself, is little taken notice of — the mind still carrying its view from that to some tangible ideas, which have been observed to be connected with it, and by that means come to be suggested by it. So that when a thing is said to appear great or small, or whatever estimate be made of the magnitude of any thing, this is meant not of the visible but of the tangible object. This duly considered, it will be no hard matter to reconcile the seeming contradiction there is, that the moon should appear of a different bigness, the visible magnitude thereof remaining still the same. For, by sect. 56, the very same visible extension, with a different faintness, shall suggest a different tangible extension. When therefore the horizontal moon is said to appear greater than the meridional moon, this must be understood, not of a greater visible extension, but of a greater tangible extension, which, by reason of the more than ordinary faintness of the visible appearance, is suggested to the mind along with it.

 

75. Many attempts have been made by learned men to account for this appearance. Gassendus, Des Cartes, Hobbes, and several others have employed their thoughts on that subject; but how fruitless and unsatisfactory their endeavours have been is sufficiently shewn in the Philosophical Transactions (Numb. 187, ), where you may see their several opinions at large set forth and confuted, not without some surprise at the gross blunders that ingenious men have been forced into by endeavouring to reconcile this appearance with the ordinary principles of optics. Since the writing of which there hath been published in the Transactions (Numb. 187, ) another paper relating to the same affair, by the celebrated Dr. Wallis, wherein he attempts to account for that phenomenon; which, though it seems not to contain anything new, or different from what had been said before by others, I shall nevertheless consider in this place.

 76. His opinion, in short, is this: — We judge not of the magnitude of an object by the optic angle alone, but by the optic angle in conjunction with the distance. Hence, though the angle remain the same, or even become less, yet, if withal the distance seem to have been increased, the object shall appear greater. Now, one way whereby we estimate the distance of anything is by the number and extent of the intermediate objects. When therefore the moon is seen in the horizon, the variety of  fields, houses, &c. together with the large prospect of the wide extended land or sea that lies between the eye and the utmost limb of the horizon, suggest unto the mind the idea of greater distance, and consequently magnify the appearance. And this, according to Dr. Wallis, is the true account of the extraordinary largeness attributed by the mind to the horizontal moon, at a time when the angle subtended by its diameter is not one jot greater than it used to be.

77. With reference to this opinion, not to repeat what has been already said concerning distance, I shall only observe, first , that if the prospect of interjacent objects be that which suggests the idea of farther distance, and this idea of farther distance be the cause that brings into the mind the idea of greater magnitude, it should hence follow that if one looked at the horizontal moon from behind a wall, it would appear no bigger than ordinary. For, in that case, the wall interposing cuts off all that prospect of sea and land, &c. which might otherwise increase the apparent distance, and thereby the apparent magnitude of the moon. Nor will it suffice to say, the memory doth even then suggest all that extent of land, &c. which lies within the horizon, which suggestion occasions a sudden judgment of sense, that the moon is farther off and larger than usual. For, ask any man who from such a station beholding the horizontal moon shall think her greater than usual, whether he hath at that time in his mind any idea of the intermediate objects, or long tract of land that lies between his eye and the extreme edge of the horizon? and whether it be that idea which is the cause of his making the aforementioned judgment? He will, without doubt, reply in the negative, and declare the horizontal moon shall appear greater than the meridional, though he never thinks of all or any of those things that lie between him and it. [And as for the absurdity of any idea’s introducing into the mind another, whilst itself is not perceived, this has already fallen under our observation, and is too evident to need any farther enlargement on it.] Secondly  , it seems impossible, by this hypothesis, to account for the moon’s  appearing, in the very same situation, at one time greater than at another; which, nevertheless, has been shewn to be very agreeable to the principles we have laid down, and receives a most easy and natural explication from them. [For the further clearing up of this point, it is to be observed, that what we immediately and properly see are only lights and colours in sundry situations and shades, and degrees of faintness and clearness, confusion and distinctness. All which visible objects are only in the mind; nor do they suggest aught external, whether distance or magnitude, otherwise than by habitual connexion, as words do things. We are also to remark, that beside the straining of the eyes, and beside the vivid and faint, the distinct and confused appearances (which, bearing some proportion to lines and angles, have been substituted instead of them in the foregoing part of this Treatise), there are other means which suggest both distance and magnitude — particularly the situation of visible points or objects, as upper or lower; the former suggesting a farther distance and greater magnitude, the latter a nearer distance and lesser magnitude — all which is an effect only of custom and experience, there being really nothing intermediate in the line of distance between the uppermost and the lowermost, which are both equidistant, or rather at no distance from the eye; as there is also nothing in upper or lower which by necessary connexion should suggest greater or lesser magnitude. Now, as these customary experimental means of suggesting distance do likewise suggest magnitude, so they suggest the one as immediately as the other. I say, they do not (vide sect. 53) first suggest distance, and then leave the mind from thence to infer or compute magnitude, but suggest magnitude as immediately and directly as they suggest distance.]

 78. This phenomenon of the horizontal moon is a clear instance of the insufficiency of lines and angles for explaining the way wherein the mind perceives and estimates the magnitude of outward objects. There is, nevertheless, a use of computation by them — in order to determine the  apparent magnitude of things, so far as they have a connexion with and are proportional to those other ideas or perceptions which are the true and immediate occasions that suggest to the mind the apparent magnitude of things. But this in general may, I think, be observed concerning mathematical computation in optics — that it can never be very precise and exact, since the judgments we make of the magnitude of external things do often depend on several circumstances which are not proportional to or capable of being defined by lines and angles.

 79. From what has been said, we may safely deduce this consequence, to wit, that a man born blind, and made to see, would, at first opening of his eyes, make a very different judgment of the magnitude of objects intromitted by them from what others do. He would not consider the ideas of sight with reference to, or as having any connexion with, the ideas of touch. His view of them being entirely terminated within themselves, he can no otherwise judge them great or small than as they contain a greater or lesser number of visible points. Now, it being certain that any visible point can cover or exclude from view only one other visible point, it follows that whatever object intercepts the view of another hath an equal number of visible points with it; and, consequently, they shall both be thought by him to have the same magnitude. Hence, it is evident one in those circumstances would judge his thumb, with which he might hide a tower, or hinder its being seen, equal to that tower; or his hand, the interposition whereof might conceal the firmament from his view, equal to the firmament: how great an inequality soever there may, in our apprehensions, seem to be betwixt those two things, because of the customary and close connexion that has grown up in our minds between the objects of sight and touch, whereby the very different and distinct ideas of those two senses are so blended and confounded together as to be mistaken for one and the same thing — out of which prejudice we cannot easily extricate ourselves.

 

80. For the better explaining the nature of vision, and setting the manner wherein we perceive magnitudes in a due light, I shall proceed to make some observations concerning matters relating thereto, whereof the want of reflection, and duly separating between tangible and visible ideas, is apt to create in us mistaken and confused notions. And, first , I shall observe, that the minimum visibile is exactly equal in all beings whatsoever that are endowed with the visive faculty. No exquisite formation of the eye, no peculiar sharpness of sight, can make it less in one creature than in another; for, it not being distinguishable into parts, nor in anywise consisting of them, it must necessarily be the same to all. For, suppose it otherwise, and that the minimum visibile of a mite, for instance, be less than the minimum visibile of a man; the latter therefore may, by detraction of some part, be made equal to the former. It doth therefore consist of parts, which is inconsistent with the notion of a minimum visibile or point.

81. It will, perhaps, be objected, that the minimum visibile of a man doth really and in itself contain parts whereby it surpasses that of a mite, though they are not perceivable by the man. To which I answer, the minimum visibile  having (in like manner as all other the proper and immediate objects of sight) been shewn not to have any existence without the mind of him who sees it, it follows there cannot be any part of it that is not actually perceived and therefore visible. Now, for any object to contain several distinct  visible parts, and at the same time to be a minimum visibile , is a manifest contradiction.

82. Of these visible points we see at all times an equal number. It is every whit as great when our view is contracted and bounded by near objects as when it is extended to larger and remoter ones. For, it being impossible that one minimum visibile should obscure or keep out of sight more than one other, it is a plain consequence that, when my view is on all sides bounded by the walls of my study, I see just as many visible points as I could in case that, by the removal of the study-walls and all other obstructions, I had a full prospect of the circumjacent fields, mountains, sea, and open firmament. For, so long as I am shut up within the walls, by their interposition every point of the external objects is covered from my view. But, each point that is seen being able to cover or exclude from sight one only other corresponding point, it follows that, whilst my sight is confined to those narrow walls, I see as many points, or minima visibilia , as I should were those walls away, by looking on all the external objects whose prospect is intercepted by them. Whenever, therefore, we are said to have a greater prospect at one time than another, this must be understood with relation, not to the proper and immediate, but the secondary and mediate objects of vision — which, as hath been shewn, do properly belong to the touch.

83. The visive faculty, considered with reference to its immediate objects, may be found to labour of two defects. First , in respect of the extent or number of visible points that are at once perceivable by it, which is narrow and limited to a certain degree. It can take in at one view but a certain determinate number of minima visibilia , beyond which it cannot extend its prospect. Secondly , our sight is defective in that its view is not only narrow, but also for the most part confused. Of those things that we take in at one prospect, we can see but a few at once clearly and unconfusedly; and the more we fix our sight on any one object, by so much the darker and more indistinct shall the rest appear.

 84. Corresponding to these two defects of sight, we may imagine as many perfections, to wit, 1st. That of comprehending in one view a greater number of visible points;  2dly, of being able to view them all equally and at once, with the utmost clearness and distinction. That those perfections are not actually in some intelligences of a different order and capacity from ours, it is impossible for us to know.

85. In neither of those two ways do microscopes contribute to the improvement of sight. For, when we look through a microscope, we neither see more visible points, nor are the collateral points more distinct, than when we look with the naked eye at objects placed at a due distance. A microscope brings us, as it were, into a new world. It presents us with a new scene of visible objects, quite different from what we behold with the naked eye. But herein consists the most remarkable difference, to wit, that whereas the objects perceived by the eye alone have a certain connexion with tangible objects, whereby we are taught to foresee what will ensue upon the approach or application of distant objects to the parts of our own body — which much conduceth to its preservation — there is not the like connexion between things tangible and those visible objects that are perceived by help of a fine microscope.

86. Hence, it is evident that, were our eyes turned into the nature of microscopes, we should not be much benefitted by the change. We should be deprived of the forementioned advantage we at present receive by the visive faculty, and have left us only the empty amusement of seeing, without any other benefit arising from it. But, in that case, it will perhaps be said, our sight would be endued with a far greater sharpness and penetration than it now hath. But I would fain know wherein consists that sharpness which is esteemed so great an excellency of sight. It is certain, from what we have already shewn, that the minimum visibile  is never greater or lesser, but in all cases constantly the same. And in the case of microscopical eyes, I see only this difference, to wit, that upon the ceasing of a certain observable connexion betwixt the divers perceptions of sight and touch, which before enabled us to  regulate our actions by the eye, it would now be rendered utterly unserviceable to that purpose.

87. Upon the whole, it seems that if we consider the use and end of sight, together with the present state and circumstances of our being, we shall not find any great cause to complain of any defect or imperfection in it, or easily conceive how it could be mended. With such admirable wisdom is that faculty contrived, both for the pleasure and convenience of life.

 

88. Having finished what I intended to say concerning the Distance and Magnitude of objects, I come now to treat of the manner wherein the mind perceives by sight their Situation. Among the discoveries of the last age, it is reputed none of the least, that the manner of vision has been more clearly explained than ever it had been before. There is, at this day, no one ignorant that the pictures of external objects are painted on the retina or fund of the eye; that we can see nothing which is not so painted; and that, according as the picture is more distinct or confused, so also is the perception we have of the object. But then, in this explication of vision, there occurs one mighty difficulty, viz. the objects are painted in an inverted order on the bottom of the eye: the upper part of any object being painted on the lower part of the eye, and the lower part of the object on the upper part of the eye; and so also as to right and left. Since therefore the pictures are thus inverted, it is demanded, how it comes to pass that we see the objects erect and in their natural posture?

 [image "img63.png" file=Image00062.gif] 

Figure 4

89. In answer to this difficulty, we are told that the mind, perceiving an impulse of a ray of light on the upper part of the eye, considers this ray as coming in a direct line from the lower part of the object; and, in like manner, tracing the ray that strikes on the lower part of the eye, it is directed to the upper part of the object. Thus, in the adjacent figure, C , the lower point of the object ABC , is projected on c the upper part of the eye. So likewise, the highest point A is projected on a the lowest part of the eye; which makes the representation cba  inverted. But the mind — considering  the stroke that is made on c as coming in the straight line Cc from the lower end of the object; and the stroke or impulse on a , as coming in the line Aa from the upper end of the object — is directed to make a right judgment of the situation of the object ABC , notwithstanding the picture of it be inverted. Moreover, this is illustrated by conceiving a blind man, who, holding in his hands two sticks that cross each other, doth with them touch the extremities of an object, placed in a perpendicular situation. It is certain this man will judge that to be the upper part of the object which he touches with the stick held in the undermost hand, and that to be the lower part of the object which he touches with the stick in his uppermost hand. This is the common explication of the erect appearance of objects, which is generally received and acquiesced in, being (as Mr. Molyneux tells us, Diopt. part ii. ch. vii. ) “allowed by all men as satisfactory.”

 90. But this account to me does not seem in any degree true. Did I perceive those impulses, decussations, and directions of the rays of light, in like manner as hath been set forth, then, indeed, it would not at first view be altogether void of probability. And there might be some pretence for the comparison of the blind man and his cross sticks. But the case is far otherwise. I know very well that I perceive no such thing. And, of consequence, I cannot thereby make an estimate of the situation of objects. Moreover, I appeal to any one’s experience, whether he be conscious to himself that he thinks on the intersection made by the radius pencils, or pursues the impulses they give in right lines, whenever he perceives by sight the position of  any object? To me it seems evident that crossing and tracing of the rays, &c. is never thought on by children, idiots, or, in truth, by any other, save only those who have applied themselves to the study of optics. And for the mind to judge of the situation of objects by those things without perceiving them, or to perceive them without knowing it, take which you please, it is perfectly beyond my comprehension. Add to this, that the explaining the manner of vision by the example of cross sticks, and hunting for the object along the axes of the radius pencils, doth suppose the proper objects of sight to be perceived at a distance from us, contrary to what hath been demonstrated. [We may therefore venture to pronounce this opinion, concerning the way wherein the mind perceives the erect appearance of objects, to be of a piece with those other tenets of writers in optics, which in the foregoing parts of this treatise we have had occasion to examine and refute.]

91. It remains, therefore, that we look for some other explication of this difficulty. And I believe it not impossible to find one, provided we examine it to the bottom, and carefully distinguish between the ideas of sight and touch; which cannot be too oft inculcated in treating of vision. But, more especially throughout the consideration of this affair, we ought to carry that distinction in our thoughts; for that from want of a right understanding thereof, the difficulty of explaining erect vision seems chiefly to arise.

 92. In order to disentangle our minds from whatever prejudices we may entertain with relation to the subject in hand, nothing seems more apposite than the taking into our thoughts the case of one born blind, and afterwards, when grown up, made to see. And — though perhaps it may not be a task altogether easy and familiar to us, to divest ourselves entirely of the experiences received from sight, so as to be able to put our thoughts exactly in the posture of such a one’s — we must, nevertheless, as far as possible, endeavour to frame true conceptions of what might reasonably be supposed to pass in his mind.

 

93. It is certain that a man actually blind, and who had continued so from his birth, would, by the sense of feeling, attain to have ideas of upper and lower. By the motion of his hand, he might discern the situation of any tangible object placed within his reach. That part on which he felt himself supported, or towards which he perceived his body to gravitate, he would term lower , and the contrary to this upper ; and accordingly denominate whatsoever objects he touched.

94. But then, whatever judgments he makes concerning the situation of objects are confined to those only that are perceivable by touch. All those things that are intangible, and of a spiritual nature — his thoughts and desires, his passions, and in general all the modifications of his soul — to these he would never apply the terms upper and lower, except only in a metaphorical sense. He may perhaps, by way of allusion, speak of high or low thoughts: but those terms, in their proper signification, would never be applied to anything that was not conceived to exist without the mind. For, a man born blind, and remaining in the same state, could mean nothing else by the words higher and lower than a greater or lesser distance from the earth; which distance he would measure by the motion or application of his hand, or some other part of his body. It is, therefore, evident that all those things which, in respect of each other, would by him be thought higher or lower, must be such as were conceived to exist without his mind, in the ambient space.

 95. Whence it plainly follows, that such a one, if we suppose him made to see, would not at first sight think that anything he saw was high or low, erect or inverted. For, it hath been already demonstrated, in sect. 41, that he would not think the things he perceived by sight to be at any distance from him, or without his mind. The objects to which he had hitherto been used to apply the terms up and down, high and low, were such only as affected, or were some way perceived by his touch. But the proper  objects of vision make a new set of ideas, perfectly distinct and different from the former, and which can in no sort make themselves perceived by touch. There is, therefore, nothing at all that could induce him to think those terms applicable to them. Nor would he ever think it, till such time as he had observed their connexion with tangible objects, and the same prejudice began to insinuate itself into his understanding, which, from their infancy, had grown up in the understandings of other men.

96. To set this matter in a clearer light, I shall make use of an example. Suppose the above-mentioned blind person, by his touch, perceives a man to stand erect. Let us inquire into the manner of this. By the application of his hand to the several parts of a human body, he had perceived different tangible ideas; which being collected into sundry complex ones have distinct names annexed to them. Thus, one combination of a certain tangible figure, bulk, and consistency of parts is called the head; another the hand; a third the foot, and so of the rest — all which complex ideas could, in his understanding, be made up only of ideas perceivable by touch. He had also, by his touch, obtained an idea of earth or ground, towards which he perceives the parts of his body to have a natural tendency. Now — by erect  nothing more being meant than that perpendicular position of a man wherein his feet are nearest to the earth — if the blind person, by moving his hand over the parts of the man who stands before him, do perceive the tangible ideas that compose the head to be farthest from, and those that compose the feet to be nearest to, that other combination of tangible ideas which he calls earth, he will denominate that man erect. But, if we suppose him on a sudden to receive his sight, and that he behold a man standing before him, it is evident, in that case, he would neither judge the man he sees to be erect nor inverted; for he, never having known those terms applied to any other save tangible things, or which existed in the space without him, and what he sees neither being tangible, nor perceived as existing without, he could not  know that, in propriety of language, they were applicable to it.

97. Afterwards, when, upon turning his head or eyes up and down to the right and left, he shall observe the visible objects to change, and shall also attain to know that they are called by the same names, and connected with the objects perceived by touch; then, indeed, he will come to speak of them and their situation in the same terms that he has been used to apply to tangible things: and those that he perceives by turning up his eyes he will call upper, and those that by turning down his eyes he will call lower.

98. And this seems to me the true reason why he should think those objects uppermost that are painted on the lower part of his eye. For, by turning the eye up they shall be distinctly seen; as likewise they that are painted on the highest part of the eye shall be distinctly seen by turning the eye down, and are for that reason esteemed lowest. For we have shewn that to the immediate objects of sight, considered in themselves, he would not attribute the terms high and low. It must therefore be on account of some circumstances which are observed to attend them. And these, it is plain, are the actions of turning the eye up and down, which suggest a very obvious reason why the mind should denominate the objects of sight accordingly high or low. And, without this motion of the eye — this turning it up and down in order to discern different objects — doubtless erect , inverse , and other the like terms relating to the position of tangible objects, would never have been transferred, or in any degree apprehended to belong to the ideas of sight, the mere act of seeing including nothing in it to that purpose; whereas the different situations of the eye naturally direct the mind to make a suitable judgment of the situation of objects intromitted by it.

 99. Farther, when he has by experience learned the connexion there is between the several ideas of sight and touch, he will be able, by the perception he has of the situation of visible things in respect of one another, to make a sudden and true estimate of the situation of outward, tangible things corresponding to them. And thus  it is he shall perceive by sight the situation of external objects, which do not properly fall under that sense.

100. I know we are very prone to think that, if just made to see, we should judge of the situation of visible things as we do now. But, we are also as prone to think that, at first sight, we should in the same way apprehend the distance and magnitude of objects, as we do now; which hath been shewn to be a false and groundless persuasion. And, for the like reasons, the same censure may be passed on the positive assurance that most men, before they have thought sufficiently of the matter, might have of their being able to determine by the eye, at first view, whether objects were erect or inverse.

101. It will perhaps be objected to our opinion, that a man, for instance, being thought erect when his feet are next the earth, and inverted when his head is next the earth, it doth hence follow that, by the mere act of vision, without any experience or altering the situation of the eye, we should have determined whether he were erect or inverted. For both the earth itself, and the limbs of the man who stands thereon, being equally perceived by sight, one cannot choose seeing what part of the man is nearest the earth, and what part farthest from it, i.e. whether he be erect or inverted.

102. To which I answer, the ideas which constitute the tangible earth and man are entirely different from those which constitute the visible earth and man. Nor was it possible, by virtue of the visive faculty alone, without superadding any experience of touch, or altering the position of the eye, ever to have known, or so much as suspected, there had been any relation or connexion between them. Hence, a man at first view would not denominate anything he saw, earth , or head , or foot  ; and consequently, he could not tell, by the mere act of vision, whether the head or feet were nearest the earth. Nor, indeed, would we have thereby any thought of earth or man, erect or inverse, at all — which will be made yet  more evident, if we nicely observe, and make a particular comparison between, the ideas of both senses.

103. That which I see is only variety of light and colours. That which I feel is hard or soft, hot or cold, rough or smooth. What similitude, what connexion, have those ideas with these? Or, how is it possible that any one should see reason to give one and the same name to combinations of ideas so very different, before he had experienced their co-existence? We do not find there is any necessary connexion betwixt this or that tangible quality, and any colour whatsoever. And we may sometimes perceive colours, where there is nothing to be felt. All which doth make it manifest that no man, at first receiving of his sight, would know there was any agreement between this or that particular object of his sight and any object of touch he had been already acquainted with. The colours therefore of the head would to him no more suggest the idea of head than they would the idea of feet.

104. Farther, we have at large shewn (vid. sect. 63 and 64) there is no discoverable necessary connexion between any given visible magnitude and any one particular tangible magnitude; but that it is entirely the result of custom and experience, and depends on foreign and accidental circumstances, that we can, by the perception of visible extension, inform ourselves what may be the extension of any tangible object connected with it. Hence, it is certain, that neither the visible magnitude of head or foot would bring along with them into the mind, at first opening of the eyes, the respective tangible magnitudes of those parts.

 105. By the foregoing section, it is plain the visible figure of any part of the body hath no necessary connexion with the tangible figure thereof, so as at first sight to suggest it to the mind. For, figure is the termination of magnitude. Whence it follows that no visible magnitude having in its own nature an aptness to suggest any one particular tangible magnitude, so neither can any visible figure be inseparably connected with its corresponding tangible figure, so as of itself, and in a way prior to experience, it might suggest it  to the understanding. This will be farther evident, if we consider that what seems smooth and round to the touch may to sight, if viewed through a microscope, seem quite otherwise.

106. From all which, laid together and duly considered, we may clearly deduce this inference: — In the first act of vision, no idea entering by the eye would have a perceivable connexion with the ideas to which the names earth, man, head, foot, &c. were annexed in the understanding of a person blind from his birth; so as in any sort to introduce them into his mind, or make themselves be called by the same names, and reputed the same things with them, as afterwards they come to be.

107. There doth, nevertheless, remain one difficulty, which to some may seem to press hard on our opinion, and deserve not to be passed over. For, though it be granted that neither the colour, size, nor figure of the visible feet have any necessary connexion with the ideas that compose the tangible feet, so as to bring them at first sight into my mind, or make me in danger of confounding them, before I had been used to and for some time experienced their connexion; yet thus much seems undeniable, namely, that the number of the visible feet being the same with that of the tangible feet, I may from hence, without any experience of sight, reasonably conclude that they represent or are connected with the feet rather than the head. I say, it seems the idea of two visible feet will sooner suggest to the mind the idea of two tangible feet than of one head — so that the blind man, upon first reception of the visive faculty, might know which were the feet or two, and which the head or one.

 108. In order to get clear of this seeming difficulty, we need only observe that diversity of visible objects does not necessarily infer diversity of tangible objects corresponding to them. A picture painted with great variety of colours affects the touch in one uniform manner; it is therefore evident that I do not, by any necessary consecution, independent of experience, judge of the number of things tangible from the number of things visible. I should not therefore at first opening my eyes conclude that because I see two I shall feel two. How, therefore, can I, before experience teaches me, know that the visible legs, because  two, are connected with the tangible legs; or the visible head, because one, is connected with the tangible head? The truth is, the things I see are so very different and heterogeneous from the things I feel that the perception of the one would never have suggested the other to my thoughts, or enabled me to pass the least judgment thereon, until I had experienced their connexion.

109. But, for a fuller illustration of this matter, it ought to be considered, that number (however some may reckon it amongst the primary qualities) is nothing fixed and settled, really existing in things themselves. It is entirely the creature of the mind, considering either a simple idea by itself, or any combination of simple ideas to which it gives one name, and so makes it pass for a unit. According as the mind variously combines its ideas, the unit varies; and as the unit, so the number, which is only a collection of units, doth also vary. We call a window one, a chimney one; and yet a house, in which there are many windows and many chimneys, has an equal right to be called one; and many houses go to the making of one city. In these and the like instances, it is evident the unit  constantly relates to the particular draughts the mind makes of its ideas, to which it affixes names, and wherein it  includes more or less, as best suits its own ends and purposes. Whatever therefore the mind considers as one, that is an unit. Every combination of ideas is considered as one thing by the mind, and in token thereof is marked by one name. Now, this naming and combining together of ideas is perfectly arbitrary, and done by the mind in such sort as experience shews it to be most convenient — without which our ideas had never been collected into such sundry distinct combinations as they now are.

110. Hence, it follows that a man born blind, and afterwards, when grown up, made to see, would not, in the first act of vision, parcel out the ideas of sight into the same distinct collections that others do who have experienced which do regularly co-exist and are proper to be bundled up together under one name. He would not, for example, make into one complex idea, and thereby esteem and unite all those particular ideas which constitute the visible head or foot. For, there can be no reason assigned why he should do so, barely upon his seeing a man stand upright before him. There crowd into his mind the ideas which compose the visible man, in company with all the other ideas of sight perceived at the same time. But, all these ideas offered at once to his view he would not distribute into sundry distinct combinations, till such time as, by observing the motion of the parts of the man and other experiences, he comes to know which are to be separated and which to be collected together.

 111. From what hath been premised, it is plain the objects of sight and touch make, if I may so say, two sets of ideas, which are widely different from each other. To objects of either kind we indifferently attribute the terms high and low, right and left, and such like, denoting the position or situation of things; but then we must well observe that the position of any object is determined with respect only to objects of the same sense. We say any object of touch is high or low, according as it is more or less distant from the tangible earth: and in like manner we  denominate any object of sight high or low, in proportion as it is more or less distant from the visible earth. But, to define the situation of visible things with relation to the distance they bear from any tangible thing, or vice versa , this were absurd and perfectly unintelligible. For all visible things are equally in the mind, and take up no part of the external space; and consequently are equidistant from any tangible thing which exists without the mind.

112. Or rather, to speak truly, the proper objects of sight are at no distance, neither near nor far from any tangible thing. For, if we inquire narrowly into the matter, we shall find that those things only are compared together in respect of distance which exist after the same manner, or appertain unto the same sense. For, by the distance between any two points, nothing more is meant than the number of intermediate points. If the given points are visible, the distance between them is marked out by the number of the interjacent visible points; if they are tangible, the distance between them is a line consisting of tangible points; but, if they are one tangible and the other visible, the distance between them doth neither consist of points perceivable by sight nor by touch, i.e. it is utterly inconceivable. This, perhaps, will not find an easy admission into all men’s understanding. However, I should gladly be informed whether it be not true, by any one who will be at the pains to reflect a little, and apply it home to his thoughts.

 113. The not observing what has been delivered in the two last sections, seems to have occasioned no small part of the difficulty that occurs in the business of direct appearances. The head, which is painted nearest the earth, seems to be farthest from it; and on the other hand, the feet, which are painted farthest from the earth, are thought nearest to it. Herein lies the difficulty, which vanishes if we express the thing more clearly and free from ambiguity, thus: — How comes it that, to the eye, the visible head, which is nearest the tangible earth, seems farthest from the  earth; and the visible feet, which are farthest from the tangible earth, seem nearest the earth? The question being thus proposed, who sees not the difficulty is founded on a supposition that the eye or visive faculty, or rather the soul by means thereof, should judge of the situation of visible objects with reference to their distance from the tangible earth? Whereas, it is evident the tangible earth is not perceived by sight. And it hath been shewn, in the two last preceding sections, that the location of visible objects is determined only by the distance they bear from one another, and that it is nonsense to talk of distance, far or near, between a visible and tangible thing.

114. If we confine our thoughts to the proper objects of sight, the whole is plain and easy. The head is painted farthest from, and the feet nearest to, the visible earth; and so they appear to be. What is there strange or unaccountable in this? Let us suppose the pictures in the fund of the eye to be the immediate objects of sight. The consequence is that things should appear in the same posture they are painted in; and is it not so? The head which is seen seems farthest from the earth which is seen; and the feet which are seen seem nearest to the earth which is seen. And just so they are painted.

 115. But, say you, the picture of the man is inverted, and yet the appearance is erect. I ask, what mean you by the picture of the man, or, which is the same thing, the visible man’s being inverted? You tell me it is inverted, because the heels are uppermost and the head undermost? Explain me this. You say that by the head’s being undermost, you mean that it is nearest to the earth; and, by the heels being uppermost, that they are farthest from the earth. I ask again, what earth you mean? You cannot mean the earth that is painted on the eye or the visible earth — for the picture of the head is farthest from the picture of the earth, and the picture of the feet nearest to the picture of the earth; and accordingly the visible head is farthest from the visible earth, and the visible feet nearest to it. It remains, therefore, that you mean the tangible earth; and so determine the situation of visible things with respect to tangible things — contrary to what hath been demonstrated in sect. 111 and 112. The two  distinct provinces of sight and touch should be considered apart, and as though their objects had no intercourse, no manner of relation to one another, in point of distance or position.

116. Farther, what greatly contributes to make us mistake in this matter is that, when we think of the pictures in the fund of the eye, we imagine ourselves looking on the fund of another’s eye, or another looking on the fund of our own eye, and beholding the pictures painted thereon. Suppose two eyes, A and B . A from some distance looking on the pictures in B sees them inverted, and for that reason concludes they are inverted in B . But this is wrong. There are projected in little on the bottom of A the images of the pictures of, suppose, man, earth, &c., which are painted on B . And, besides these, the eye B itself, and the objects which environ it, together with another earth, are projected in a larger size on A . Now, by the eye A these larger images are deemed the true objects, and the lesser only pictures in miniature. And it is with respect to those greater images that it determines the situation of the smaller images; so that, comparing the little man with the great earth, A judges him inverted, or that the feet are farthest from and the head nearest to the great earth. Whereas, if A compare the little man with the little earth, then he will appear erect, i.e. his head shall seem farthest from and his feet nearest to the little earth. But we must consider that B does not see two earths as A does. It sees only what is represented by the little pictures in A , and consequently shall judge the man erect. For, in truth, the man in B is not inverted, for there the feet are next the earth; but it is the representation of it in A which is inverted, for there the head of the representation of the picture of the man in B is next the earth, and the feet farthest from the earth — meaning the earth which is without the representation of the pictures in B . For, if you take the little linages of the pictures in B  , and consider them by themselves, and with respect only to one another, they are all erect and in their natural posture.

 

117. Farther, there lies a mistake in our imagining that the pictures of external objects are painted on the bottom of the eye. It has been shewn there is no resemblance between the ideas of sight and things tangible. It hath likewise been demonstrated, that the proper objects of sight do not exist without the mind. Whence it clearly follows that the pictures painted on the bottom of the eye are not the pictures of external objects. Let any one consult his own thoughts, and then tell me, what affinity, what likeness, there is between that certain variety and disposition of colours which constitute the visible man, or picture of a man, and that other combination of far different ideas, sensible by touch, which compose the tangible man. But, if this be the case, how come they to be accounted pictures or images, since that supposes them to copy or represent some originals or other?

118. To which I answer — In the forementioned instance, the eye A takes the little images, included within the representation of the other eye B , to be pictures or copies, whereof the archetypes are not things existing without, but the larger pictures projected on its own fund; and which by A are not thought pictures, but the originals or true things themselves. Though if we suppose a third eye C , from a due distance, to behold the fund of A , then indeed the things projected thereon shall, to C , seem pictures or images, in the same sense that those projected on B do to A .

 119. Rightly to conceive the business in hand, we must carefully distinguish between the ideas of sight and touch, between the visible and tangible eye; for certainly on the tangible eye nothing either is or seems to be painted. Again, the visible eye, as well as all other visible objects, hath been shewn to exist only in the mind; which, perceiving its own ideas, and comparing them together, does call some pictures in respect to others. What hath been said, being rightly comprehended and laid together, does, I think, afford a full and genuine explication of the erect appearance of objects — which phenomenon, I must  confess, I do not see how it can be explained by any theories of vision hitherto made public.

120. In treating of these things, the use of language is apt to occasion some obscurity and confusion, and create in us wrong ideas. For, language being accommodated to the common notions and prejudices of men, it is scarce possible to deliver the naked and precise truth, without great circumlocution, impropriety, and (to an unwary reader) seeming contradictions. I do, therefore, once for all, desire whoever shall think it worth his while to understand what I have written concerning vision, that he would not stick in this or that phrase or manner of expression, but candidly collect my meaning from the whole sum and tenor of my discourse, and, laying aside the words as much as possible, consider the bare notions themselves, and then judge whether they are agreeable to truth and his own experience or no.

 

 121. We have shewn the way wherein the mind, by mediation of visible ideas, doth perceive or apprehend the distance, magnitude, and situation of tangible objects. I come now to inquire more particularly concerning the difference between the ideas of sight and touch which are called by the same names, and see whether there be any idea common to both senses. From what we have at large set forth and demonstrated in the foregoing parts of this treatise, it is plain there is no one self-same numerical extension, perceived both by sight and touch; but that the particular figures and extensions perceived by sight, however they may be called by the same names, and reputed the same things with those perceived by touch, are nevertheless different, and have an existence very distinct and  separate from them. So that the question is not now concerning the same numerical ideas, but whether there be any one and the same sort or species of ideas equally perceivable to both senses? or, in other words, whether extension, figure, and motion perceived by sight, are not specifically distinct from extension, figure, and motion perceived by touch?

 

122. But, before I come more particularly to discuss this matter, I find it proper to take into my thoughts extension in abstract. For of this there is much talk; and I am apt to think that when men speak of extension as being an idea common to two senses, it is with a secret supposition that we can single out extension from all other tangible and visible qualities, and form thereof an abstract idea, which idea they will have common both to sight and touch. We are therefore to understand by extension in abstract, an idea of extension — for instance, a line or surface entirely stripped of all other sensible qualities and circumstances that might determine it to any particular existence; it is neither black, nor white, nor red, nor hath it any colour at all, or any tangible quality whatsoever, and consequently it is of no finite determinate magnitude; for that which bounds or distinguishes one extension from another is some quality or circumstance wherein they disagree.

123. Now, I do not find that I can perceive, imagine, or anywise frame in my mind such an abstract idea as is here spoken of. A line or surface which is neither black, nor white, nor blue, nor yellow, &c.; nor long, nor short, nor rough, nor smooth, nor square, nor round, &c. is perfectly incomprehensible. This I am sure of as to myself; how far the faculties of other men may reach they best can tell.

 124. It is commonly said that the object of geometry is  abstract extension. But geometry contemplates figures: now, figure is the termination of magnitude; but we have shewn that extension in abstract hath no finite determinate magnitude; whence it clearly follows that it can have no figure, and consequently is not the object of geometry. It is indeed a tenet, as well of the modern as the ancient philosophers, that all general truths are concerning universal abstract ideas; without which, we are told, there could be no science, no demonstration of any general proposition in geometry. But it were no hard matter, did I think it necessary to my present purpose, to shew that propositions and demonstrations in geometry might be universal, though they who make them never think of abstract general ideas of triangles or circles.

125. After reiterated efforts and pangs of thought to apprehend the general idea of a triangle, I have found it altogether incomprehensible. And surely, if any one were able to let that idea into my mind, it must be the author of the Essay concerning Human Understanding : he, who has so far distinguished himself from the generality of writers, by the clearness and significancy of what he says. Let us therefore see how this celebrated author describes the general or [which is the same thing, the] abstract idea of a triangle. “It must be,” says he, “neither oblique nor rectangle, neither equilateral, equicrural, nor scalenum; but all and none of these at once. In effect it is somewhat imperfect that cannot exist; an idea, wherein some parts of several different and inconsistent ideas are put together.” (Essay on Human Understanding  , B. iv. ch. 7. s. 9.) This is the idea which he thinks needful for the enlargement of knowledge, which is the subject of mathematical demonstration, and without which we could never come to know any general proposition  concerning triangles. [Sure I am, if this be the case, it is impossible for me to attain to know even the first elements of geometry: since I have not the faculty to frame in my mind such an idea as is here described.] That author acknowledges it doth “require some pains and skill to form this general idea of a triangle.” (Ibid. ) But, had he called to mind what he says in another place, to wit, “that ideas of mixed modes wherein any inconsistent ideas are put together, cannot so much as exist in the mind, i.e. be conceived,” (vid. B. iii. ch. 10. s. 33, ibid. ) — I say, had this occurred to his thoughts, it is not improbable he would have owned it above all the pains and skill he was master of, to form the above-mentioned idea of a triangle, which is made up of manifest staring contradictions. That a man [of such a clear understanding], who thought so much and so well, and laid so great a stress on clear and determinate ideas, should nevertheless talk at this rate, seems very surprising. But the wonder will lessen, if it be considered that the source whence this opinion [of abstract figures and extension ] flows is the prolific womb which has brought forth innumerable errors and difficulties, in all parts of philosophy, and in all the sciences. But this matter, taken in its full extent, were a subject too vast and comprehensive to be insisted on in this place. [I shall only observe that your metaphysicians and men of speculation seem to have faculties distinct from those of ordinary men, when they talk of general or abstracted triangles and circles, &c., and so peremptorily declare them to be the subject of all the eternal, immutable, universal truths in geometry.] And so much for extension in abstract.

 

126. Some, perhaps, may think pure space, vacuum, or trine dimension, to be equally the object of sight and touch. But, though we have a very great propension to think the ideas of outness and space to be the immediate object of sight, yet, if I mistake not, in the foregoing parts of this Essay  , that hath been clearly demonstrated  to be a mere delusion, arising from the quick and sudden suggestion of fancy, which so closely connects the idea of distance with those of sight, that we are apt to think it is itself a proper and immediate object of that sense, till reason corrects the mistake.

127. It having been shewn that there are no abstract ideas of figure, and that it is impossible for us, by any precision of thought, to frame an idea of extension separate from all other visible and tangible qualities, which shall be common both to sight and touch — the question now remaining is, whether the particular extensions, figures, and motions perceived by sight, be of the same kind with the particular extensions, figures, and motions perceived by touch? In answer to which I shall venture to lay down the following proposition: — The extension, figures, and motions perceived by sight are specifically distinct from the ideas of touch, called by the same names; nor is there any such thing as one idea, or kind of idea, common to both senses. This proposition may, without much difficulty, be collected from what hath been said in several places of this Essay. But, because it seems so remote from, and contrary to the received notions and settled opinion of mankind, I shall attempt to demonstrate it more particularly and at large by the following arguments: —

128. [First  ,] When, upon perception of an idea, I range it under this or that sort, it is because it is perceived after the same manner, or because it has a likeness or conformity with, or affects me in the same way as the ideas of the sort I rank it under. In short, it must not be entirely new, but have something in it old and already perceived by me. It must, I say, have so much, at least,  in common with the ideas I have before known and named, as to make me give it the same name with them. But, it has been, if I mistake not, clearly made out that a man born blind would not, at first reception of his sight, think the things he saw were of the same nature with the objects of touch, or had anything in common with them; but that they were a new set of ideas, perceived in a new manner, and entirely different from all he had ever perceived before. So that he would not call them by the same name, nor repute them to be of the same sort, with anything he had hitherto known. [And surely the judgment of such an unprejudiced person is more to be relied on in this case than the sentiments of the generality of men; who, in this as in almost everything else, suffer themselves to be guided by custom, and the erroneous suggestions of prejudice, rather than reason and sedate reflection.]

129. Secondly , Light and colours are allowed by all to constitute a sort or species entirely different from the ideas of touch; nor will any man, I presume, say they can make themselves perceived by that sense. But there is no other immediate object of sight besides light and colours. It is therefore a direct consequence, that there is no idea common to both senses.

130. It is a prevailing opinion, even amongst those who have thought and writ most accurately concerning our ideas, and the ways whereby they enter into the understanding, that something more is perceived by sight than barely light and colours with their variations. [The excellent] Mr. Locke termeth sight “the most comprehensive of all our senses, conveying to our minds the ideas of light and colours, which are peculiar only to that sense; and also the far different ideas of space, figure, and motion.” (Essay on Human Understanding  , B. iii. ch. 9. s. 9.) Space or distance, we have shewn, is no otherwise the  object of sight than of hearing. (Vid. sect. 46.) And, as for figure and extension, I leave it to any one that shall calmly attend to his own clear and distinct ideas to decide whether he has any idea intromitted immediately and properly by sight save only light and colours: or, whether it be possible for him to frame in his mind a distinct abstract idea of visible extension, or figure, exclusive of all colour; and, on the other hand, whether he can conceive colour without visible extension? For my own part, I must confess, I am not able to attain so great a nicety of abstraction. I know very well that, in a strict sense, I see nothing but light and colours, with their several shades and variations. He who beside these doth also perceive by sight ideas far different and distinct from them, hath that faculty in a degree more perfect and comprehensive than I can pretend to. It must be owned, indeed, that, by the mediation of light and colours, other far different ideas are suggested to my mind. But so they are by hearing. But then, upon this score, I see no reason why the sight should be thought more comprehensive than the hearing, which, beside sounds which are peculiar to that sense, doth, by their mediation, suggest not only space, figure, and motion, but also all other ideas whatsoever that can be signified by words.

131. Thirdly  , It is, I think, an axiom universally received, that “quantities of the same kind may be added together and make one entire sum.” Mathematicians add lines together; but they do not add a line to a solid, or conceive it as making one sum with a surface. These three kinds of quantity being thought incapable of any such mutual addition, and consequently of being compared together in the several ways of proportion, are by them for that reason esteemed entirely disparate and heterogeneous. Now let any one try in his thoughts to add a visible line or surface to a tangible line or surface, so as to conceive them making one continued sum or whole. He that can do this may think them homogeneous; but he that cannot must, by the foregoing axiom, think them heterogeneous. [I acknowledge myself to be of the latter sort.] A blue and a red line I can conceive added together into one sum and  making one continued line; but, to make, in my thoughts, one continued line of a visible and tangible line added together, is, I find, a task far more difficult, and even insurmountable — and I leave it to the reflection and experience of every particular person to determine for himself.

132. A farther confirmation of our tenet may be drawn from the solution of Mr. Molyneux’s problem, published by Mr. Locke in his Essay : which I shall set down as it there lies, together with Mr. Locke’s opinion of it:— “Suppose a man born blind, and now adult, and taught by his touch to distinguish between a cube and a sphere of the same metal, and nighly of the same bigness, so as to tell when he felt one and the other, which is the cube, and which the sphere. Suppose then the cube and sphere placed on a table, and the blind man made to see: Quære, Whether by his sight, before he touched them, he could now distinguish, and tell, which is the globe, which the cube. To which the acute and judicious proposer answers: Not. For, though he has obtained the experience of how a globe, how a cube affects his touch; yet he has not yet attained the experience, that what affects his touch so or so must affect his sight so or so: or that a protuberant angle in the cube, that pressed his hand unequally, shall appear to his eye as it doth in the cube. I agree with this thinking gentleman, whom I am proud to call my friend, in his answer to this his problem; and am of opinion that the blind man, at first sight, would not be able with certainty to say, which was the globe, which the cube, whilst he only saw them.” (Essay on Human Understanding , B. ii. ch. 9. s. 8.)

 133. Now, if a square surface perceived by touch be of the same sort with a square surface perceived by sight, it is certain the blind man here mentioned might know a square surface as soon as he saw it. It is no more but introducing into his mind, by a new inlet, an idea he has been already well acquainted with. Since therefore he is supposed to have known by his touch that a cube is a body  terminated by square surfaces; and that a sphere is not terminated by square surfaces — upon the supposition that a visible and tangible square differ only in numero , it follows that he might know, by the unerring mark of the square surfaces, which was the cube, and which not, while he only saw them. We must therefore allow, either that visible extension and figures are specifically distinct from tangible extension and figures, or else, that the solution of this problem, given by those two [very] thoughtful and ingenious men, is wrong.

134. Much more might be laid together in proof of the proposition I have advanced. But, what has been said is, if I mistake not, sufficient to convince any one that shall yield a reasonable attention. And, as for those that will not be at the pains of a little thought, no multiplication of words will ever suffice to make them understand the truth, or rightly conceive my meaning.

135. I cannot let go the above-mentioned problem without some reflection on it. It hath been made evident that a man blind from his birth would not, at first sight, denominate anything he saw, by the names he had been used to appropriate to ideas of touch. (Vid. sect. 106.) Cube, sphere, table are words he has known applied to things perceivable by touch, but to things perfectly intangible he never knew them applied. Those words, in their wonted application, always marked out to his mind bodies or solid things which were perceived by the resistance they gave. But there is no solidity, no resistance or protrusion, perceived by sight. In short, the ideas of sight are all new perceptions, to which there be no names annexed in his mind; he cannot therefore understand what is said to him concerning them. And, to ask of the two bodies he saw placed on the table, which was the sphere, which the cube, were to him a question downright bantering and unintelligible; nothing he sees being able to suggest to his thoughts the idea of body, distance, or, in general, of anything he had already known.

 136. It is a mistake to think the same thing affects both sight and touch. If the same angle or square which is the  object of touch be also the object of vision, what should hinder the blind man, at first sight, from knowing it? For, though the manner wherein it affects the sight be different from that wherein it affected his touch, yet, there being, beside this manner or circumstance, which is new and unknown, the angle or figure, which is old and known, he cannot choose but discern it.

137. Visible figure and extension having been demonstrated to be of a nature entirely different and heterogeneous from tangible figure and extension, it remains that we inquire concerning motion. Now, that visible motion is not of the same sort with tangible motion seems to need no farther proof; it being an evident corollary from what we have shewn concerning the difference there is betwixt visible and tangible extension. But, for a more full and express proof hereof, we need only observe that one who had not yet experienced vision would not at first sight know motion. Whence it clearly follows that motion perceivable by sight is of a sort distinct from motion perceivable by touch. The antecedent I prove thus — By touch he could not perceive any motion but what was up or down, to the right or left, nearer or farther from him; besides these, and their several varieties or complications, it is impossible he should have any idea of motion. He would not therefore think anything to be motion, or give the name motion to any idea, which he could not range under some or other of those particular kinds thereof. But, from sect. 95, it is plain that, by the mere act of vision, he could not know motion upwards or downwards, to the right or left, or in any other possible direction. From which I conclude, he would not know motion at all at first sight. As for the idea of motion in abstract, I shall not waste paper about it, but leave it to my reader to make the best he can of it. To me it is perfectly unintelligible.

 138. The consideration of motion may furnish a new field for inquiry. But, since the manner wherein the  mind apprehends by sight the motion of tangible objects, with the various degrees thereof, may be easily collected from what has been said concerning the manner wherein that sense doth suggest their various distances, magnitudes, and situations, I shall not enlarge any farther on this subject, but proceed to inquire what may be alleged, with greatest appearance of reason, against the proposition we have demonstrated to be true; for, where there is so much prejudice to be encountered, a bare and naked demonstration of the truth will scarce suffice. We must also satisfy the scruples that men may start in favour of their preconceived notions, shew whence the mistake arises, how it came to spread, and carefully disclose and root out those false persuasions that an early prejudice might have implanted in the mind.

139. First , therefore, it will be demanded how visible extension and figures come to be called by the same name with tangible extension and figures, if they are not of the same kind with them? It must be something more than humour or accident that could occasion a custom so constant and universal as this, which has obtained in all ages and nations of the world, and amongst all ranks of men, the learned as well as the illiterate.

 140. To which I answer, we can no more argue a visible and tangible square to be of the same species, from their being called by the same name, than we can that a tangible square, and the monosyllable consisting of six letters whereby it is marked, are of the same species, because they are both called by the same name. It is customary to call written words, and the things they signify, by the same name: for, words not being regarded in their own nature, or otherwise than as they are marks of things, it had been superfluous, and beside the design of language, to have given them names distinct from those of the things marked by them. The same reason holds here also. Visible figures are the marks of tangible figures; and, from sect. 59, it is plain that in themselves they are little regarded, or upon any other score than for their connexion with tangible figures, which by nature they are ordained to signify. And, because this language of nature does  not vary in different ages or nations, hence it is that in all times and places visible figures are called by the same names as the respective tangible figures suggested by them; and not because they are alike, or of the same sort with them.

141. But, say you, surely a tangible square is liker to a visible square than to a visible circle: it has four angles, and as many sides; so also has the visible square — but the visible circle has no such thing, being bounded by one uniform curve, without right lines or angles, which makes it unfit to represent the tangible square, but very fit to represent the tangible circle. Whence it clearly follows, that visible figures are patterns of, or of the same species with, the respective tangible figures represented by them; that they are like unto them, and of their own nature fitted to represent them, as being of the same sort; and that they are in no respect arbitrary signs, as words.

142. I answer, it must be acknowledged the visible square is fitter than the visible circle to represent the tangible square, but then it is not because it is liker, or more of a species with it; but, because the visible square contains in it several distinct parts, whereby to mark the several distinct corresponding parts of a tangible square, whereas the visible circle doth not. The square perceived by touch hath four distinct equal sides, so also hath it four distinct equal angles. It is therefore necessary that the visible figure which shall be most proper to mark it contain four distinct equal parts, corresponding to the four sides of the tangible square; as likewise four other distinct and equal parts, whereby to denote the four equal angles of the tangible square. And accordingly we see the visible figures contain in them distinct visible parts, answering to the distinct tangible parts of the figures signified or suggested by them.

 143. But, it will not hence follow that any visible figure is like unto or of the same species with its corresponding tangible figure — unless it be also shewn that not only the number, but also the kind of the parts be the same in both. To illustrate this, I observe that visible figures represent tangible figures much after the same manner that written words do sounds. Now, in this respect, words are not arbitrary; it not being indifferent what written word stands  for any sound. But, it is requisite that each word contain in it as many distinct characters as there are variations in the sound it stands for. Thus, the single letter a is proper to mark one simple uniform sound; and the word adultery is accommodated to represent the sound annexed to it — in the formation whereof there being eight different collisions or modifications of the air by the organs of speech, each of which produces a difference of sound, it was fit the word representing it should consist of as many distinct characters, thereby to mark each particular difference or part of the whole sound. And yet nobody, I presume, will say the single letter a , or the word adultery , are alike unto or of the same species with the respective sounds by them represented. It is indeed arbitrary that, in general, letters of any language represent sounds at all; but, when that is once agreed, it is not arbitrary what combination of letters shall represent this or that particular sound. I leave this with the reader to pursue, and apply it in his own thoughts.

144. It must be confessed that we are not so apt to confound other signs with the things signified, or to think them of the same species, as we are visible and tangible ideas. But, a little consideration will shew us how this may well be, without our supposing them of a like nature. These signs are constant and universal; their connexion with tangible ideas has been learnt at our first entrance into the world; and ever since, almost every moment of our lives, it has been occurring to our thoughts, and fastening and striking deeper on our minds. When we observe that signs are variable, and of human institution; when we remember there was a time they were not connected in our minds with those things they now so readily suggest, but that their signification was learned by the slow steps of experience: this preserves us from confounding them. But, when we find the same signs suggest the same things all over the world; when we know they are not of human institution, and cannot remember that we ever learned their signification, but think that at first sight they would have suggested to us the same things they do now: all this persuades us they are of the same species as the things respectively represented by them, and that it is by a natural resemblance they suggest them to our minds.

 145. Add to this that whenever we make a nice survey  of any object, successively directing the optic axis to each point thereof, there are certain lines and figures, described by the motion of the head or eye, which, being in truth perceived by feeling, do nevertheless so mix themselves, as it were, with the ideas of sight that we can scarce think but they appertain to that sense. Again, the ideas of sight enter into the mind several at once, more distinct and unmingled than is usual in the other senses beside the touch. Sounds, for example, perceived at the same instant, are apt to coalesce, if I may so say, into one sound: but we can perceive, at the same time, great variety of visible objects, very separate and distinct from each other. Now, tangible extension being made up of several distinct coexistent parts, we may hence gather another reason that may dispose us to imagine a likeness or analogy between the immediate objects of sight and touch. But nothing, certainly, does more contribute to blend and confound them together, than the strict and close connexion they have with each other. We cannot open our eyes but the ideas of distance, bodies, and tangible figures are suggested by them. So swift, and sudden, and unperceived is the transit from visible to tangible ideas that we can scarce forbear thinking them equally the immediate object of vision.

146. The prejudice which is grounded on these, and whatever other causes may be assigned thereof, sticks so fast on our understandings, that it is impossible, without obstinate striving and labour of the mind, to get entirely clear of it. But then the reluctancy we find in rejecting any opinion can be no argument of its truth, to whoever considers what has been already shewn with regard to the prejudices we entertain concerning the distance, magnitude, and situation of objects; prejudices so familiar to our minds, so confirmed and inveterate, as they will hardly give way to the clearest demonstration.

 

 147. Upon the whole, I think we may fairly conclude  that the proper objects of Vision constitute the Universal Language of Nature; whereby we are instructed how to regulate our actions, in order to attain those things that are necessary to the preservation and well-being of our bodies, as also to avoid whatever may be hurtful and destructive of them. It is by their information that we are principally guided in all the transactions and concerns of life. And the manner wherein they signify and mark out unto us the objects which are at a distance is the same with that of languages and signs of human appointment; which do not suggest the things signified by any likeness or identity of nature, but only by an habitual connexion that experience has made us to observe between them.

 148. Suppose one who had always continued blind be told by his guide that after he has advanced so many steps he shall come to the brink of a precipice, or be stopped by a wall; must not this to him seem very admirable and surprising? He cannot conceive how it is possible for mortals to frame such predictions as these, which to him would seem as strange and unaccountable as prophecy does to others. Even they who are blessed with the visive faculty may (though familiarity make it less observed) find therein sufficient cause of admiration. The wonderful art and contrivance wherewith it is adjusted to those ends and purposes for which it was apparently  designed; the vast extent, number, and variety of objects that are at once, with so much ease, and quickness, and pleasure, suggested by it — all these afford subject for much and pleasing speculation, and may, if anything, give us some glimmering analogous prænotion of things, that are placed beyond the certain discovery and comprehension of our present state.

 

149. I do not design to trouble myself much with drawing corollaries from the doctrine I have hitherto laid down. If it bears the test, others may, so far as they shall think convenient, employ their thoughts in extending it farther, and applying it to whatever purposes it may be subservient to. Only, I cannot forbear making some inquiry concerning the object of geometry, which the subject we have been upon does naturally lead one to. We have shewn there is no such idea as that of extension in abstract; and that there are two kinds of sensible extension and figures, which are entirely distinct and heterogeneous from each other. Now, it is natural to inquire which of these is the object of geometry.

 

 150. Some things there are which, at first sight, incline one to think geometry conversant about visible extension. The constant use of the eyes, both in the practical and speculative parts of that science, doth very much induce us thereto. It would, without doubt, seem odd to a mathematician to go about to convince him the diagrams he saw upon paper were not the figures, or even the likeness of the figures, which make the subject of the demonstration — the contrary being held an unquestionable truth, not only by mathematicians, but also by those who apply themselves more particularly to the study of logic; I mean who consider the nature of science, certainty, and demonstration; it being by them assigned as one  reason of the extraordinary clearness and evidence of geometry, that in that science the reasonings are free from those inconveniences which attend the use of arbitrary signs, the very ideas themselves being copied out, and exposed to view upon paper. But, by the bye, how well this agrees with what they likewise assert of abstract ideas being the object of geometrical demonstration I leave to be considered.

151. To come to a resolution in this point, we need only observe what has been said in sect. 59, 60, 61, where it is shewn that visible extensions in themselves are little regarded, and have no settled determinate greatness, and that men measure altogether by the application of tangible extension to tangible extension. All which makes it evident that visible extension and figures are not the object of geometry.

152. It is therefore plain that visible figures are of the same use in geometry that words are. And the one may as well be accounted the object of that science as the other; neither of them being any otherwise concerned therein than as they represent or suggest to the mind the particular tangible figures connected with them. There is, indeed, this difference betwixt the signification of tangible figures by visible figures, and of ideas by words — that whereas the latter is variable and uncertain, depending altogether on the arbitrary appointment of men, the former is fixed, and immutably the same in all times and places. A visible square, for instance, suggests to the mind the same tangible figure in Europe that it doth in America. Hence it is, that the voice of nature, which speaks to our eyes, is not liable to that misinterpretation and ambiguity that languages of human contrivance are unavoidably subject to. From which may, in some measure, be derived that peculiar evidence and clearness of geometrical demonstrations.

 153. Though what has been said may suffice to shew what ought to be determined with relation to the object of geometry, I shall, nevertheless, for the fuller illustration thereof, take into my thoughts the case of an intelligence or unbodied spirit, which is supposed to see perfectly  well, i.e. to have a clear perception of the proper and immediate objects of sight, but to have no sense of touch. Whether there be any such being in nature or no, is beside my purpose to inquire; it suffices, that the supposition contains no contradiction in it. Let us now examine what proficiency such a one may be able to make in geometry. Which speculation will lead us more clearly to see whether the ideas of sight can possibly be the object of that science.

154. First , then, it is certain the aforesaid intelligence could have no idea of a solid or quantity of three dimensions, which follows from its not having any idea of distance. We, indeed, are prone to think that we have by sight the ideas of space and solids; which arises from our imagining that we do, strictly speaking, see distance, and some parts of an object at a greater distance than others; which has been demonstrated to be the effect of the experience we have had what ideas of touch are connected with such and such ideas attending vision. But the intelligence here spoken of is supposed to have no experience of touch. He would not, therefore, judge as we do, nor have any idea of distance, outness, or profundity, nor consequently of space or body, either immediately or by suggestion. Whence it is plain he can have no notion of those parts of geometry which relate to the mensuration of solids, and their convex or concave surfaces, and contemplate the properties of lines generated by the section of a solid. The conceiving of any part whereof is beyond the reach of his faculties.

155. Farther  , he cannot comprehend the manner wherein geometers describe a right line or circle; the rule and compass, with their use, being things of which it is impossible he should have any notion. Nor is it an easier matter for him to conceive the placing of one plane or angle on another, in order to prove their equality; since that supposes some idea of distance, or external space.  All which makes it evident our pure intelligence could never attain to know so much as the first elements of plain geometry. And perhaps, upon a nice inquiry, it will be found he cannot even have an idea of plain figures any more than he can of solids; since some idea of distance is necessary to form the idea of a geometrical plane, as will appear to whoever shall reflect a little on it.

156. All that is properly perceived by the visive faculty amounts to no more than colours with their variations, and different proportions of light and shade — but the perpetual mutability and fleetingness of those immediate objects of sight render them incapable of being managed after the manner of geometrical figures; nor is it in any degree useful that they should. It is true there be divers of them perceived at once; and more of some, and less of others: but accurately to compute their magnitude, and assign precise determinate proportions between things so variable and inconstant, if we suppose it possible to be done, must yet be a very trifling and insignificant labour.

157. I must confess, it seems to be the opinion of some very ingenious men that flat or plane figures are immediate objects of sight, though they acknowledge solids are not. And this opinion of theirs is grounded on what is observed in painting, wherein (say they) the ideas immediately imprinted in the mind are only of planes variously coloured, which, by a sudden act of the judgment, are changed into solids: but, with a little attention, we shall find the planes here mentioned as the immediate objects of sight are not visible but tangible planes. For, when we say that pictures are planes, we mean thereby that they appear to the touch smooth and uniform. But then this smoothness and uniformity, or, in other words, this planeness of the picture is not perceived immediately by vision; for it appeareth to the eye various and multiform.

 158. From all which we may conclude that planes are no more the immediate object of sight than solids. What we strictly see are not solids, nor yet planes variously coloured — they are only diversity of colours. And some of these suggest to the mind solids, and others plane figures; just as they have been experienced to be connected with the one or the other: so that we see planes in the same way that we see solids — both being equally suggested by the  immediate objects of sight, which accordingly are themselves denominated planes and solids. But, though they are called by the same names with the things marked by them, they are, nevertheless, of a nature entirely different, as hath been demonstrated.

159. What has been said is, if I mistake not, sufficient to decide the question we proposed to examine, concerning the ability of a pure spirit, such as we have described, to know geometry. It is, indeed, no easy matter for us to enter precisely into the thoughts of such an intelligence; because we cannot, without great pains, cleverly separate and disentangle in our thoughts the proper objects of sight from those of touch which are connected with them. This, indeed, in a complete degree seems scarce possible to be performed; which will not seem strange to us, if we consider how hard it is for any one to hear the words of his native language, which is familiar to him, pronounced in his ears without understanding them. Though he endeavour to disunite the meaning from the sound, it will nevertheless intrude into his thoughts, and he shall find it extreme difficult, if not impossible, to put himself exactly in the posture of a foreigner that never learnt the language, so as to be affected barely with the sounds themselves, and not perceive the signification annexed to them.

  160. By this time, I suppose, it is clear that neither abstract nor visible extension makes the object of geometry; the not discerning of which may, perhaps, have created some difficulty and useless labour in mathematics. [Sure I am that somewhat relating thereto has occurred to my thoughts; which, though after the most anxious and repeated examination I am forced to think it true, doth, nevertheless, seem so far out of the common road of geometry, that I know not whether it may not be thought presumption if  I should make it public, in an age wherein that science hath received such mighty improvements by new methods; great part whereof, as well as of the ancient discoveries, may perhaps lose their reputation, and much of that ardour with which men study the abstruse and fine geometry be abated, if what to me, and those few to whom I have imparted it, seems evidently true, should really prove to be so.]

 An Appendix To The Essay On Vision [image "img56.jpg" file=Image00055.jpg] 

[ T HIS A PPENDIX IS contained only in the second edition. ]

The censures which, I am informed, have been made on the foregoing Essay inclined me to think I had not been clear and express enough in some points; and, to prevent being misunderstood for the future, I was willing to make any necessary alterations or additions in what I had written. But that was impracticable, the present edition having been almost finished before I received this information. Wherefore, I think it proper to consider in this place the principal objections that are come to my notice.

 

In the first place, it is objected, that in the beginning of the Essay I argue either against all use of lines and angles in optics, and then what I say is false; or against those writers only who will have it that we can perceive by sense the optic axes, angles, &c., and then it is insignificant, this being an absurdity which no one ever held. To which I answer that I argue only against those who are of opinion that we perceive the distance of objects by lines and angles, or, as they term it, by a kind of innate geometry. And, to shew that this is not fighting with my own shadow, I shall here set down a passage from the celebrated Des Cartes: —

 [image "img64.png" file=Image00063.gif] 

“Distantiam præterea discimus, per mutuam quandam conspirationem oculorum. Ut enim cæcus noster duo bacilla tenens, A E et C E , de quorum longitudine incertus, solumque intervallum manuum A et C  , cum magnitudine  angulorum A C E , et C A E exploratum habens, inde, ut ex Geometria quadam omnibus innata, scire potest ubi sit punctum E . Sic quum nostri oculi R S T et r s t ambo, vertuntur ad X , magnitudo lineæ S s , et angulorum X S s et X s S , certos nos reddunt ubi sit punctum X . Et idem opera alterutrius possumus indagare, loco illum movendo, ut si versus X illum semper dirigentes, prime sistamus in puncto S , et statim post in puncto s , hoc sufficiet ut magnitudo lineæ S s , et duorum angulorum X S s et X s S nostræ imaginationi simul occurrant, et distantiam puncti X nos edoceant: idque per actionem mentis, quæ licet simplex judicium esse videatur, ratiocinationem tamen quandam involutam habet, similem illi, qua Geometræ per duas stationes diversas, loca inaccessa dimetiuntur.”

 [image "img65.png" file=Image00064.gif] 

I might amass together citations from several authors to the same purpose, but, this being so clear in the point, and from an author of so great note, I shall not trouble the reader with any more. What I have said on this head was not for the sake of rinding fault with other men; but, because I judged it necessary to demonstrate in the first place that we neither see distance immediately , nor yet perceive it by the mediation of anything that hath (as lines and angles) a necessary connexion with it. For on the demonstration of this point the whole theory depends.

Secondly  , it is objected, that the explication I give of the appearance of the horizontal moon (which may also be  applied to the sun) is the same that Gassendus had given before. I answer, there is indeed mention made of the grossness of the atmosphere in both; but then the methods wherein it is applied to solve the phenomenon are widely different, as will be evident to whoever shall compare what I have said on this subject with the following words of Gassendus: —

“Heinc dici posse videtur: solem humilem oculo spectatum ideo apparere majorem, quam dum altius egreditur, quia dum vicinus est horizonti prolixa est series vaporum, atque adeo corpusculorum quæ solis radios ita retundunt, ut oculus minus conniveat, et pupilla quasi umbrefacta longe magis amplificetur, quam dum sole multum elato rari vapores intercipiuntur, solque ipse ita splendescit, ut pupilla in ipsum spectans contractissima efficiatur. Nempe ex hoc esse videtur, cur visibilis species ex sole procedens, et per pupillam amplificatam intromissa in retinam, ampliorem in illa sedem occupet, majoremque proinde creet solis apparentiam, quam dum per contractam pupillam eodem intromissa contendit.” Vid. Epist. 1. De Apparente Magnitudine Solis Humilis et Sublimis , . This solution of Gassendus proceeds on a false principle, to wit, that the pupil’s being enlarged augments the species or image on the fund of the eye.

 

Thirdly , against what is said in Sect. 80, it is objected, that the same thing which is so small as scarce to be discerned by a man, may appear like a mountain to some small insect; from which it follows that the minimum visibile is not equal in respect of all creatures. I answer, if this objection be sounded to the bottom, it will be found to mean no more than that the same particle of matter which is marked to a man by one minimum visibile , exhibits to an insect a great number of minima visibilia . But this does not prove that one minimum visibile of the insect is not equal to one minimum visibile of the man. The not distinguishing between the mediate and immediate objects of sight is, I suspect, a cause of misapprehension in this matter.

 Some other misinterpretations and difficulties have been  made, but, in the points they refer to, I have endeavoured to be so very plain that I know not how to express myself more clearly. All I shall add is, that if they who are pleased to criticise on my Essay would but read the whole over with some attention, they might be the better able to comprehend my meaning, and consequently to judge of my mistakes.

 

 I am informed that, soon after the first edition of this treatise, a man somewhere near London was made to see, who had been born blind, and continued so for about twenty years. Such a one may be supposed a proper judge to decide how far some tenets laid down in several places of the foregoing Essay are agreeable to truth; and if any curious person hath the opportunity of making proper interrogatories to him thereon, I should gladly see my notions either amended or confirmed by experience.

  A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) [image "img66.jpg" file=Image00065.jpg] 

 OXFORD CLARENDON PRESS 1901 TEXT

Widely regarded as Berkeley’s chief philosophical work, A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge largely seeks to refute the claims made by John Locke concerning the nature of human perception. Like all the Empiricist philosophers, both Locke and Berkeley agreed that we perceive experiences, regardless of whether material objects exist. However, Berkeley sought to prove that the outside world, which causes the ideas one has within one’s mind, is also composed solely of ideas. Berkeley suggests that “Ideas can only resemble Ideas” – the mental ideas that we possess can only resemble other ideas (not material objects) and thus the external world consists not of physical form, but rather of ideas. This world is therefore given logic and regularity by some other force, which Berkeley concludes is God.

In the introduction, Berkeley declares that his intention was to make an inquiry into the First Principles of Human Knowledge in order to discover the principles that have led to doubt, uncertainty, absurdity and contradiction in philosophy. In order to prepare the reader, he discusses two topics that lead to errors. Firstly, he claims that the mind cannot conceive abstract ideas. It is not possible to have an idea of an abstract thing that is common to many particular ideas and so has, at the same time, many different predicates and no predicates. Secondly, Berkeley declares that words, such as names, do not signify abstract ideas. With regard to ideas, he asserts that we can only think of particular things that have been perceived. Names, he argues, signify general ideas, not abstract ideas. General ideas represent any one of several particular ideas. Berkeley criticises Locke for claiming that words signify general, but abstract, ideas. At the end of the introduction, he advises the reader to let his words engender clear, particular ideas instead of trying to associate them with non-existent abstractions.

Berkeley opens the treatise by asserting that existence is the state of being perceived by a perceiver. Human minds know ideas, not objects. The three kinds of ideas are those of sensation, thought and imagination. When several ideas are associated together, they are thought to be ideas of one distinct thing, which is then signified by one name. Ideas, he claims, are known and perceived by a knowing perceiver. This active perceiver is designated by the names mind, spirit, soul or self. Therefore, ideas exist by virtue of a perceiver. The existence of an idea consists in being perceived. To say that something exists is to say that it is perceived by a perceiver. Thus, this is the main principle of human knowledge. External objects are things that are perceived through our senses. We perceive only our own sensations or ideas. To say that an object exists without being perceived is to attempt to abstract that which cannot be abstracted. We cannot separate or abstract objects and their qualities from our perception of them. If an object exists or is perceived, it must be perceived by me or some other perceiver. It is impossible to separate the being of a sensible thing from its existence as a perception of a perceiver. There can be no unthinking substance or substratum of ideas. Consequently, the perceiving mind or spirit is the only substance of ideas. Ideas inhere in or belong to a perceiver.

Berkeley explains that the main design of writing this treatise is to promote the consideration of God and our duty. If we are clearly convinced of God’s existence, then we shall fill our hearts with “awful circumspection” and “holy fear”. He believes that the world exists as it does, when no one is looking at it, as it consists of ideas that are perceived by the mind of God. If we think that the eyes of the Lord are everywhere, beholding the evil and the good, knowing our innermost thoughts, then we shall realise our total dependence on Him. This in effect will give us an incentive to be virtuous and to avoid vice.

 [image "img67.jpg" file=Image00066.jpg] 

The first edition’s title page

CONTENTSEditor’s Preface To ‘The Treatise Concerning The Principles Of Human Knowledge’

i. Rationale of the Principles.

ii. Objections to the New Principles answered (sect. 34-84).

iii. Consequences and Applications of the New Principles (sect. 85-156).

Dedication

The Preface

Introduction

 Part First

 

 [image "img68.jpg" file=Image00067.jpg] 

John Locke (1632-1704) was an English philosopher and physician, widely regarded as one of the most influential of Enlightenment thinkers and commonly known as the “Father of Liberalism”.

 A TREATISE CONCERNING THE PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE

[PART I]

WHEREIN THE CHIEF CAUSES OF ERROR AND DIFFICULTY IN THE SCIENCES, WITH THE GROUNDS OF SCEPTICISM, ATHEISM, AND IRRELIGION, ARE INQUIRED INTO

First Published in 1710

  Editor’s Preface To ‘The Treatise Concerning The Principles Of Human Knowledge’ [image "img69.jpg" file=Image00068.jpg] 

T HIS BOOK OF Principles contains the most systematic and reasoned exposition of Berkeley’s philosophy, in its early stage, which we possess. Like the Essay on Vision , its tentative pioneer, it was prepared at Trinity College, Dublin. Its author had hardly completed his twenty-fifth year when it was published. The first edition of this “First Part” of the projected Treatise, “printed by Aaron Rhames, for Jeremy Pepyat, bookseller in Skinner Row, Dublin,” appeared early in 1710. A second edition, with minor changes, and in which “Part I” was withdrawn from the title-page, was published in London in 1734, “printed for Jacob Tonson” — on the eve of Berkeley’s settlement at Cloyne. It was the last in the author’s lifetime. The projected “Second Part” of the Principles  was never given to the world, and we can hardly conjecture its design. In a letter in 1729 to his American friend, Samuel Johnson, Berkeley mentions that he had “made considerable progress on the Second Part,” but “the manuscript,” he adds, “was lost about fourteen years ago, during my travels in Italy; and I never had leisure since to do so  disagreeable a thing as writing twice on the same subject.”

An edition of the Principles appeared in London in 1776, twenty-three years after Berkeley’s death, with a running commentary of Remarks by the anonymous editor, on the pages opposite the text, in which, according to the editor, Berkeley’s doctrines are “carefully examined, and shewn to be repugnant to fact, and his principles to be incompatible with the constitution of human nature and the reason and fitness of things.” In this volume the Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous are appended to the Principles , and a “Philosophical Discourse concerning the nature of Human Being” is prefixed to the whole, “being a defence of Mr. Locke’s principles, and some remarks on Dr. Beattie’s Essay on Truth ,” by the author of the Remarks on Berkeley’s Principles . The acuteness of the Remarks is not in proportion to their bulk and diffuseness: many popular misconceptions of Berkeley are served up, without appreciation of the impotence of matter, and of natural causation as only passive sense-symbolism, which is at the root of the theory of the material world against which the Remarks are directed.

The Kantian and post-Kantian Idealism that is characteristic of the nineteenth century has recalled attention to Berkeley, who had produced his spiritual philosophy under the prevailing conditions of English thought in the preceding age, when Idealism in any form was uncongenial. In 1869 the book of Principles was translated into German, with annotations, by Ueberweg, professor of philosophy at Königsberg, the university of Kant. The Clarendon Press edition of the Collected Works of Berkeley followed in 1871. In 1874 an edition of the Principles  , by Dr. Kranth, Professor of Philosophy in the university of Pennsylvania, appeared in America, with annotations drawn largely from  the Clarendon Press edition and Ueberweg. In 1878 Dr. Collyns Simon republished the Principles , with discussions based upon the text, followed by an appendix of remarks on Kant and Hume in their relation to Berkeley.

The book of Principles , as we have it, must be taken as a systematic fragment of an incompletely developed philosophy. Many years after its appearance, the author thus describes the conditions:— “It was published when I was very young, and without doubt hath many defects. For though the notions should be true (as I verily think they are), yet it is difficult to express them clearly and consistently, language being framed for common use and received prejudices. I do not therefore pretend that my books can teach truth. All I hope for is that they may be an occasion to inquisitive men of discovering truth.” Again:— “I had no inclination to trouble the world with large volumes. What I have done was rather with the view of giving hints to thinking men, who have leisure and curiosity to go to the bottom of things, and pursue them in their own minds. Two or three times reading these small tracts (Essay on Vision , Principles , Dialogues , De Motu ), and making what is read the occasion of thinking, would, I believe, render the whole familiar and easy to the mind, and take off that shocking appearance which hath often been observed to attend speculative truths.” The incitements to further and deeper thought thus proposed have met with a more sympathetic response in this generation than in the lifetime of Berkeley.

There is internal evidence in the book of Principles that its author had been a diligent and critical student of Locke’s Essay . Like the Essay , it is dedicated to the Earl of Pembroke. The word idea  is not less characteristic  of the Principles than of the Essay , although Berkeley generally uses it with a narrower application than Locke, confining it to phenomena presented objectively to our senses, and their subjective reproductions in imagination. With both Berkeley and Locke objective phenomena (under the name of ideas) are the materials supplied to man for conversion into natural science. Locke’s reduction of ideas into simple and complex, as well as some of his subdivisions, reappear with modifications in the Principles . Berkeley’s account of Substance and Power, Space and Time, while different from Locke’s, still bears marks of the Essay . Concrete Substance, which in its ultimate meaning much perplexes Locke, is identified with the personal pronouns “I” and “you” by Berkeley, and is thus spiritualised. Cause proper, or Power, he finds only in the voluntary activity of persons. Space is presented to us in our sensuous experience of resistance to organic movements; while it is symbolised in terms of phenomena presented to sight, as already explained in the Essay on Vision . Time is revealed in our actual experience of change in the ideas or phenomena of which we are percipient in sense; length of time being calculated by the changes in the adopted measure of duration. Infinite space and infinite time, being necessarily incapable of finite ideation, are dismissed as abstractions that for man must always be empty of realisable meaning. Indeed, the Commonplace Book  shews that Locke influenced Berkeley as much by antagonism as otherwise. “Such was the candour of that great man that I persuade myself, were he alive, he would not be offended that I differed from him, seeing that in so doing I follow his advice to use my own judgment, see with my own eyes and not with another’s.” So he argues against Locke’s opinions about the infinity and eternity of space, and the possibility of matter endowed with power to think, and urges his inconsistency in treating some qualities  of matter as wholly material, while he insists that others, under the name of “secondary,” are necessarily dependent on sentient intelligence. Above all he assails Locke’s “abstract ideas” as germs of scepticism — interpreting Locke’s meaning paradoxically.

Next to Locke, Descartes and Malebranche are prominent in the Principles . Recognition of the ultimate supremacy of Spirit, or the spiritual character of active power and the constant agency of God in nature, suggested by Descartes, was congenial to Berkeley, but he was opposed to the mechanical conception of the universe found in the Cartesian physical treatises. That thought is synonymous with existence is a formula with which the French philosopher might make him familiar, as well as with the assumption that ideas only are immediate objects of human perception; an assumption in which Descartes was followed by Locke, and philosophical thinkers in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, but under differing interpretations of the term idea .

Malebranche appears less in the Principles than Locke and Descartes. In early life, at any rate, Berkeley would be less at home in the “divine vision” of Malebranche than among the “ideas” of Locke. The mysticism of the Recherche de la Vérité is unlike the transparent lucidity of Berkeley’s juvenile thought. But the subordinate place and office of the material world in Malebranche’s system, and his conception of power as wholly spiritual, approached the New Principles of Berkeley.

Plato and Aristotle hardly appear, either by name or as characteristic influence, in the book of Principles , which in this respect contrasts with the abundant references to ancient and mediaeval thinkers in Siris , and to a less extent in the De Motu and Alciphron .

The Introduction to the Principles  is a proclamation of war against “abstract ideas,” which is renewed in the body  of the work, and again more than once in the writings of Berkeley’s early and middle life, but is significantly withdrawn in his old age. In the ardour of youth, his prime remedy for anarchy in philosophy, and for the sceptical disposition which philosophy had been apt to generate, was suppression of abstract ideas as impossible ideas — empty names heedlessly accepted as ideas — an evil to be counteracted by steady adherence to the concrete experience found in our senses and inner consciousness. Never to lose our hold of positive facts, and always to individualise general conceptions, are regulative maxims by which Berkeley would make us govern our investigation of ultimate problems. He takes up his position in the actual universe of applied reason; not in the empty void of abstract reason, remote from particulars and succession of change, in which no real existence is found. All realisable ideas must be either concrete data of sense, or concrete data of inward consciousness. It is relations embodied in particular facts, not pretended abstract ideas, that give fruitful meaning to common terms. Abstract matter, abstract substance, abstract power, abstract space, abstract time — unindividualisable in sense or in imagination — must all be void of meaning; the issue of unlawful analysis, which pretends to find what is real without the concrete ideas that make the real, because percipient spirit is the indispensable factor of all reality. The only lawful abstraction is nominal — the application, that is to say, of a name in common to an indefinite number of things which resemble one another. This is Berkeley’s “Nominalism.”

Berkeley takes Locke as the representative advocate of the “abstract ideas” against which he wages war in the Introduction to the Principles . Under cover of an ambiguity in the term idea , he is unconsciously fighting against a man of straw. He supposes that Locke means by idea  only a concrete datum of sense, or of imagination;  and he argues that we cannot without contradiction abstract from all such data, and yet retain idea. But Locke includes among his ideas intellectual relations — what Berkeley himself afterwards distinguished as notions , in contrast with ideas. This polemic against Locke is therefore one of verbal confusion. In later life he probably saw this, as he saw deeper into the whole question involved. This is suggested by the omission of the argument against abstract ideas, given in earlier editions of Alciphron , from the edition published a year before he died. In his juvenile attack on abstractions, his characteristic impetuosity seems to carry him to the extreme of rejecting rational relations that are involved in the objectivity of sensible things and natural order, thus resting experience at last only on phenomena — particular and contingent.

A preparatory draft of the Introduction to the Principles , which I found in the manuscript department of the library of Trinity College, Dublin, is printed in the appendix to this edition of Berkeley’s Philosophical Works. The variations are of some interest, biographical and philosophical. It seems to have been written in the autumn of 1708, and it may with advantage be compared with the text of the finished Introduction, as well as with numerous relative entries in the Commonplace Book .

After this Introduction, the New Principles themselves are evolved, in a corresponding spirit of hostility to empty abstractions. The sections may be thus divided: —

i. Rationale of the Principles (sect. 1-33).

ii. Supposed Objections to the Principles answered (sect. 34-84).

iii. Consequences and Applications of the Principles (sect. 85-156).

 i. Rationale of the Principles. [image "img69.jpg" file=Image00068.jpg] 

T HE READER MAY remember that one of the entries in the Commonplace Book runs as follows:— “To begin the First Book, not with mention of sensation and reflexion, but, instead of sensation, to use perception, or thought in general.” Berkeley seems there to be oscillating between Locke and Descartes. He now adopts Locke’s account of the materials of which our concrete experience consists (sect. 1). The data of human knowledge of existence are accordingly found in the ideas, phenomena, or appearances (a ) of which we are percipient in the senses, and (b ) of which we are conscious when we attend to our inward passions and operations — all which make up the original contents of human experience, to be reproduced in new forms and arrangements, (c ) in memory and (d ) imagination and (e ) expectation. Those materials are called ideas because living mind or spirit is the indispensable realising factor: they all presuppose living mind, spirit, self, or ego to realise and elaborate them (sect. 2). This is implied in our use of personal pronouns, which signify, not ideas of any of the preceding kinds, but that which is “entirely distinct from them, wherein they exist, or, which is the same thing, by which they are perceived.” In this fundamental presupposition Descartes is more apparent than Locke, and there is even an unconscious forecast of Kant and Hegel.

Berkeley next faces a New Question which his New Principles are intended to answer. How is the concrete world that is presented to our senses related to Mind or Spirit? Is all or any of its reality independent of percipient experience? Is it true that the phenomena of which we are percipient in sense are ultimately independent of all percipient and conscious life, and are even the ultimate basis of all that is real? Must we recognise in the phenomena of Matter the substance  of what we call Mind?  For do we not find, when we examine Body and Spirit mutually related in our personality, that the latter is more dependent on the former, and on the physical cosmos of which the former is a part, than our body and its bodily surroundings are dependent on Spirit? In short, is not the universe of existence, in its final form, only lifeless Matter?

 The claim of Matter to be supreme is what Berkeley produces his Principles in order to reduce. Concrete reality is self-evidently unreal, he argues, in the total absence of percipient Spirit, for Spirit is the one realising factor. Try to imagine the material world unperceived and you are trying to picture empty abstraction. Wholly material matter is self-evidently an inconceivable absurdity; a universe emptied of all percipient life is an impossible universe. The material world becomes real in being perceived: it depends for its reality upon the spiritual realisation. As colours in a dark room become real with the introduction of light, so the material world becomes real in the life and agency of Spirit. It must exist in terms of sentient life and percipient intelligence, in order to rise into any degree of reality that human beings at least can be at all concerned with, either speculatively or practically. Matter totally abstracted from percipient spirit must go the way of all abstract ideas. It is an illusion, concealed by confused thought and abuse of words; yet from obvious causes strong enough to stifle faith in this latent but self-evident Principle — that the universe of sense-presented phenomena can have concrete existence only in and by sentient intelligence. It is the reverse of this Principle that Berkeley takes to have been “the chief source of all that scepticism and folly, all those contradictions and inexplicable puzzling absurdities, that have in all ages been a reproach to human reason.” And indeed,  when it is fully understood, it is seen in its own light to be the chief of “those truths which are so near and obvious to the mind, that a man need only open his eyes to see them. For such I take this important one to be — that all the choir of heaven and furniture of the Earth, in a word, all those bodies which compose the mighty frame of the world, have not any subsistence without a Mind” (sect. 6). Living Mind or Spirit is the indispensable factor of all realities that are presented to our senses, including, of course, our own bodies.

Yet this Principle, notwithstanding its intuitive certainty, needs to be evoked by reflection from the latency in which it lies concealed, in the confused thought of the unreflecting. It is only gradually, and with the help of reasoning, that the world presented to the senses is distinctly recognised in this its deepest and truest reality. And even when we see that the phenomena immediately presented to our senses need to be realised in percipient experience, in order to be concretely real, we are ready to ask whether there may not be substances like the things so presented, which can exist “without mind,” or in a wholly material way (sect. 8). Nay, are there not some of the phenomena immediately presented to our senses which do not need living mind to make them real? It is allowed by Locke and others that all those qualities of matter which are called secondary cannot be wholly material, and that living mind is indispensable for their realisation in nature; but Locke and the rest argue, that this is not so with the qualities which they call primary , and which they regard as of the essence of matter. Colours, sounds, tastes, smells are all allowed to be not wholly material; but are not the size, shape, situation, solidity, and motion of bodies qualities that are real without need for the realising agency of any Mind or Spirit in the universe, and which would continue to be what they are now if all Spirit, divine or human, ceased to exist?

The supposition that some of the phenomena of what is called Matter can be real, and yet wholly material, is discussed in sections 9-15, in which it is argued that the things of sense cannot exist really, in any of their manifestations, unless they are brought into reality in some percipient life and experience. It is held impossible that any quality of matter can have the reality which we all attribute to it, unless it is spiritually realised (sect. 15).

But may Matter not be real apart from all its so-called qualities, these being allowed to be not wholly material, because real only within percipient spirit? May not this wholly material Matter be Something that, as it were, exists behind the ideas, phenomena, or qualities that make their appearance to human beings? This question, Berkeley would say, is a meaningless and wholly unpractical one. Material substance that makes and can make no real appearance — unphenomenal or unideal — stripped of all its qualities — is only “another name for abstract Being,” and “the abstract idea of Being appeareth to me the most incomprehensible of all other. When I consider the two parts or branches which make up the words material substance , I am convinced there is no distinct meaning annexed to them” (sect. 17). Neither Sense nor Reason inform us of the existence of real material substances that exist abstractly  , or out of all relation to the secondary and primary qualities of which we are percipient when we exercise our senses. By our senses we cannot perceive more than ideas or phenomena, aggregated as individual things that are presented to us: we cannot perceive substances that make no appearance in sense. Then as for reason, unrealised substances, abstracted from living Spirit, human or divine, being altogether meaningless, can in no way explain the concrete realisations of human experience. In short, if there are wholly unphenomenal material substances, it is impossible that we should ever discover  them, or have any concern with them, speculative or practical; and if there are not, we should have the same reason to assert that there are which we have now (sect. 20). It is impossible to put any meaning into wholly abstract reality. “To me the words mean either a direct contradiction, or nothing at all” (sect. 24).

The Principle that the esse of matter necessarily involves percipi , and its correlative Principle that there is not any other substance than Spirit, which is thus the indispensable factor of all reality, both lead on to the more obviously practical Principle — that the material world, per se , is wholly powerless, and that all changes in Nature are the immediate issue of the agency of Spirit (sect. 25-27). Concrete power, like concrete substance, is essentially spiritual. To be satisfied that the whole natural world is only the passive instrument and expression of Spiritual Power we are asked to analyse the sensuous data of experience. We can find no reason for attributing inherent power to any of the phenomena and phenomenal things that are presented to our senses, or for supposing that they can be active causes, either of the changes that are continuously in progress among themselves, or of the feelings, perceptions, and volitions of which spiritual beings are conscious. We find the ideas or phenomena that pass in procession before our senses related to one another as signs to their meanings, in a cosmical order that virtually makes the material world a language and a prophecy: but this cosmical procession is not found to originate in the ideas or phenomena themselves, and there is reason for supposing it to be maintained by ever-living Spirit, which thus not only substantiates the things of sense, but explains their laws of motion and their movements.

 Yet the universe of reality is not exclusively One Spirit. Experience contradicts the supposition. I find  on trial that my personal power to produce changes in the ideas or phenomena which my senses present to me is a limited power (sect. 28-33). I can make and unmake my own fancies, but I cannot with like freedom make and unmake presentations of sense. When in daylight I open my eyes, it is not in my power to determine whether I shall see or not; nor is it in my power to determine what objects I shall see. The cosmical order of sense-phenomena is independent of my will. When I employ my senses, I find myself always confronted by sensible signs of perfect Reason and omnipresent Will. But I also awake in the faith that I am an individual person. And the sense-symbolism of which the material world consists, while it keeps me in constant and immediate relation to the Universal Spirit, whose language it is, keeps me likewise in intercourse with other persons, akin to myself, who are signified to me by their overt actions and articulate words, which enter into my sensuous experience. Sense-given phenomena thus, among their other instrumental offices, are the medium of communication between human beings, who by this means can find companions, and make signs to them. So while, at our highest point of view, Nature is Spirit, experience shews that there is room in the universe for a plurality of persons, individual, and in a measure free or morally responsible. If Berkeley does not say all this, his New Principles tend thus.

At any rate, in his reasoned exposition of his Principles he is anxious to distinguish those phenomena that are presented to the senses of all mankind from the private ideas or fancies of individual men (sect. 28-33). The former constitute the world which sentient beings realise in common. He calls them ideas  because they are unrealisable without percipient mind; but still on the understanding that they are not to be confounded with the chimeras of imagination. They are more deeply and truly real than chimeras. The groups in which they are found  to coexist are the individual things of sense, whose fixed order of succession exemplifies what we call natural law, or natural causation: the correlation of their changes to our pleasures and pains, desires and aversions, makes scientific knowledge of their laws practically important to the life of man, in his embodied state.

Moreover, the real ideas presented to our senses, unlike those of imagination, Berkeley would imply, cannot be either representative or misrepresentative. Our imagination may mislead us: the original data of sense cannot: although we may, and often do, misinterpret their relations to one another, and to our pleasures and pains and higher faculties. The divine meaning with which they are charged, of which science is a partial expression, they may perhaps be said to represent. Otherwise representative sense-perception is absurdity: the ideas of sense cannot be representative in the way those of imagination are; for fancies are faint representations of data of sense. The appearances that sentient intelligence realises are the things of sense, and we cannot go deeper. If we prefer accordingly to call the material world a dream or a chimera, we must understand that it is the reasonable dream in which all sentient intelligence participates, and by which the embodied life of man must be regulated.

 Has Berkeley, in his juvenile ardour, and with the impetuosity natural to him, while seeking to demonstrate the impotence of matter, and the omnipresent supremacy of Spirit, so spiritualised the material world as to make it unfit for the symbolical office in the universe of reality which he supposes it to discharge? Is its potential existence in God, and its percipient realisation by me, and presumably by innumerable other sentient beings, an adequate account of the real material world existing in place and time? Can this universal orderly dream experienced in sense involve the objectivity implied in its being the reliable medium of  social intercourse? Does such a material world provide me with a means of escape from absolute solitude? Nay, if Matter cannot rise into reality without percipient spirit as realising factor, can my individual percipient spirit realise myself without independent Matter? Without intelligent life Matter is pronounced unreal. But is it not also true that without Matter, and the special material organism we call our body, percipient spirit is unreal? Does not Nature seem as indispensable to Spirit as Spirit is to Nature? Must we not assume at least their unbeginning and unending coexistence, even if we recognise in Spirit the deeper and truer reality? Do the New Principles explain the final ground of trust and certainty about the universe of change into which I entered as a stranger when I was born? If they make all that I have believed in as outward to be in its reality inward , do they not disturb the balance that is necessary to all human certainties, and leave me without any realities at all?

That Berkeley at the age of twenty-five, and educated chiefly by Locke, had fathomed or even entertained all these questions was hardly to be looked for. How far he had gone may be gathered by a study of the sequel of his book of Principles .

 ii. Objections to the New Principles answered (sect. 34-84). [image "img69.jpg" file=Image00068.jpg] 

T HE SUPPOSED O BJECTIONS , with Berkeley’s answers, may be thus interpreted: —

First objection. (Sect. 34-40.) The preceding Principles banish all substantial realities, and substitute a universe of chimeras.

Answer.  This objection is a play upon the popular meaning of the word “idea.” That name is appropriate to the phenomena presented in sense, because they become concrete realities only in the experience of living  Spirit; and so it is not confined to the chimeras of individual fancy, which may misrepresent the real ideas of sense that are presented in the natural system independently of our will.

Second objection. (Sect. 41.) The preceding Principles abolish the distinction between Perception and Imagination — between imagining one’s self burnt and actually being burnt.

Answer. Real fire differs from fancied fire: as real pain does from fancied pain; yet no one supposes that real pain any more than imaginary pain can exist unfelt by a sentient intelligence.

Third objection. (Sect. 42-44.) We actually see sensible things existing at a distance from our bodies. Now, whatever is seen existing at a distance must be seen as existing external to us in our bodies, which contradicts the foregoing Principles.

Answer. Distance, or outness, is not visible. It is a conception which is suggested gradually, by our experience of the connexion between visible colours and certain visual sensations that accompany seeing, on the one hand, and our tactual experience, on the other — as was proved in the Essay on Vision , in which the ideality of the visible world is demonstrated.

Fourth objection. (Sect. 45-48.) It follows from the New Principles, that the material world must be undergoing continuous annihilation and recreation in the innumerable sentient experiences in which it becomes real.

Answer . According to the New Principles a thing may be realised in the sense-experience of other minds, during intervals of its perception by my  mind; for the Principles do not affirm dependence only on this or that  mind, but on a living Mind. If this implies a constant creation of the material world, the conception of the universe as in a state of constant creation is not new, and it signally displays Divine Providence.

Fifth objection. (Sect. 49.) If extension and extended Matter can exist only in mind , it follows that extension is an attribute of mind — that mind is extended.

Answer. Extension and other sensible qualities exist in mind, not as modes of mind, which is unintelligible, but as ideas of which Mind is percipient; and this is absolutely inconsistent with the supposition that Mind is itself extended.

Sixth objection. (Sect. 50.) Natural philosophy proceeds on the assumption that Matter is independent of percipient mind, and it thus contradicts the New Principles.

Answer. On the contrary, Matter — if it means what exists abstractly, or in independence of all percipient Mind — is useless in natural philosophy, which is conversant exclusively with the ideas or phenomena that compose concrete things, not with empty abstractions.

Seventh objection. (Sect. 51.) To refer all change to spiritual agents alone, and to regard the things of sense as wholly impotent, thus discharging natural causes as the New Principles do, is at variance with human language and with good sense.

Answer.  While we may speak as the multitude do, we should learn to think with the few who reflect. We may still speak of “natural causes,” even when, as philosophers, we recognise that all true efficiency must be spiritual, and that the material world is only a system of sensible symbols,  regulated by Divine Will and revealing Omnipresent Mind.

Eighth objection. (Sect. 54, 55.) The natural belief of men seems inconsistent with the world being mind-dependent.

Answer. Not so when we consider that men seldom comprehend the deep meaning of their practical assumptions; and when we recollect the prejudices, once dignified as good sense, which have successively surrendered to philosophy.

Ninth objection. (Sect. 56, 57.) Any Principle that is inconsistent with our common faith in the existence of the material world must be rejected.

Answer. The fact that we are conscious of not being ourselves the cause of changes perpetually going on in our sense -ideas, some of which we gradually learn by experience to foresee, sufficiently accounts for the common belief in the independence of those ideas, and is what men truly mean by this.

Tenth objection. (Sect. 58, 59.) The foregoing Principles concerning Matter and Spirit are inconsistent with the laws of motion, and with other truths in mathematics and natural philosophy.

Answer. The laws of motion, and those other truths, may be all conceived and expressed in consistency with the absence of independent substance and causation in Matter.

Eleventh objection. (Sect. 60-66.) If, according to the foregoing Principles, the material world is merely phenomena presented by a Power not-ourselves to our senses, the elaborate contrivances which we find in Nature are useless; for we might have had all experiences that are needful without them, by the direct agency of God.

Answer. Elaborate contrivances in Nature are relatively necessary as signs: they express to us  the occasional presence and some of the experience of other men, also the constant presence and power of the Universal Spirit, while  the scientific interpretation of elaborately constituted Nature is a beneficial moral and intellectual exercise.

Twelfth objection. (Sect. 67-79.) Although the impossibility of active Matter may be demonstrable, this does not prove the impossibility of inactive Matter, neither solid nor extended , which may be the occasion of our having sense-ideas.

Answer. This supposition is unintelligible: the words in which it is expressed convey no meaning.

Thirteenth objection. (Sect. 80, 81.) Matter may be an unknowable Somewhat , neither substance nor accident, cause nor effect, spirit nor idea: all the reasonings against Matter, conceived as something positive, fail, when this wholly negative notion is maintained.

Answer. This is to use the word “Matter” as people use the word “nothing”: Unknowable Somewhat cannot be distinguished from nothing.

Fourteenth objection. (Sect. 82-84.) Although we cannot, in opposition to the New Principles, infer scientifically the existence of Matter, in abstraction from all realising percipient life, or form any conception, positive or negative, of what Matter is; yet Holy Scripture demands the faith of every Christian in the independent reality of the material world.

Answer. The independent reality of the material world is nowhere affirmed in Scripture.

 iii. Consequences and Applications of the New Principles (sect. 85-156). [image "img69.jpg" file=Image00068.jpg] 

I N THIS PORTION of the Treatise, the New Principles, already guarded against objections, are applied to enlighten and invigorate final faith, often suffering from the paralysis of the scepticism produced by materialism; also to improve the sciences, including those which relate to Mind, in man and in God. They are applied: —

1. To the refutation of Scepticism as to the reality of the world (sect. 85-91) and God (sect. 92-96);

2. To the liberation of thought from the bondage of unmeaning abstractions (sect. 97-100);

3. To the purification of Natural Philosophy, by making it an interpretation of ideas of sense, simply in their relations of coexistence and sequence, according to which they constitute the Divine Language of Nature (sect. 101-116);

4. To simplify Mathematics, by eliminating infinites and other empty abstractions (sect. 117-134);

5. To explain and sustain faith in the Immortality of men (sect. 135-144);

6. To explain the belief which each man has in the existence of other men; as signified to him in and through sense-symbolism (sect. 145);

7. To vindicate faith in God, who is signified in and through the sense-symbolism of universal nature (sect. 146-156).

It was only by degrees that Berkeley’s New Principles attracted attention. A new mode of conceiving the world we live in, by a young and unknown author, published at a distance from the centre of English intellectual life, was apt to be overlooked. In connexion with the Essay on Vision   , however, it drew enough of regard to make Berkeley an object of interest to the literary world on his first visit to London, three years after its publication.

  DedicationTO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE

 [image "img69.jpg" file=Image00068.jpg] 

THOMAS, EARL OF PEMBROKE, &c.

KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER, AND ONE OF THE LORDS OF HER MAJESTY’S MOST HONOURABLE PRIVY COUNCIL

My Lord,

 You will perhaps wonder that an obscure person, who has not the honour to be known to your lordship, should presume to address you in this manner. But that a man who has written something with a design to promote Useful Knowledge and Religion in the world should make choice of your lordship for his patron, will not be thought strange by any one that is not altogether unacquainted with the present state of the church and learning, and consequently ignorant how great an ornament and support you are to both. Yet, nothing could have induced me to make you this present of my poor endeavours, were  I not encouraged by that candour and native goodness which is so bright a part in your lordship’s character. I might add, my lord, that the extraordinary favour and bounty you have been pleased to shew towards our Society gave me hopes you would not be unwilling to countenance the studies of one of its members. These considerations determined me to lay this treatise at your lordship’s feet, and the rather because I was ambitious to have it known that I am with the truest and most profound respect, on account of that learning and virtue which the world so justly admires in your lordship,

My Lord,

Your lordship’s most humble
and most devoted servant,

  GEORGE BERKELEY.

 The Preface [image "img69.jpg" file=Image00068.jpg] 

W HAT I HERE make public has, after a long and scrupulous inquiry, seemed to me evidently true and not unuseful to be known; particularly to those who are tainted with Scepticism, or want a demonstration of the existence and immateriality of God, or the natural immortality of the Soul. Whether it be so or no I am content the reader should impartially examine; since I do not think myself any farther concerned for the success of what I have written than as it is agreeable to truth. But, to the end this may not suffer, I make it my request that the reader suspend his judgment till he has once at least read the whole through, with that degree of attention and thought which the subject-matter shall seem to deserve. For, as there are some passages that, taken by themselves, are very liable (nor could it be remedied) to gross misinterpretation, and to be charged with most absurd consequences, which, nevertheless, upon an entire perusal will appear not to follow from them; so likewise, though the whole should be read over, yet, if this be done transiently, it is very probable my sense may be mistaken; but to a thinking reader, I flatter myself it will be throughout clear and obvious.

 As for the characters of novelty and singularity which  some of the following notions may seem to bear, it is, I hope, needless to make any apology on that account. He must surely be either very weak, or very little acquainted with the sciences, who shall reject a truth that is capable of demonstration, for no other reason but because it is newly known, and contrary to the prejudices of mankind.

  Thus much I thought fit to premise, in order to prevent, if possible, the hasty censures of a sort of men who are too apt to condemn an opinion before they rightly comprehend it.

 Introduction [image "img69.jpg" file=Image00068.jpg] 

1. P HILOSOPHY BEING nothing else but the study of Wisdom and Truth, it may with reason be expected that those who have spent most time and pains in it should enjoy a greater calm and serenity of mind, a greater clearness and evidence of knowledge, and be less disturbed with doubts and difficulties than other men. Yet, so it is, we see the illiterate bulk of mankind, that walk the high-road of plain common sense, and are governed by the dictates of nature, for the most part easy and undisturbed. To them nothing that is familiar appears unaccountable or difficult to comprehend. They complain not of any want of evidence in their senses, and are out of all danger of becoming Sceptics. But no sooner do we depart from sense and instinct to follow the light of a superior principle — to reason, meditate, and reflect on the nature of things, but a thousand scruples spring up in our minds, concerning those things which before we seemed fully to comprehend. Prejudices and errors of sense do from all parts discover themselves to our view; and, endeavouring to correct these by reason, we are insensibly drawn into uncouth paradoxes, difficulties, and inconsistencies, which multiply and grow upon us as we advance in speculation; till at length, having wandered through many intricate mazes, we find ourselves just where we were, or, which is worse, sit down in a forlorn Scepticism.

2. The cause of this is thought to be the obscurity of things, or the natural weakness and imperfection of our understandings. It is said the faculties we have are few, and those designed by nature for the support and pleasure of life, and not to penetrate into the inward essence and constitution of things: besides, the mind of man being finite, when it treats of things which partake of Infinity, it is not to be wondered at if it run into absurdities and contradictions, out of which it is impossible it should ever extricate itself; it being of the nature of Infinite not to be comprehended by that which is finite.

3. But, perhaps, we may be too partial to ourselves in placing the fault originally in our faculties, and not rather in the wrong use we make of them. It is a hard thing to suppose that right deductions from true principles should ever end in consequences which cannot be maintained or made consistent. We should believe that God has dealt more bountifully with the sons of men than to give them a strong desire for that knowledge which he had placed quite out of their reach. This were not agreeable to the wonted indulgent methods of Providence, which, whatever appetites it may have implanted in the creatures, doth usually furnish them with such means as, if rightly made use of, will not fail to satisfy them. Upon the whole, I am inclined to think that the far greater part, if not all, of those difficulties which have hitherto amused philosophers, and blocked up the way to knowledge, are entirely owing to ourselves. We have first raised a dust, and then complain we cannot see.

 4. My purpose therefore is, to try if I can discover what those Principles are which have introduced all that doubtfulness and uncertainty, those absurdities and contradictions, into the several sects of philosophy; insomuch that the wisest men have thought our ignorance incurable, conceiving it to arise from the natural dulness and limitation of our faculties. And surely it is a work well deserving our pains to make a strict inquiry concerning the First  Principles of Human Knowledge; to sift and examine them on all sides: especially since there may be some grounds to suspect that those lets and difficulties, which stay and embarrass the mind in its search after truth, do not spring from any darkness and intricacy in the objects, or natural defect in the understanding, so much as from false Principles which have been insisted on, and might have been avoided.

5. How difficult and discouraging soever this attempt may seem, when I consider what a number of very great and extraordinary men have gone before me in the like designs, yet I am not without some hopes; upon the consideration that the largest views are not always the clearest, and that he who is short-sighted will be obliged to draw the object nearer, and may, perhaps, by a close and narrow survey, discern that which had escaped far better eyes.

6. In order to prepare the mind of the reader for the easier conceiving what follows, it is proper to premise somewhat, by way of Introduction, concerning the nature and abuse of Language. But the unravelling this matter leads me in some measure to anticipate my design, by taking notice of what seems to have had a chief part in rendering speculation intricate and perplexed, and to have occasioned innumerable errors and difficulties in almost all parts of knowledge. And that is the opinion that the mind hath a power of framing abstract  ideas or notions of things. He who is not a perfect stranger to the writings and disputes of philosophers must needs  acknowledge that no small part of them are spent about abstract ideas. These are in a more especial manner thought to be the object of those sciences which go by the name of logic and metaphysics, and of all that which passes under the notion of the most abstracted and sublime learning; in all which one shall scarce find any question handled in such a manner as does not suppose their existence in the mind, and that it is well acquainted with them.

7. It is agreed on all hands that the qualities or modes of things do never really exist each of them apart by itself, and separated from all others, but are mixed, as it were, and blended together, several in the same object. But, we are told, the mind, being able to consider each quality singly, or abstracted from those other qualities with which it is united, does by that means frame to itself abstract ideas . For example, there is conceived by sight an object extended, coloured, and moved: this mixed or compound idea the mind resolving into its simple, constituent parts, and viewing each by itself, exclusive of the rest, does frame the abstract ideas of extension, colour, and motion. Not that it is possible for colour or motion to exist without extension; but only that the mind can frame to itself by abstraction the idea of colour exclusive of extension, and of motion exclusive of both colour and extension.

 8. Again, the mind having observed that in the particular extensions perceived by sense there is something common and alike in all, and some other things peculiar, as this or that figure or magnitude, which distinguish them one from another, it considers apart, or singles out by itself, that which is common; making thereof a most abstract idea of extension; which is neither line, surface, nor solid, nor has any figure or magnitude, but is an idea entirely prescinded from all these. So likewise the mind, by leaving out of the particular colours perceived by sense that which distinguishes them one from another, and retaining that only which is common to all, makes an idea of colour in abstract; which is neither red, nor blue, nor white, nor any other determinate colour. And, in like manner, by considering motion abstractedly, not only from the body moved, but likewise from the figure it describes, and all particular directions and velocities, the abstract idea of motion is  framed; which equally corresponds to all particular motions whatsoever that may be perceived by sense.

9. And as the mind frames to itself abstract ideas of qualities or modes , so does it, by the same precision, or mental separation, attain abstract ideas of the more compounded beings which include several coexistent qualities. For example, the mind having observed that Peter, James, and John resemble each other in certain common agreements of shape and other qualities, leaves out of the complex or compound idea it has of Peter, James, and any other particular man, that which is peculiar to each, retaining only what is common to all, and so makes an abstract idea, wherein all the particulars equally partake; abstracting entirely from and cutting off all those circumstances and differences which might determine it to any particular existence. And after this manner it is said we come by the abstract idea of man , or, if you please, humanity, or human nature; wherein it is true there is included colour, because there is no man but has some colour, but then it can be neither white, nor black, nor any particular colour, because there is no one particular colour wherein all men partake. So likewise there is included stature, but then it is neither tall stature, nor low stature, nor yet middle stature, but something abstracted from all these. And so of the rest. Moreover, there being a great variety of other creatures that partake in some parts, but not all, of the complex idea of man, the mind, leaving out those parts which are peculiar to men, and retaining those only which are common to all the living creatures, frames the idea of animal ; which abstracts not only from all particular men, but also all birds, beasts, fishes, and insects. The constituent parts of the abstract idea of animal are body, life, sense, and spontaneous motion. By body is meant body without any particular shape or figure, there being no one shape or figure common to all animals; without covering, either of hair, or feathers, or scales, &c., nor yet naked: hair, feathers, scales, and nakedness being the distinguishing properties of particular animals, and for that reason left out of the abstract idea. Upon the same account, the spontaneous motion must be neither walking, nor flying, nor creeping; it is nevertheless a motion, but what that motion is it is not easy to conceive.

10. Whether others have this wonderful faculty of abstracting their ideas, they best can tell. For myself, [I dare be confident I have it not.] I find indeed I have a faculty of imagining or representing to myself, the ideas of those particular things I have perceived, and of variously compounding and dividing them. I can imagine a man with two heads; or the upper parts of a man joined to the body of a horse. I can consider the hand, the eye, the nose, each by itself abstracted or separated from the rest of the body. But then whatever hand or eye I imagine, it must have some particular shape and colour. Likewise the idea of man that I frame to myself must be either of a white, or a black, or a tawny, a straight, or a crooked, a tall, or a low, or a middle-sized man. I cannot by any effort of thought conceive the abstract idea above described. And it is equally impossible for me to form the abstract idea of motion distinct from the body moving, and which is neither swift nor slow, curvilinear nor rectilinear; and the like may be said of all other abstract general ideas whatsoever. To be plain, I own myself able to abstract in one sense, as when I consider some particular parts or qualities separated from others, with which, though they are united in some object, yet it is possible they may really exist without them. But I deny that I can abstract from one another, or conceive separately, those qualities which it is impossible should exist so separated; or that I can frame a general notion, by abstracting from particulars in the manner aforesaid — which last are the two proper acceptations of abstraction  . And there is ground to think most men will acknowledge themselves to be in my case. The generality of men which are simple and illiterate never pretend to abstract notions. It is said they are difficult, and not to be attained without pains and study. We may  therefore reasonably conclude that, if such there be, they are confined only to the learned.

11. I proceed to examine what can be alleged in defence of the doctrine of abstraction, and try if I can discover what it is that inclines the men of speculation to embrace an opinion so remote from common sense as that seems to be. There has been a late [excellent and] deservedly esteemed philosopher who, no doubt, has given it very much countenance, by seeming to think the having abstract general ideas is what puts the widest difference in point of understanding betwixt man and beast. “The having of general ideas,” saith he, “is that which puts a perfect distinction betwixt man and brutes, and is an excellency which the faculties of brutes do by no means attain unto. For it is evident we observe no foot-steps in them of making use of general signs for universal ideas; from which we have reason to imagine that they have not the faculty of abstracting, or making general ideas, since they have no use of words, or any other general signs.” And a little after:— “Therefore, I think, we may suppose, that it is in this that the species of brutes are discriminated from man: and it is that proper difference wherein they are wholly separated, and which at last widens to so wide a distance. For if they have any ideas at all, and are not bare machines (as some would have them), we cannot deny them to have some reason. It seems as evident to me that they do, some of them, in certain instances, reason, as that they have sense; but it is only in particular ideas, just as they receive them from their senses. They are the best of them tied up within those narrow bounds, and have not (as I think) the faculty to enlarge them by any kind of abstraction.” — Essay on Human Understanding  , B. II. ch. 11. § 10 and 11. I readily agree with this learned author, that the faculties of brutes can by no means attain to abstraction. But then if this be made the distinguishing property of that sort  of animals, I fear a great many of those that pass for men must be reckoned into their number. The reason that is here assigned, why we have no grounds to think brutes have abstract general ideas, is, that we observe in them no use of words, or any other general signs; which is built on this supposition, to wit, that the making use of words implies having general ideas. From which it follows that men who use language are able to abstract or generalize their ideas. That this is the sense and arguing of the author will further appear by his answering the question he in another place puts: “Since all things that exist are only particulars, how come we by general terms?” His answer is: “Words become general by being made the signs of general ideas.” — Essay on Human Understanding , B. III. ch. 3. § 6. But it seems that a word becomes general by being made the sign, not of an abstract general idea, but of several particular ideas, any one of which it indifferently suggests to the mind. For example, when it is said “the change of motion is proportional to the impressed force,” or that “whatever has extension is divisible,” these propositions are to be understood of motion and extension in general; and nevertheless it will not follow that they suggest to my thoughts an idea of motion without a body moved, or any determinate direction and velocity; or that I must conceive an abstract general idea of extension, which is neither line, surface, nor solid, neither great nor small, black, white, nor red, nor of any other determinate colour. It is only implied that whatever particular motion I consider, whether it be swift or slow, perpendicular, horizontal, or oblique, or in whatever object, the axiom concerning it holds equally true. As does the other of every particular extension; it matters not whether line, surface, or solid, whether of this or that magnitude or figure.

12. By observing how ideas become general, we may the better judge how words are made so. And here it is to be noted that I do not deny absolutely there are general ideas , but only that there are any abstract general ideas . For, in the passages we have quoted wherein there is mention of general ideas, it is always supposed that they are formed by abstraction, after the manner set forth in sections 8 and 9. Now, if we will annex a meaning to our words, and speak only of what we can conceive, I believe we shall acknowledge that an idea, which considered in itself is particular, becomes general, by being made to represent or stand for all other particular ideas of the same sort. To make this plain by an example. Suppose a geometrician is demonstrating the method of cutting a line in two equal parts. He draws, for instance, a black line of an inch in length: this, which in itself is a particular line, is nevertheless with regard to its signification general; since, as it is there used, it represents all particular lines whatsoever; so that what is demonstrated of it is demonstrated of all lines, or, in other words, of a line in general. And, as that particular line becomes general by being made a sign, so the name line, which taken absolutely is particular, by being a sign, is made general. And as the former owes its generality, not to its being the sign of an abstract or general line, but of all particular right lines that may possibly exist, so the latter must be thought to derive its generality from the same cause, namely, the various particular lines which it indifferently denotes.

13. To give the reader a yet clearer view of the nature of abstract ideas, and the uses they are thought necessary to, I shall add one more passage out of the Essay on Human Understanding  , which is as follows:— “Abstract ideas are not so obvious or easy to children, or the yet unexercised mind, as particular ones. If they seem so to grown men, it is only because by constant and familiar use  they are made so. For, when we nicely reflect upon them, we shall find that general ideas are fictions and contrivances of the mind, that carry difficulty with them, and do not so easily offer themselves as we are apt to imagine. For example, does it not require some pains and skill to form the general idea of a triangle (which is yet none of the most abstract, comprehensive, and difficult); for it must be neither oblique nor rectangle, neither equilateral, equicrural, nor scalenon; but all and none of these at once? In effect, it is something imperfect, that cannot exist; an idea wherein some parts of several different and inconsistent ideas are put together. It is true the mind, in this imperfect state, has need of such ideas, and makes all the haste to them it can, for the conveniency of communication and enlargement of knowledge; to both which it is naturally very much inclined. But yet one has reason to suspect such ideas are marks of our imperfection. At least this is enough to shew that the most abstract and general ideas are not those that the mind is first and most easily acquainted with, nor such as its earliest knowledge is conversant about.” — B. iv. ch. 7. § 9. If any man has the faculty of framing in his mind such an idea of a triangle as is here described, it is in vain to pretend to dispute him out of it, nor would I go about it. All I desire is that the reader would fully and certainly inform himself whether he has such an idea or no. And this, methinks, can be no hard task for any one to perform. What more easy than for any one to look a little into his own thoughts, and there try whether he has, or can attain to have, an idea that shall correspond with the description that is here given of the general idea of a triangle — which is neither oblique nor rectangle, equilateral, equicrural nor scalenon, but all and none of these at once?

 14. Much is here said of the difficulty that abstract ideas carry with them, and the pains and skill requisite to the forming them. And it is on all hands agreed that there is  need of great toil and labour of the mind, to emancipate our thoughts from particular objects, and raise them to those sublime speculations that are conversant about abstract ideas. From all which the natural consequence should seem to be, that so difficult a thing as the forming abstract ideas was not necessary for communication , which is so easy and familiar to all sorts of men. But, we are told, if they seem obvious and easy to grown men, it is only because by constant and familiar use they are made so. Now, I would fain know at what time it is men are employed in surmounting that difficulty, and furnishing themselves with those necessary helps for discourse. It cannot be when they are grown up; for then it seems they are not conscious of any such painstaking. It remains therefore to be the business of their childhood. And surely the great and multiplied labour of framing abstract notions will be found a hard task for that tender age. Is it not a hard thing to imagine that a couple of children cannot prate together of their sugar-plums and rattles and the rest of their little trinkets, till they have first tacked together numberless inconsistencies, and so framed in their minds abstract general ideas, and annexed them to every common name they make use of?

15. Nor do I think them a whit more needful for the enlargement of knowledge than for communication. It is, I know, a point much insisted on, that all knowledge and demonstration are about universal notions, to which I fully agree. But then it does not appear to me that those notions are formed by abstraction in the manner premised — universality , so far as I can comprehend, not consisting in the absolute, positive nature or conception of anything, but in the relation it bears to the particulars signified or represented by it; by virtue whereof it is that things, names, or notions, being in their own nature particular , are rendered universal  . Thus, when I demonstrate any proposition concerning triangles, it is supposed that I have in view the  universal idea of a triangle: which ought not to be understood as if I could frame an idea of a triangle which was neither equilateral, nor scalenon, nor equicrural; but only that the particular triangle I consider, whether of this or that sort it matters not, doth equally stand for and represent all rectilinear triangles whatsoever, and is in that sense universal. All which seems very plain and not to include any difficulty in it.

16. But here it will be demanded, how we can know any proposition to be true of all particular triangles, except we have first seen it demonstrated of the abstract idea of a triangle which equally agrees to all? For, because a property may be demonstrated to agree to some one particular triangle, it will not thence follow that it equally belongs to any other triangle which in all respects is not the same with it. For example, having demonstrated that the three angles of an isosceles rectangular triangle are equal to two right ones, I cannot therefore conclude this affection agrees to all other triangles which have neither a right angle nor two equal sides. It seems therefore that, to be certain this proposition is universally true, we must either make a particular demonstration for every particular triangle, which is impossible; or once for all demonstrate it of the abstract idea of a triangle, in which all the particulars do indifferently partake, and by which they are all equally represented. To which I answer, that, though the idea I have in view whilst I make the demonstration be, for instance, that of an isosceles rectangular triangle whose sides are of a determinate length, I may nevertheless be certain it extends to all other rectilinear triangles, of what sort or bigness soever. And that because neither the right angle, nor the equality, nor determinate length of the sides are at all concerned in the demonstration. It is true the diagram I have in view includes all these particulars; but then there is not the least mention made of them  in the proof of the proposition. It is not said the three angles are equal to two right ones, because one of them is a right  angle, or because the sides comprehending it are of the same length. Which sufficiently shews that the right angle might have been oblique, and the sides unequal, and for all that the demonstration have held good. And for this reason it is that I conclude that to be true of any obliquangular or scalenon which I had demonstrated of a particular right-angled equicrural triangle, and not because I demonstrated the proposition of the abstract idea of a triangle. [And here it must be acknowledged that a man may consider a figure merely as triangular; without attending to the particular qualities of the angles, or relations of the sides. So far he may abstract. But this will never prove that he can frame an abstract, general, inconsistent idea of a triangle. In like manner we may consider Peter so far forth as man, or so far forth as animal, without framing the forementioned abstract idea, either of man or of animal; inasmuch as all that is perceived is not considered.]

 17. It were an endless as well as an useless thing to trace the Schoolmen, those great masters of abstraction, through all the manifold inextricable labyrinths of error and dispute which their doctrine of abstract natures and notions seems to have led them into. What bickerings and controversies, and what a learned dust have been raised about those matters, and what mighty advantage has been from thence derived to mankind, are things at this day too clearly known to need being insisted on. And it had been well if the ill effects of that doctrine were confined to those only who make the most avowed profession of it. When men consider the great pains, industry, and parts that have for so many ages been laid out on the cultivation and advancement of the sciences, and that notwithstanding all this the far greater part of them remain full of darkness and uncertainty, and disputes that are like never to have an end; and even those that are thought to be supported by the most clear and cogent demonstrations contain in them paradoxes which are perfectly irreconcilable to the understandings of men; and that, taking all together, a very small portion of them does supply any real benefit to mankind, otherwise than by being an innocent diversion  and amusement — I say, the consideration of all this is apt to throw them into a despondency and perfect contempt of all study. But this may perhaps cease upon a view of the false Principles that have obtained in the world; amongst all which there is none, methinks, hath a more wide influence over the thoughts of speculative men than this of abstract general ideas .

18. I come now to consider the source of this prevailing notion, and that seems to me to be language . And surely nothing of less extent than reason itself could have been the source of an opinion so universally received. The truth of this appears as from other reasons so also from the plain confession of the ablest patrons of abstract ideas, who acknowledge that they are made in order to naming; from which it is clear consequence that if there had been no such thing as speech or universal signs, there never had been any thought of abstraction. See B. iii. ch. 6. § 39, and elsewhere of the Essay on Human Understanding .

 Let us examine the manner wherein Words have contributed to the origin of that mistake. — First then, it is thought that every name has, or ought to have, one only precise and settled signification; which inclines men to think there are certain abstract determinate ideas that constitute the true and only immediate signification of each general name; and that it is by the mediation of these abstract ideas that a general name comes to signify any particular thing. Whereas, in truth, there is no such thing as one precise and definite signification annexed to any general name, they all signifying indifferently a great number of particular ideas. All which does evidently follow from what has been already said, and will clearly appear to any one by a little reflexion. To this it will be objected that every name that has a definition is thereby restrained to one certain signification. For example, a triangle is defined to be “a plain surface comprehended by three right lines”; by which that name is limited to denote one certain idea and no other. To which I answer, that in the definition it is not  said whether the surface be great or small, black or white, nor whether the sides are long or short, equal or unequal, nor with what angles they are inclined to each other; in all which there may be great variety, and consequently there is no one settled idea which limits the signification of the word triangle. It is one thing for to keep a name constantly to the same definition , and another to make it stand everywhere for the same idea : the one is necessary, the other useless and impracticable.

19. But, to give a farther account how words came to produce the doctrine of abstract ideas, it must be observed that it is a received opinion that language has no other end but the communicating ideas, and that every significant name stands for an idea. This being so, and it being withal certain that names which yet are not thought altogether insignificant do not always mark out particular conceivable ideas, it is straightway concluded that they stand for abstract notions. That there are many names in use amongst speculative men which do not always suggest to others determinate, particular ideas, or in truth anything at all, is what nobody will deny. And a little attention will discover that it is not necessary (even in the strictest reasonings) that significant names which stand for ideas should, every time they are used, excite in the understanding the ideas they are made to stand for: in reading and discoursing, names being for the most part used as letters are in Algebra, in which, though a particular quantity be marked by each letter, yet to proceed right it is not requisite that in every step each letter suggest to your thoughts that particular quantity it was appointed to stand for.

 20. Besides, the communicating of ideas marked by words is not the chief and only end of language, as is commonly supposed. There are other ends, as the raising of some passion, the exciting to or deterring from an action, the putting the mind in some particular disposition; to which the former is in many cases barely subservient, and sometimes entirely omitted, when these can be obtained without  it, as I think doth not unfrequently happen in the familiar use of language. I entreat the reader to reflect with himself, and see if it doth not often happen, either in hearing or reading a discourse, that the passions of fear, love, hatred, admiration, and disdain, and the like, arise immediately in his mind upon the perception of certain words, without any ideas coming between. At first, indeed, the words might have occasioned ideas that were fitting to produce those emotions; but, if I mistake not, it will be found that, when language is once grown familiar, the hearing of the sounds or sight of the characters is oft immediately attended with those passions which at first were wont to be produced by the intervention of ideas that are now quite omitted. May we not, for example, be affected with the promise of a good thing  , though we have not an idea of what it is? Or is not the being threatened with danger sufficient to excite a dread, though we think not of any particular evil likely to befal us, nor yet frame to ourselves an idea of danger in abstract? If any one shall join ever so little reflection of his own to what has been said, I believe that it will evidently appear to him that general names are often used in the propriety of language without the speakers designing them for marks of ideas in his own, which he would have them raise in the mind of the hearer. Even proper names themselves do not seem always spoken with a design to bring into our view the ideas of those individuals that are supposed to be marked by them. For example, when a schoolman tells me “Aristotle hath said it,” all I conceive he means by it is to dispose me to embrace his opinion with the deference and submission which custom has annexed to that name. And this effect may be so instantly produced in the minds of those who are accustomed to resign their judgment to authority of that philosopher, as it is impossible any idea either of his person, writings, or reputation should go before. [So close and immediate a connexion may custom establish  betwixt the very word Aristotle and the motions of assent and reverence in the minds of some men.] Innumerable examples of this kind may be given, but why should I insist on those things which every one’s experience will, I doubt not, plentifully suggest unto him?

21. We have, I think, shewn the impossibility of Abstract Ideas. We have considered what has been said for them by their ablest patrons; and endeavoured to shew they are of no use for those ends to which they are thought necessary. And lastly, we have traced them to the source from whence they flow, which appears evidently to be Language.

It cannot be denied that words are of excellent use, in that by their means all that stock of knowledge which has been purchased by the joint labours of inquisitive men in all ages and nations may be drawn into the view and made the possession of one single person. But [at the same time it must be owned that] most parts of knowledge have been [so] strangely perplexed and darkened by the abuse of words, and general ways of speech wherein they are delivered, [that it may almost be made a question whether language has contributed more to the hindrance or advancement of the sciences]. Since therefore words are so apt to impose on the understanding, [I am resolved in my inquiries to make as little use of them as possibly I can:] whatever ideas I consider, I shall endeavour to take them bare and naked into my view; keeping out of my thoughts, so far as I am able, those names which long and constant use hath so strictly united with them. From which I may expect to derive the following advantages: —

22. First , I shall be sure to get clear of all controversies purely verbal, the springing up of which weeds in almost all the sciences has been a main hindrance to the growth of true and sound knowledge. Secondly  , this seems to be a sure way to extricate myself out of that fine and subtle net  of abstract ideas, which has so miserably perplexed and entangled the minds of men; and that with this peculiar circumstance, that by how much the finer and more curious was the wit of any man, by so much the deeper was he likely to be ensnared and faster held therein. Thirdly , so long as I confine my thoughts to my own ideas, divested of words, I do not see how I can easily be mistaken. The objects I consider, I clearly and adequately know. I cannot be deceived in thinking I have an idea which I have not. It is not possible for me to imagine that any of my own ideas are alike or unlike that are not truly so. To discern the agreements or disagreements there are between my ideas, to see what ideas are included in any compound idea and what not, there is nothing more requisite than an attentive perception of what passes in my own understanding.

23. But the attainment of all these advantages does presuppose an entire deliverance from the deception of words; which I dare hardly promise myself, so difficult a thing it is to dissolve an union so early begun, and confirmed by so long a habit as that betwixt words and ideas. Which difficulty seems to have been very much increased by the doctrine of abstraction . For, so long as men thought abstract ideas were annexed to their words, it does not seem strange that they should use words for ideas; it being found an impracticable thing to lay aside the word, and retain the abstract  idea in the mind; which in itself was perfectly inconceivable. This seems to me the principal cause why those who have so emphatically recommended to others the laying aside all use of words in their meditations, and contemplating their bare ideas, have yet failed to perform it themselves. Of late many have been very sensible of the absurd opinions and insignificant disputes which grow out of the abuse of words. And, in order to remedy these evils, they advise well, that we attend to the ideas signified, and draw off our attention from the words which signify them.  But, how good soever this advice may be they have given others, it is plain they could not have a due regard to it themselves, so long as they thought the only immediate use of words was to signify ideas, and that the immediate signification of every general name was a determinate abstract idea.

24. But these being known to be mistakes, a man may with greater ease prevent his being imposed on by words. He that knows he has no other than particular ideas, will not puzzle himself in vain to find out and conceive the abstract idea annexed to any name. And he that knows names do not always stand for ideas will spare himself the labour of looking for ideas where there are none to be had. It were, therefore, to be wished that every one would use his utmost endeavours to obtain a clear view of the ideas he would consider; separating from them all that dress and incumbrance of words which so much contribute to blind the judgment and divide the attention. In vain do we extend our view into the heavens and pry into the entrails of the earth, in vain do we consult the writings of learned men and trace the dark footsteps of antiquity. We need only draw the curtain of words, to behold the fairest tree of knowledge, whose fruit is excellent, and within the reach of our hand.

   25. Unless we take care to clear the First Principles of Knowledge from the embarras and delusion of Words, we may make infinite reasonings upon them to no purpose; we may draw consequences from consequences, and be never the wiser. The farther we go, we shall only lose ourselves the more irrecoverably, and be the deeper entangled in difficulties and mistakes. Whoever therefore designs to read the following sheets, I entreat him that he  would make my words the occasion of his own thinking, and endeavour to attain the same train of thoughts in reading that I had in writing them. By this means it will be easy for him to discover the truth or falsity of what I say. He will be out of all danger of being deceived by my words. And I do not see how he can be led into an error by considering his own naked, undisguised ideas.

  Part First [image "img69.jpg" file=Image00068.jpg] 

1. I T IS evident to any one who takes a survey of the objects of human knowledge , that they are either ideas actually imprinted on the senses; or else such as are perceived by attending to the passions and operations of the mind; or lastly, ideas formed by help of memory and imagination — either compounding, dividing, or barely representing those originally perceived in the aforesaid ways. By sight I have the ideas of light and colours, with their several degrees and variations. By touch I perceive hard and soft, heat and cold, motion and resistance; and of all these more and less either as to quantity or degree. Smelling furnishes me with odours; the palate with tastes; and hearing conveys sounds to the mind in all their variety of tone and composition.

And as several of these are observed to accompany each other, they come to be marked by one name, and so to be reputed as one thing . Thus, for example, a certain colour, taste, smell, figure and consistence having been observed to go together, are accounted one distinct thing, signified by the name apple; other collections of ideas constitute a stone, a tree, a book, and the like sensible things; which as they are pleasing or disagreeable excite the passions of love, hatred, joy, grief, and so forth.

2. But, besides all that endless variety of ideas or objects of knowledge, there is likewise Something which knows or perceives them; and exercises divers operations, as willing, imagining, remembering, about them. This perceiving, active being is what I call mind , spirit , soul , or myself . By which words I do not denote any one of my ideas, but a thing entirely distinct from them, wherein they exist, or, which is the same thing, whereby they are perceived; for the existence of an idea consists in being perceived.

3. That neither our thoughts, nor passions, nor ideas formed by the imagination, exist without the mind is what everybody will allow. And to me it seems no less evident that the various sensations, or ideas imprinted on the Sense, however blended or combined together (that is, whatever objects they compose), cannot exist otherwise than in a mind perceiving them. I think an intuitive knowledge may be obtained of this, by any one that shall attend to what is meant by the term exist  when applied to  sensible things. The table I write on I say exists; that is, I see and feel it: and if I were out of my study I should say it existed; meaning thereby that if I was in my study I might perceive it, or that some other spirit actually does perceive it. There was an odour, that is, it was smelt; there was a sound, that is, it was heard; a colour or figure, and it was perceived by sight or touch. This is all that I can understand by these and the like expressions. For as to what is said of the absolute existence of unthinking things, without any relation to their being perceived, that is to me perfectly unintelligible. Their esse is percipi ; nor is it possible they should have any existence out of the minds or thinking things which perceive them.

4. It is indeed an opinion strangely prevailing amongst men, that houses, mountains, rivers, and in a word all sensible objects, have an existence, natural or real, distinct from their being perceived by the understanding. But, with how great an assurance and acquiescence soever this Principle may be entertained in the world, yet whoever shall find in his heart to call it in question may, if I mistake not, perceive it to involve a manifest contradiction. For, what are the forementioned objects but the things we perceive by sense? and what do we perceive besides our own ideas or sensations? and is it not plainly repugnant that any one of these, or any combination of them, should exist unperceived?

 5. If we thoroughly examine this tenet it will, perhaps,  be found at bottom to depend on the doctrine of abstract ideas . For can there be a nicer strain of abstraction than to distinguish the existence of sensible objects from their being perceived, so as to conceive them existing unperceived? Light and colours, heat and cold, extension and figures — in a word the things we see and feel — what are they but so many sensations, notions, ideas, or impressions on the sense? and is it possible to separate, even in thought, any of these from perception? For my part, I might as easily divide a thing from itself. I may, indeed, divide in my thoughts, or conceive apart from each other, those things which perhaps I never perceived by sense so divided. Thus, I imagine the trunk of a human body without the limbs, or conceive the smell of a rose without thinking on the rose itself. So far, I will not deny, I can abstract; if that may properly be called abstraction which extends only to the conceiving separately such objects as it is possible may really exist or be actually perceived asunder. But my conceiving or imagining power does not extend beyond the possibility of real existence or perception. Hence, as it is impossible for me to see or feel anything without an actual sensation of that thing, so is it impossible for me to conceive in my thoughts any sensible thing or object distinct from the sensation or perception of it. [In truth, the object and the sensation are the same thing, and cannot therefore be abstracted from each other.]

6. Some truths there are so near and obvious to the mind that a man need only open his eyes to see them. Such I take this important one to be, viz. that all the choir of heaven and furniture of the earth, in a word all those bodies which compose the mighty frame of the world, have not any subsistence without a mind; that their being  is to be perceived or known; that consequently so long as they are not actually perceived by me, or do not exist in my mind, or that of any other created spirit, they must either  have no existence at all, or else subsist in the mind of some Eternal Spirit: it being perfectly unintelligible, and involving all the absurdity of abstraction, to attribute to any single part of them an existence independent of a spirit. [To be convinced of which, the reader need only reflect, and try to separate in his own thoughts the being of a sensible thing from its being perceived .]

7. From what has been said it is evident there is not any other Substance than Spirit , or that which perceives. But, for the fuller proof of this point, let it be considered the sensible qualities are colour, figure, motion, smell, taste, and such like, that is, the ideas perceived by sense. Now, for an idea to exist in an unperceiving thing is a manifest contradiction; for to have an idea is all one as to perceive: that therefore wherein colour, figure, and the like qualities exist must perceive them. Hence it is clear there can be no unthinking substance or substratum of those ideas.

8. But, say you, though the ideas themselves do not exist without the mind, yet there may be things like them, whereof they are copies or resemblances; which things exist without the mind, in an unthinking substance. I answer, an idea can be like nothing but an idea; a colour or figure can be like nothing but another colour or figure. If we look but never so little into our thoughts, we shall find it impossible for us to conceive a likeness except only between our ideas. Again, I ask whether those supposed originals  , or external things, of which our ideas are the pictures or representations, be themselves perceivable or  no? If they are, then they are ideas, and we have gained our point: but if you say they are not, I appeal to any one whether it be sense to assert a colour is like something which is invisible; hard or soft, like something which is intangible; and so of the rest.

9. Some there are who make a distinction betwixt primary and secondary qualities. By the former they mean extension, figure, motion, rest, solidity or impenetrability, and number; by the latter they denote all other sensible qualities, as colours, sounds, tastes, and so forth. The ideas we have of these last they acknowledge not to be the resemblances of anything existing without the mind, or unperceived; but they will have our ideas of the primary qualities to be patterns or images of things which exist without the mind, in an unthinking substance which they call Matter. By Matter, therefore, we are to understand an inert, senseless substance, in which extension, figure, and motion do actually subsist. But it is evident, from what we have already shewn, that extension, figure, and motion are only ideas existing in the mind, and that an idea can be like nothing but another idea; and that consequently neither they nor their archetypes can exist in an unperceiving substance. Hence, it is plain that the very notion of what is called Matter or corporeal substance , involves a contradiction in it. [Insomuch that I should not think it necessary to spend more time in exposing its absurdity. But, because the tenet of the existence of Matter seems to have taken so deep a root in the minds of philosophers, and draws after it so many ill consequences, I choose rather to be thought prolix and tedious than omit anything that might conduce to the full discovery and extirpation of that prejudice.]

 10. They who assert that figure, motion, and the rest of  the primary or original qualities do exist without the mind, in unthinking substances, do at the same time acknowledge that colours, sounds, heat, cold, and suchlike secondary qualities, do not; which they tell us are sensations, existing in the mind alone, that depend on and are occasioned by the different size, texture, and motion of the minute particles of matter. This they take for an undoubted truth, which they can demonstrate beyond all exception. Now, if it be certain that those original qualities are inseparably united with the other sensible qualities, and not, even in thought, capable of being abstracted from them, it plainly follows that they exist only in the mind. But I desire any one to reflect, and try whether he can, by any abstraction of thought, conceive the extension and motion of a body without all other sensible qualities. For my own part, I see evidently that it is not in my power to frame an idea of a body extended and moving, but I must withal give it some colour or other sensible quality, which is acknowledged to exist only in the mind. In short, extension, figure and motion, abstracted from all other qualities, are inconceivable. Where therefore the other sensible qualities are, there must these be also, to wit, in the mind and nowhere else.

11. Again, great and small , swift and slow , are allowed to exist nowhere without the mind; being entirely relative, and changing as the frame or position of the organs of sense varies. The extension therefore which exists without the mind is neither great nor small, the motion neither swift nor slow; that is, they are nothing at all. But, say you, they are extension in general, and motion in general. Thus we see how much the tenet of extended moveable substances existing without the mind depends on that strange doctrine of abstract ideas  . And here I cannot but remark how nearly the vague and indeterminate description  of Matter, or corporeal substance, which the modern philosophers are run into by their own principles, resembles that antiquated and so much ridiculed notion of materia prima , to be met with in Aristotle and his followers. Without extension solidity cannot be conceived: since therefore it has been shewn that extension exists not in an unthinking substance, the same must also be true of solidity.

12. That number is entirely the creature of the mind, even though the other qualities be allowed to exist without, will be evident to whoever considers that the same thing bears a different denomination of number as the mind views it with different respects. Thus, the same extension is one, or three, or thirty-six, according as the mind considers it with reference to a yard, a foot, or an inch. Number is so visibly relative, and dependent on men’s understanding, that it is strange to think how any one should give it an absolute existence without the mind. We say one book, one page, one line, &c.; all these are equally units, though some contain several of the others. And in each instance, it is plain, the unit relates to some particular combination of ideas arbitrarily put together by the mind.

13. Unity I know some will have to be a simple or uncompounded idea, accompanying all other ideas into the mind. That I have any such idea answering the word unity  I do not find; and if I had, methinks I could not miss finding it; on the contrary, it should be the most familiar to my understanding, since it is said to accompany all other ideas, and to be perceived by all the ways of  sensation and reflexion. To say no more, it is an abstract idea .

14. I shall farther add, that, after the same manner as modern philosophers prove certain sensible qualities to have no existence in Matter, or without the mind, the same thing may be likewise proved of all other sensible qualities whatsoever. Thus, for instance, it is said that heat and cold are affections only of the mind, and not at all patterns of real beings, existing in the corporeal substances which excite them; for that the same body which appears cold to one hand seems warm to another. Now, why may we not as well argue that figure and extension are not patterns or resemblances of qualities existing in Matter; because to the same eye at different stations, or eyes of a different texture at the same station, they appear various, and cannot therefore be the images of anything settled and determinate without the mind? Again, it is proved that sweetness is not really in the sapid thing; because the thing remaining unaltered the sweetness is changed into bitter, as in case of a fever or otherwise vitiated palate. Is it not as reasonable to say that motion is not without the mind; since if the succession of ideas in the mind become swifter, the motion, it is acknowledged, shall appear slower, without any alteration in any external object?

15. In short, let any one consider those arguments which are thought manifestly to prove that colours and tastes exist only in the mind, and he shall find they may with equal force be brought to prove the same thing of extension, figure, and motion. Though it must be confessed this method of arguing does not so much prove that there is no extension or colour in an outward object, as that we do not know by sense which is the true extension or colour of the object. But the arguments foregoing plainly shew it to be impossible that any colour or extension at all, or other sensible quality whatsoever, should exist in an unthinking subject without the mind, or in truth that there should be any such thing as an outward object.

16. But let us examine a little the received opinion. It is said extension is a mode or accident of Matter, and that Matter is the substratum that supports it. Now I desire that you would explain to me what is meant by Matter’s supporting extension. Say you, I have no idea of Matter; and therefore cannot explain it. I answer, though you have no positive, yet, if you have any meaning at all, you must at least have a relative idea of Matter; though you know not what it is, yet you must be supposed to know what relation it bears to accidents, and what is meant by its supporting them. It is evident support cannot here be taken in its usual or literal sense, as when we say that pillars support a building. In what sense therefore must it be taken? [ For my part, I am not able to discover any sense at all that can be applicable to it.]

17. If we inquire into what the most accurate philosophers declare themselves to mean by material substance , we shall find them acknowledge they have no other meaning annexed to those sounds but the idea of Being in general, together with the relative notion of its supporting accidents. The general idea of Being appeareth to me the most abstract and incomprehensible of all other; and as for its supporting accidents, this, as we have just now observed, cannot be understood in the common sense of those words: it must therefore be taken in some other sense, but what that is they do not explain. So that when I consider the two parts or branches which make the signification of the words material substance , I am convinced there is no distinct meaning annexed to them. But why should we trouble ourselves any farther, in discussing this material substratum or support of figure and motion and other sensible qualities? Does it not suppose they have an existence without the mind? And is not this a direct repugnancy, and altogether inconceivable?

 18. But, though it were possible that solid, figured, moveable substances may exist without the mind, corresponding to the ideas we have of bodies, yet how is it possible for us to know this? Either we must know it by Sense or by Reason. As for our senses, by them we  have the knowledge only of our sensations, ideas, or those things that are immediately perceived by sense, call them what you will: but they do not inform us that things exist without the mind, or unperceived, like to those which are perceived. This the materialists themselves acknowledge. — It remains therefore that if we have any knowledge at all of external things, it must be by reason inferring their existence from what is immediately perceived by sense. But (I do not see) what reason can induce us to believe the existence of bodies without the mind, from what we perceive, since the very patrons of Matter themselves do not pretend there is any necessary connexion betwixt them and our ideas? I say it is granted on all hands (and what happens in dreams, frensies, and the like, puts it beyond dispute) that it is possible we might be affected with all the ideas we have now, though no bodies existed without resembling them. Hence it is evident the supposition of external bodies is not necessary for the producing our ideas; since it is granted they are produced sometimes, and might possibly be produced always, in the same order we see them in at present, without their concurrence.

 19. But, though we might possibly have all our sensations without them, yet perhaps it may be thought easier to conceive and explain the manner of their production, by supposing external bodies in their likeness rather than otherwise; and so it might be at least probable there are such things as bodies that excite their ideas in our minds. But neither can this be said. For, though we give the materialists their external bodies, they by their own confession are never the nearer knowing how our ideas are produced; since they own themselves unable to comprehend in what manner body can act upon spirit, or how it is possible it should imprint any idea in the mind. Hence  it is evident the production of ideas or sensations in our minds, can be no reason why we should suppose Matter or corporeal substances; since that is acknowledged to remain equally inexplicable with or without this supposition. If therefore it were possible for bodies to exist without the mind, yet to hold they do so must needs be a very precarious opinion; since it is to suppose, without any reason at all, that God has created innumerable beings that are entirely useless, and serve to no manner of purpose.

20. In short, if there were external bodies, it is impossible we should ever come to know it; and if there were not, we might have the very same reasons to think there were that we have now. Suppose — what no one can deny possible — an intelligence, without the help of external bodies, to be affected with the same train of sensations or ideas that you are, imprinted in the same order and with like vividness in his mind. I ask whether that intelligence hath not all the reason to believe the existence of Corporeal Substances, represented by his ideas, and exciting them in his mind, that you can possibly have for believing the same thing? Of this there can be no question. Which one consideration were enough to make any reasonable person suspect the strength of whatever arguments he may think himself to have, for the existence of bodies without the mind.

21. Were it necessary to add any farther proof against the existence of Matter, after what has been said, I could instance several of those errors and difficulties (not to mention impieties) which have sprung from that tenet. It has occasioned numberless controversies and disputes in philosophy, and not a few of far greater moment in religion. But I shall not enter into the detail of them in this place, as well because I think arguments a posteriori  are unnecessary for confirming what has been, if I mistake not,  sufficiently demonstrated a priori , as because I shall hereafter find occasion to speak somewhat of them.

22. I am afraid I have given cause to think I am needlessly prolix in handling this subject. For, to what purpose is it to dilate on that which may be demonstrated with the utmost evidence in a line or two, to any one that is capable of the least reflexion? It is but looking into your own thoughts, and so trying whether you can conceive it possible for a sound, or figure, or motion, or colour to exist without the mind or unperceived. This easy trial may perhaps make you see that what you contend for is a downright contradiction. Insomuch that I am content to put the whole upon this issue: — If you can but conceive it possible for one extended moveable substance, or in general for any one idea, or anything like an idea, to exist otherwise than in a mind perceiving it, I shall readily give up the cause. And, as for all that compages of external bodies you contend for, I shall grant you its existence, though you cannot either give me any reason why you believe it exists, or assign any use to it when it is supposed to exist. I say, the bare possibility of your opinions being true shall pass for an argument that it is so.

23. But, say you, surely there is nothing easier than for me to imagine trees, for instance, in a park, or books existing in a closet, and nobody by to perceive them. I answer, you may so, there is no difficulty in it. But what is all this, I beseech you, more than framing in your mind certain ideas which you call books and trees  , and at the same time omitting to frame the idea of any one that may perceive them? But do not you yourself perceive or think of them all the while? This therefore is nothing to the purpose: it only shews you have the power of imagining, or forming ideas in your mind; but it does not shew that you can conceive it possible the objects of your thought may exist without the mind. To make out this, it is necessary that  you conceive them existing unconceived or unthought of; which is a manifest repugnancy. When we do our utmost to conceive the existence of external bodies, we are all the while only contemplating our own ideas. But the mind, taking no notice of itself, is deluded to think it can and does conceive bodies existing unthought of, or without the mind, though at the same time they are apprehended by, or exist in, itself. A little attention will discover to any one the truth and evidence of what is here said, and make it unnecessary to insist on any other proofs against the existence of material substance .

24. [Could men but forbear to amuse themselves with words, we should, I believe, soon come to an agreement in this point.] It is very obvious, upon the least inquiry into our own thoughts, to know whether it be possible for us to understand what is meant by the absolute existence of sensible objects in themselves , or without the mind . To me it is evident those words mark out either a direct contradiction, or else nothing at all. And to convince others of this, I know no readier or fairer way than to entreat they would calmly attend to their own thoughts; and if by this attention the emptiness or repugnancy of those expressions does appear, surely nothing more is requisite for their conviction. It is on this therefore that I insist, to wit, that the absolute existence of unthinking things are words without a meaning, or which include a contradiction. This is what I repeat and inculcate, and earnestly recommend to the attentive thoughts of the reader.

 25. All our ideas, sensations, notions, or the things which we perceive, by whatsoever names they may be distinguished, are visibly inactive: there is nothing of power or agency  included in them. So that one idea or object of thought cannot produce or make any alteration in another. To be satisfied of the truth of this, there is nothing else requisite but a bare observation of our ideas. For, since they and every part of them exist only in the mind, it follows that there is nothing in them but what is perceived; but whoever shall attend to his ideas, whether of sense or reflexion, will not perceive in them any power or activity; there is, therefore, no such thing contained in them. A little attention will discover to us that the very being of an idea implies passiveness and inertness in it; insomuch that it is impossible for an idea to do anything, or, strictly speaking, to be the cause of anything: neither can it be the resemblance or pattern of any active being, as is evident from sect. 8. Whence it plainly follows that extension, figure, and motion cannot be the cause of our sensations. To say, therefore, that these are the effects of powers resulting from the configuration, number, motion, and size of corpuscles, must certainly be false.

26. We perceive a continual succession of ideas; some are anew excited, others are changed or totally disappear. There is therefore some cause of these ideas, whereon they depend, and which produces and changes them. That this cause cannot be any quality or idea or combination of ideas , is clear from the preceding section. It must therefore be a substance ; but it has been shewn that there is no corporeal or material substance: it remains therefore that the cause of ideas is an incorporeal active substance or Spirit.

27. A Spirit is one simple, undivided active being — as it perceives ideas it is called the understanding , and as it produces or otherwise operates about them it is called the will . Hence there can be no idea formed of a soul or spirit; for all ideas whatever, being passive and inert (vid. sect. 25), they cannot represent unto us, by way of image or likeness, that which acts. A little attention will make it plain to any one, that to have an idea which shall be like that active Principle of motion and change of ideas is absolutely impossible. Such is the nature of Spirit, or that which acts, that it cannot be of itself perceived, but only by the effects which it produceth. If any man shall doubt of the truth of what is here delivered, let him but reflect and try if he can frame the idea of any power or active being; and whether he has ideas of two principal powers, marked by the names will and understanding , distinct from each other, as well as from a third idea of Substance or Being in general, with a relative notion of its supporting or being the subject of the aforesaid powers — which is signified by the name soul or spirit . This is what some hold; but, so far as I can see, the words will , [understanding , mind ,] soul , spirit , do not stand for different ideas, or, in truth, for any idea at all, but for something which is very different from ideas, and which, being an agent, cannot be like unto, or represented by, any idea whatsoever. [Though it must be owned at the same time that we have some notion of soul, spirit, and the operations of the mind, such as willing, loving, hating — inasmuch as we know or understand the meaning of these words.]

28. I find I can excite ideas in my mind at pleasure, and vary and shift the scene as oft as I think fit. It is no more than willing  , and straightway this or that idea arises in my fancy; and by the same power it is obliterated and  makes way for another. This making and unmaking of ideas doth very properly denominate the mind active. Thus much is certain and grounded on experience: but when we talk of unthinking agents, or of exciting ideas exclusive of volition, we only amuse ourselves with words.

29. But, whatever power I may have over my own thoughts, I find the ideas actually perceived by Sense have not a like dependence on my will. When in broad daylight I open my eyes, it is not in my power to choose whether I shall see or no, or to determine what particular objects shall present themselves to my view: and so likewise as to the hearing and other senses; the ideas imprinted on them are not creatures of my will. There is therefore some other Will or Spirit that produces them.

30. The ideas of Sense are more strong, lively, and distinct than those of the Imagination; they have likewise a steadiness, order, and coherence, and are not excited at random, as those which are the effects of human wills often are, but in a regular train or series — the admirable connexion whereof sufficiently testifies the wisdom and benevolence of its Author. Now the set rules, or established methods, wherein the Mind we depend on excites in us the ideas of Sense, are called the laws of nature ; and these we learn by experience, which teaches us that such and such ideas are attended with such and such other ideas, in the ordinary course of things.

 31. This gives us a sort of foresight, which enables us to regulate our actions for the benefit of life. And without this we should be eternally at a loss: we could not know  how to act anything that might procure us the least pleasure, or remove the least pain of sense. That food nourishes, sleep refreshes, and fire warms us; that to sow in the seed-time is the way to reap in the harvest; and in general that to obtain such or such ends, such or such means are conducive — all this we know, not by discovering any necessary connexion between our ideas, but only by the observation of the settled laws of nature; without which we should be all in uncertainty and confusion, and a grown man no more know how to manage himself in the affairs of life than an infant just born.

32. And yet this consistent uniform working, which so evidently displays the Goodness and Wisdom of that Governing Spirit whose Will constitutes the laws of nature, is so far from leading our thoughts to Him, that it rather sends them wandering after second causes. For, when we perceive certain ideas of Sense constantly followed by other ideas, and we know this is not of our own doing, we forthwith attribute power and agency to the ideas themselves, and make one the cause of another, than which nothing can be more absurd and unintelligible. Thus, for example, having observed that when we perceive by sight a certain round luminous figure, we at the same time perceive by touch the idea or sensation called heat, we do from thence conclude the sun to be the cause of heat. And in like manner perceiving the motion and collision of bodies to be attended with sound, we are inclined to think the latter the effect of the former.

33. The ideas imprinted on the Senses by the Author of nature are called real things : and those excited in the imagination, being less regular, vivid, and constant, are more properly termed ideas or images of  things, which  they copy and represent. But then our sensations , be they never so vivid and distinct, are nevertheless ideas: that is, they exist in the mind, or are perceived by it, as truly as the ideas of its own framing. The ideas of Sense are allowed to have more reality in them, that is, to be more strong, orderly, and coherent than the creatures of the mind; but this is no argument that they exist without the mind. They are also less dependent on the spirit or thinking substance which perceives them, in that they are excited by the will of another and more powerful Spirit; yet still they are ideas : and certainly no idea, whether faint or strong, can exist otherwise than in a mind perceiving it.

34. Before we proceed any farther it is necessary we spend some time in answering Objections which may probably be made against the Principles we have hitherto laid down. In doing of which, if I seem too prolix to those of quick apprehensions, I desire I may be excused, since all men do not equally apprehend things of this nature; and I am willing to be understood by every one.

First , then, it will be objected that by the foregoing principles all that is real and substantial in nature is banished out of the world, and instead thereof a chimerical scheme of ideas  takes place. All things that exist exist only in the mind; that is, they are purely notional. What therefore becomes of the sun, moon, and stars? What must we think of houses, rivers, mountains, trees, stones; nay, even of our own bodies? Are all these but so many  chimeras and illusions on the fancy? — To all which, and whatever else of the same sort may be objected, I answer, that by the Principles premised we are not deprived of any one thing in nature. Whatever we see, feel, hear, or any wise conceive or understand, remains as secure as ever, and is as real as ever. There is a rerum natura , and the distinction between realities and chimeras retains its full force. This is evident from sect. 29, 30, and 33, where we have shewn what is meant by real things , in opposition to chimeras or ideas of our own framing ; but then they both equally exist in the mind, and in that sense are alike ideas .

35. I do not argue against the existence of any one thing that we can apprehend, either by sense or reflection. That the things I see with my eyes and touch with my hands do exist, really exist, I make not the least question. The only thing whose existence we deny is that which philosophers call Matter or corporeal substance. And in doing of this there is no damage done to the rest of mankind, who, I dare say, will never miss it. The Atheist indeed will want the colour of an empty name to support his impiety; and the Philosophers may possibly find they have lost a great handle for trifling and disputation. [But that is all the harm that I can see done.]

36. If any man thinks this detracts from the existence or reality of things, he is very far from understanding what hath been premised in the plainest terms I could think of. Take here an abstract of what has been said: — There are spiritual substances, minds, or human souls, which will or excite ideas in themselves at pleasure; but these are faint, weak, and unsteady in respect of others they perceive by sense: which, being impressed upon them according to certain rules or laws of nature, speak themselves the effects of a Mind more powerful and wise than human spirits. These latter are said to have more reality    in them than the former; — by which is meant that they are more affecting, orderly, and distinct, and that they are not fictions of the mind perceiving them. And in this sense the sun that I see by day is the real sun, and that which I imagine by night is the idea of the former. In the sense here given of reality , it is evident that every vegetable, star, mineral, and in general each part of the mundane system, is as much a real being by our principles as by any other. Whether others mean anything by the term reality different from what I do, I entreat them to look into their own thoughts and see.

37. It will be urged that thus much at least is true, to wit, that we take away all corporeal substances . To this my answer is, that if the word substance be taken in the vulgar sense, for a combination of sensible qualities, such as extension, solidity, weight, and the like — this we cannot be accused of taking away: but if it be taken in a philosophic sense, for the support of accidents or qualities without the mind — then indeed I acknowledge that we take it away, if one may be said to take away that which never had any existence, not even in the imagination.

38. But after all, say you, it sounds very harsh to say we eat and drink ideas, and are clothed with ideas. I acknowledge it does so — the word idea not being used in common discourse to signify the several combinations of sensible qualities which are called things  ; and it is certain that any expression which varies from the familiar use of language will seem harsh and ridiculous. But this doth not concern the truth of the proposition, which in other words is no more than to say, we are fed and clothed with those things which we perceive immediately by our senses. The hardness or softness, the colour, taste, warmth, figure, and suchlike qualities, which combined together constitute the several sorts of  victuals and apparel, have been shewn to exist only in the mind that perceives them: and this is all that is meant by calling them ideas ; which word, if it was as ordinarily used as thing , would sound no harsher nor more ridiculous than it. I am not for disputing about the propriety, but the truth of the expression. If therefore you agree with me that we eat and drink and are clad with the immediate objects of sense, which cannot exist unperceived or without the mind, I shall readily grant it is more proper or conformable to custom that they should be called things rather than ideas .

39. If it be demanded why I make use of the word idea , and do not rather in compliance with custom call them things ; I answer, I do it for two reasons: — First, because the term thing , in contradistinction to idea , is generally supposed to denote somewhat existing without the mind: Secondly, because thing hath a more comprehensive signification than idea , including spirits, or thinking things, as well as ideas. Since therefore the objects of sense exist only in the mind, and are withal thoughtless and inactive, I chose to mark them by the word idea ; which implies those properties.

40. But, say what we can, some one perhaps may be apt to reply, he will still believe his senses, and never suffer any arguments, how plausible soever, to prevail over the certainty of them. Be it so; assert the evidence of sense as high as you please, we are willing to do the same. That what I see, hear, and feel doth exist, that is to say, is perceived by me, I no more doubt than I do of my own being. But I do not see how the testimony of sense can be alleged as a proof for the existence of anything which is not  perceived by sense. We are not for having any man turn sceptic and disbelieve his senses; on the contrary, we give them all the stress and assurance imaginable; nor are there  any principles more opposite to Scepticism than those we have laid down, as shall be hereafter clearly shewn.

41. Secondly , it will be objected that there is a great difference betwixt real fire for instance, and the idea of fire, betwixt dreaming or imagining oneself burnt, and actually being so. [If you suspect it to be only the idea of fire which you see, do but put your hand into it and you will be convinced with a witness.] This and the like may be urged in opposition to our tenets. — To all which the answer is evident from what hath been already said; and I shall only add in this place, that if real fire be very different from the idea of fire, so also is the real pain that it occasions very different from the idea of the same pain, and yet nobody will pretend that real pain either is, or can possibly be, in an unperceiving thing, or without the mind, any more than its idea.

42. Thirdly , it will be objected that we see things actually without or at a distance from us, and which consequently do not exist in the mind; it being absurd that those things which are seen at the distance of several miles should be as near to us as our own thoughts. — In answer to this, I desire it may be considered that in a dream we do oft perceive things as existing at a great distance off, and yet for all that, those things are acknowledged to have their existence only in the mind.

43. But, for the fuller clearing of this point, it may be worth while to consider how it is that we perceive distance, and things placed at a distance, by sight. For, that we should in truth see  external space, and bodies actually existing in it, some nearer, others farther off, seems to carry  with it some opposition to what hath been said of their existing nowhere without the mind. The consideration of this difficulty it was that gave birth to my Essay towards a New Theory of Vision , which was published not long since. Wherein it is shewn that distance or outness is neither immediately of itself perceived by sight, nor yet apprehended or judged of by lines and angles, or anything that hath a necessary connexion with it; but that it is only suggested to our thoughts by certain visible ideas, and sensations attending vision, which in their own nature have no manner of similitude or relation either with distance or things placed at a distance; but, by a connexion taught us by experience, they come to signify and suggest them to us, after the same manner that words of any language suggest the ideas they are made to stand for. Insomuch that a man born blind, and afterwards made to see, would not, at first sight, think the things he saw to be without his mind, or at any distance from him. See sect. 41 of the forementioned treatise.

44. The ideas of sight and touch make two species entirely distinct and heterogeneous. The former are marks and prognostics of the latter. That the proper objects of sight neither exist without the mind, nor are the images of external things, was shewn even in that treatise. Though throughout the same the contrary be supposed true of tangible objects ; — not that to suppose that vulgar error was necessary for establishing the notion therein laid down, but because it was beside my purpose to examine and refute it, in a discourse concerning Vision  . So that in strict truth the ideas of sight, when we apprehend by them distance, and things placed at a distance, do not suggest or mark out to us things actually existing at a distance, but only admonish us what ideas of touch will be imprinted in our minds at such and such distances of time, and in consequence of such or such actions. It is, I say, evident, from  what has been said in the foregoing parts of this Treatise, and in sect. 147 and elsewhere of the Essay concerning Vision, that visible ideas are the Language whereby the Governing Spirit on whom we depend informs us what tangible ideas he is about to imprint upon us, in case we excite this or that motion in our own bodies. But for a fuller information in this point I refer to the Essay itself.

45. Fourthly , it will be objected that from the foregoing principles it follows things are every moment annihilated and created anew. The objects of sense exist only when they are perceived: the trees therefore are in the garden, or the chairs in the parlour, no longer than while there is somebody by to perceive them. Upon shutting my eyes all the furniture in the room is reduced to nothing, and barely upon opening them it is again created. — In answer to all which, I refer the reader to what has been said in sect. 3, 4, &c.; and desire he will consider whether he means anything by the actual existence of an idea distinct from its being perceived. For my part, after the nicest inquiry I could make, I am not able to discover that anything else is meant by those words; and I once more entreat the reader to sound his own thoughts, and not suffer himself to be imposed on by words. If he can conceive it possible either for his ideas or their archetypes to exist without being perceived, then I give up the cause. But if he cannot, he will acknowledge it is unreasonable for him to stand up in defence of he knows not what, and pretend to charge on me as an absurdity, the not assenting to those propositions which at bottom have no meaning in them.

46. It will not be amiss to observe how far the received principles of philosophy are themselves chargeable with those pretended absurdities. It is thought strangely absurd that upon closing my eyelids all the visible objects around me should be reduced to nothing; and yet is not this what philosophers commonly acknowledge, when they agree on all hands that light and colours, which alone are the proper and immediate objects of sight, are mere sensations that exist no longer than they are perceived? Again, it may to some perhaps seem very incredible that things should be every moment creating; yet this very notion is commonly taught in the schools. For the Schoolmen, though they acknowledge the existence of Matter, and that the whole mundane fabric is framed out of it, are nevertheless of opinion that it cannot subsist without the divine conservation; which by them is expounded to be a continual creation.

 47. Farther, a little thought will discover to us that, though we allow the existence of Matter or corporeal substance, yet it will unavoidably follow, from the principles which are now generally admitted, that the particular bodies, of what kind soever, do none of them exist whilst they are not perceived. For, it is evident, from sect. 11 and the following sections, that the Matter philosophers contend for is an incomprehensible Somewhat, which hath  none of those particular qualities whereby the bodies falling under our senses are distinguished one from another. But, to make this more plain, it must be remarked that the infinite divisibility of Matter is now universally allowed, at least by the most approved and considerable philosophers, who on the received principles demonstrate it beyond all exception. Hence, it follows there is an infinite number of parts in each particle of Matter which are not perceived by sense. The reason therefore that any particular body seems to be of a finite magnitude, or exhibits only a finite number of parts to sense, is, not because it contains no more, since in itself it contains an infinite number of parts, but because the sense is not acute enough to discern them. In proportion therefore as the sense is rendered more acute, it perceives a greater number of parts in the object, that is, the object appears greater; and its figure varies, those parts in its extremities which were before unperceivable appearing now to bound it in very different lines and angles from those perceived by an obtuser sense. And at length, after various changes of size and shape, when the sense becomes infinitely acute, the body shall seem infinite. During all which there is no alteration in the body, but only in the sense. Each body therefore, considered in itself, is infinitely extended, and consequently void of all shape and figure. From which it follows that, though we should grant the existence of Matter to be never so certain, yet it is withal as certain, the materialists themselves are by their own principles forced to acknowledge, that neither the particular bodies perceived by sense, nor anything like them, exists without the mind. Matter, I say, and each particle thereof, is according to them infinite and shapeless; and it is the mind that frames all that variety of bodies which compose the visible world, any one whereof does not exist longer than it is perceived.

 48. But, after all, if we consider it, the objection proposed in sect. 45 will not be found reasonably charged on the Principles we have premised, so as in truth to make any objection at all against our notions. For, though we hold indeed the objects of sense to be nothing else but  ideas which cannot exist unperceived, yet we may not hence conclude they have no existence except only while they are perceived by us ; since there may be some other spirit that perceives them though we do not. Wherever bodies are said to have no existence without the mind, I would not be understood to mean this or that particular mind, but all minds whatsoever. It does not therefore follow from the foregoing Principles that bodies are annihilated and created every moment, or exist not at all during the intervals between our perception of them.

49. Fifthly , it may perhaps be objected that if extension and figure exist only in the mind, it follows that the mind is extended and figured; since extension is a mode or attribute which (to speak with the Schools) is predicated of the subject in which it exists. — I answer, those qualities are in the mind only as they are perceived by it; — that is, not by way of mode or attribute , but only by way of idea . And it no more follows the soul or mind is extended, because extension exists in it alone, than it does that it is red or blue, because those colours are on all hands acknowledged to exist in it, and nowhere else. As to what philosophers say of subject and mode, that seems very groundless and unintelligible. For instance, in this proposition “a die is hard, extended, and square,” they will have it that the word die  denotes a subject or substance, distinct from the hardness, extension, and figure which are predicated of it, and in which they exist. This I cannot comprehend: to me a die seems to be nothing distinct from those things which are termed its modes or accidents. And, to say a die is hard, extended, and  square is not to attribute those qualities to a subject distinct from and supporting them, but only an explication of the meaning of the word die .

50. Sixthly , you will say there have been a great many things explained by matter and motion; take away these and you destroy the whole corpuscular philosophy, and undermine those mechanical principles which have been applied with so much success to account for the phenomena. In short, whatever advances have been made, either by ancient or modern philosophers, in the study of nature do all proceed on the supposition that corporeal substance or Matter doth really exist. — To this I answer that there is not any one phenomenon explained on that supposition which may not as well be explained without it, as might easily be made appear by an induction of particulars. To explain the phenomena, is all one as to shew why, upon such and such occasions, we are affected with such and such ideas. But how Matter should operate on a Spirit, or produce any idea in it, is what no philosopher will pretend to explain; it is therefore evident there can be no use of Matter in natural philosophy. Besides, they who attempt to account for things do it, not by corporeal substance, but by figure, motion, and other qualities; which are in truth no more than mere ideas, and therefore cannot be the cause of anything, as hath been already shewn. See sect. 25.

51. Seventhly  , it will upon this be demanded whether it does not seem absurd to take away natural causes, and ascribe everything to the immediate operation of spirits? We must no longer say upon these principles that fire heats, or water cools, but that a spirit heats, and so forth. Would not a man be deservedly laughed at, who should talk after this manner? — I answer, he would so: in such things we ought to think with the learned and speak with the vulgar. They who to demonstration are convinced of the  truth of the Copernican system do nevertheless say “the sun rises,” “the sun sets,” or “comes to the meridian”; and if they affected a contrary style in common talk it would without doubt appear very ridiculous. A little reflection on what is here said will make it manifest that the common use of language would receive no manner of alteration or disturbance from the admission of our tenets.

52. In the ordinary affairs of life, any phrases may be retained, so long as they excite in us proper sentiments, or dispositions to act in such a manner as is necessary for our well-being, how false soever they may be if taken in a strict and speculative sense. Nay, this is unavoidable, since, propriety being regulated by custom, language is suited to the received opinions, which are not always the truest. Hence it is impossible — even in the most rigid, philosophic reasonings — so far to alter the bent and genius of the tongue we speak as never to give a handle for cavillers to pretend difficulties and inconsistencies. But, a fair and ingenuous reader will collect the sense from the scope and tenor and connexion of a discourse, making allowances for those inaccurate modes of speech which use has made inevitable.

 53. As to the opinion that there are no corporeal causes, this has been heretofore maintained by some of the Schoolmen, as it is of late by others among the modern philosophers; who though they allow Matter to exist, yet will have God alone to be the immediate efficient cause of all things. These men saw that amongst all the objects of sense there was none which had any power or activity included in it; and that by consequence this was likewise true of whatever bodies  they supposed to exist without the mind, like unto the immediate objects of sense. But then, that they should suppose an innumerable multitude of created beings, which they acknowledge are not capable of producing any one effect in nature, and which therefore are made to no manner of purpose, since God might have done everything as well without them — this I say, though we should allow it possible, must yet be a very unaccountable and extravagant supposition.

54. In the eighth place, the universal concurrent assent of mankind may be thought by some an invincible argument in behalf of Matter, or the existence of external things. Must we suppose the whole world to be mistaken? And if so, what cause can be assigned of so widespread and predominant an error? — I answer, first, that, upon a narrow inquiry, it will not perhaps be found so many as is imagined do really believe the existence of Matter or things without the mind. Strictly speaking, to believe that which involves a contradiction, or has no meaning in it, is impossible; and whether the foregoing expressions are not of that sort, I refer it to the impartial examination of the reader. In one sense, indeed, men may be said to believe that Matter exists; that is, they act as if the immediate cause of their sensations, which affects them every moment, and is so nearly present to them, were some senseless unthinking being. But, that they should clearly apprehend any meaning marked by those words, and form thereof a settled speculative opinion, is what I am not able to conceive. This is not the only instance wherein men impose upon themselves, by imagining they believe those propositions which they have often heard, though at bottom they have no meaning in them.

55. But secondly, though we should grant a notion to be never so universally and stedfastly adhered to, yet this is but a weak argument of its truth to whoever considers what a vast number of prejudices and false opinions are everywhere embraced with the utmost tenaciousness, by the unreflecting (which are the far greater) part of mankind. There was a time when the antipodes and motion of the earth were looked upon as monstrous absurdities even by men of learning: and if it be considered what a small proportion they bear to the rest of mankind, we shall find that at this day those notions have gained but a very inconsiderable footing in the world.

56. But it is demanded that we assign a cause of this prejudice, and account for its obtaining in the world. To this I answer, that men knowing they perceived several ideas, whereof they themselves were, not the authors, as not being excited from within, nor depending on the operation of their wills, this made them maintain those ideas or objects of perception, had an existence independent of and without the mind, without ever dreaming that a contradiction was involved in those words. But, philosophers having plainly seen that the immediate objects of perception do not exist without the mind, they in some degree corrected the mistake of the vulgar; but at the same time run into another, which seems no less absurd, to wit, that there are certain objects really existing without the mind, or having a subsistence distinct from being perceived, of which our ideas are only images or resemblances, imprinted by those objects on the mind. And this notion of the philosophers owes its origin to the same cause with the former, namely, their being conscious that they  were not the authors of their own sensations; which  they evidently knew were imprinted from without, and which therefore must have some cause, distinct from the minds on which they are imprinted.

57. But why they should suppose the ideas of sense to be excited in us by things in their likeness, and not rather have recourse to Spirit , which alone can act, may be accounted for. First, because they were not aware of the repugnancy there is, as well in supposing things like unto our ideas existing without, as in attributing to them power or activity. Secondly, because the Supreme Spirit which excites those ideas in our minds, is not marked out and limited to our view by any particular finite collection of sensible ideas, as human agents are by their size, complexion, limbs, and motions. And thirdly, because His operations are regular and uniform. Whenever the course of nature is interrupted by a miracle, men are ready to own the presence of a Superior Agent. But, when we see things go on in the ordinary course, they do not excite in us any reflexion; their order and concatenation, though it be an argument of the greatest wisdom, power, and goodness in their Creator, is yet so constant and familiar to us, that we do not think them the immediate effects of a Free Spirit ; especially since inconsistency and mutability in acting, though it be an imperfection, is looked on as a mark of freedom .

58. Tenthly  , it will be objected that the notions we advance are inconsistent with several sound truths in philosophy and mathematics. For example, the motion of the earth is now universally admitted by astronomers as a truth grounded on the clearest and most convincing reasons. But, on the foregoing Principles, there can be no such thing. For, motion being only an idea, it follows that if it be not perceived it exists not: but the motion of the earth is not perceived by sense. — I answer, That tenet, if rightly understood, will be found to agree with the Principles we have premised: for, the question  whether the earth moves or no amounts in reality to no more than this, to wit, whether we have reason to conclude, from what has been observed by astronomers, that if we were placed in such and such circumstances, and such or such a position and distance both from the earth and sun, we should perceive the former to move among the choir of the planets, and appearing in all respects like one of them: and this, by the established rules of nature, which we have no reason to mistrust, is reasonably collected from the phenomena.

59. We may, from the experience we have had of the train and succession of ideas in our minds, often make, I will not say uncertain conjectures, but sure and well-grounded predictions concerning the ideas we shall be affected with pursuant to a great train of actions; and be enabled to pass a right judgment of what would have appeared to us, in case we were placed in circumstances very different from those we are in at present. Herein consists the knowledge of nature, which may preserve its use and certainty very consistently with what hath been said. It will be easy to apply this to whatever objections of the like sort may be drawn from the magnitude of the stars, or any other discoveries in astronomy or nature.

60. In the eleventh place, it will be demanded to what purpose serves that curious organization of plants, and the animal mechanism in the parts of animals. Might not vegetables grow, and shoot forth leaves and blossoms, and animals perform all their motions, as well without as with all that variety of internal parts so elegantly contrived and put together; — which, being ideas, have nothing powerful or operative in them, nor have any necessary connexion with the effects ascribed to them? If it be a Spirit that immediately produces every effect by a fiat  , or act of his will, we must think all that is fine and artificial in the works, whether of man or nature,  to be made in vain. By this doctrine, though an artist hath made the spring and wheels, and every movement of a watch, and adjusted them in such a manner as he knew would produce the motions he designed; yet he must think all this done to no purpose, and that it is an Intelligence which directs the index, and points to the hour of the day. If so, why may not the Intelligence do it, without his being at the pains of making the movements and putting them together? Why does not an empty case serve as well as another? And how comes it to pass, that whenever there is any fault in the going of a watch, there is some corresponding disorder to be found in the movements, which being mended by a skilful hand all is right again? The like may be said of all the Clockwork of Nature, great part whereof is so wonderfully fine and subtle as scarce to be discerned by the best microscope. In short, it will be asked, how, upon our Principles, any tolerable account can be given, or any final cause assigned of an innumerable multitude of bodies and machines, framed with the most exquisite art, which in the common philosophy have very apposite uses assigned them, and serve to explain abundance of phenomena?

61. To all which I answer, first, that though there were some difficulties relating to the administration of Providence, and the uses by it assigned to the several parts of nature, which I could not solve by the foregoing Principles, yet this objection could be of small weight against the truth and certainty of those things which may be proved a priori , with the utmost evidence and rigour of demonstration. Secondly, but neither are the received principles free from the like difficulties; for, it may still be demanded to what end God should take those roundabout methods of effecting things by instruments and machines, which no one can deny might have been effected by the mere command of His will, without all that apparatus  . Nay, if we narrowly consider it, we shall find the objection may be retorted with greater force on those who hold the existence of those machines without the mind; for it has been made evident that solidity, bulk,  figure, motion, and the like have no activity or efficacy in them, so as to be capable of producing any one effect in nature. See sect. 25. Whoever therefore supposes them to exist (allowing the supposition possible) when they are not perceived does it manifestly to no purpose; since the only use that is assigned to them, as they exist unperceived, is that they produce those perceivable effects which in truth cannot be ascribed to anything but Spirit.

62. But, to come nigher the difficulty, it must be observed that though the fabrication of all those parts and organs be not absolutely necessary to the producing any effect, yet it is necessary to the producing of things in a constant regular way, according to the laws of nature. There are certain general laws that run through the whole chain of natural effects: these are learned by the observation and study of nature, and are by men applied, as well to the framing artificial things for the use and ornament of life as to the explaining the various phenomena. Which explication consists only in shewing the conformity any particular phenomenon hath to the general laws of nature, or, which is the same thing, in discovering the uniformity there is in the production of natural effects; as will be evident to whoever shall attend to the several instances wherein philosophers pretend to account for appearances. That there is a great and conspicuous use in these regular constant methods of working observed by the Supreme Agent hath been shewn in sect. 31. And it is no less visible that a particular size, figure, motion, and disposition of parts are necessary, though not absolutely to the producing any effect, yet to the producing it according to the standing mechanical laws of nature. Thus, for instance, it cannot be denied that God, or the Intelligence that sustains and rules the ordinary course of things, might if He were minded to produce a miracle, cause all the motions on the dial-plate of a watch, though nobody had ever made the movements and put them in it. But yet, if He will act agreeably to the rules of mechanism, by Him for wise ends established and maintained in the creation, it is necessary that those actions of the watchmaker, whereby he  makes the movements and rightly adjusts them, precede the  production of the aforesaid motions; as also that any disorder in them be attended with the perception of some corresponding disorder in the movements, which being once corrected all is right again.

63. It may indeed on some occasions be necessary that the Author of nature display His overruling power in producing some appearance out of the ordinary series of things. Such exceptions from the general rules of nature are proper to surprise and awe men into an acknowledgment of the Divine Being; but then they are to be used but seldom, otherwise there is a plain reason why they should fail of that effect. Besides, God seems to choose the convincing our reason of His attributes by the works of nature, which discover so much harmony and contrivance in their make, and are such plain indications of wisdom and beneficence in their Author, rather than to astonish us into a belief of His Being by anomalous and surprising events.

64. To set this matter in a yet clearer light, I shall observe that what has been objected in sect. 60 amounts in reality to no more than this: — ideas are not anyhow and at random produced, there being a certain order and connexion between them, like to that of cause and effect: there are also several combinations of them, made in a very regular and artificial manner, which seem like so many instruments in the hand of nature that, being hid as it were behind the scenes, have a secret operation in producing those appearances which are seen on the theatre of the world, being themselves discernible only to the curious eye of the philosopher. But, since one idea cannot be the cause of another, to what purpose is that connexion? And since those instruments, being barely inefficacious  perceptions in the mind, are not subservient  to the production of natural effects, it is demanded why they are made; or, in other words, what reason can be assigned why God should make us, upon a close inspection into His works, behold so great variety of ideas, so artfully laid together, and so much according to rule; it not being [ credible] that He would be at the expense (if one may so speak) of all that art and regularity to no purpose?

65. To all which my answer is, first, that the connexion of ideas does not imply the relation of cause and effect , but only of a mark or sign with the thing signified . The fire which I see is not the cause of the pain I suffer upon my approaching it, but the mark that forewarns me of it. In like manner the noise that I hear is not the effect of this or that motion or collision of the ambient bodies, but the sign thereof. Secondly, the reason why ideas are formed into machines, that is, artificial and regular combinations, is the same with that for combining letters into words. That a few original ideas may be made to signify a great number of effects and actions, it is necessary they be variously combined together. And to the end their use be permanent and universal, these combinations must be made by rule , and with wise contrivance  . By this means abundance of information is conveyed unto us, concerning what we are to expect from such and such actions, and what methods are proper to be taken for the exciting such and such ideas. Which in effect is all that I conceive to be distinctly meant when it is said that, by discerning the figure, texture, and mechanism of the inward parts of bodies, whether natural or artificial, we may attain to know the several uses  and properties depending thereon, or the nature of the thing.

66. Hence, it is evident that those things which, under the notion of a cause co-operating or concurring to the production of effects, are altogether inexplicable and run us into great absurdities, may be very naturally explained, and have a proper and obvious use assigned to them, when they are considered only as marks or signs for our information. And it is the searching after and endeavouring to understand this Language (if I may so call it) of the Author of Nature, that ought to be the employment of the natural philosopher; and not the pretending to explain things by corporeal causes, which doctrine seems to have too much estranged the minds of men from that Active Principle, that supreme and wise Spirit “in whom we live, move, and have our being.”

67. In the twelfth place, it may perhaps be objected that — though it be clear from what has been said that there can be no such thing as an inert, senseless, extended, solid, figured, moveable Substance, existing without the mind, such as philosophers describe Matter; yet, if any man shall leave out of his idea of Matter the positive ideas of extension, figure, solidity and motion, and say that he means only by that word an inert, senseless substance, that exists without the mind, or unperceived, which is the occasion  of our ideas, or at the presence whereof God is pleased to excite ideas in us — it doth not appear but that Matter taken in this sense may possibly exist. — In answer to which I say, first, that it seems no less absurd to suppose a substance without accidents, than it is to suppose accidents without a substance. But secondly, though we should grant this unknown substance may possibly exist, yet where can it be supposed to be? That it exists not in the mind is agreed; and that it exists not in place is no less certain, since all place or extension  exists only in the mind, as hath been already proved. It remains therefore that it exists nowhere at all.

68. Let us examine a little the description that is here given us of Matter. It neither acts, nor perceives, nor is perceived: for this is all that is meant by saying it is an inert, senseless, unknown substance; which is a definition entirely made up of negatives, excepting only the relative notion of its standing under or supporting. But then it must be observed that it supports nothing at all, and how nearly this comes to the description of a nonentity I desire may be considered. But, say you, it is the unknown occasion , at the presence of which ideas are excited in us by the will of God. Now, I would fain know how anything can be present to us, which is neither perceivable by sense nor reflexion, nor capable of producing any idea in our minds, nor is at all extended, nor hath any form, nor exists in any place. The words “to be present,” when thus applied, must needs be taken in some abstract and strange meaning, and which I am not able to comprehend.

69. Again, let us examine what is meant by occasion . So far as I can gather from the common use of language, that word signifies either the agent which produces any effect, or else something that is observed to accompany or go before it, in the ordinary course of things. But, when it is applied to Matter, as above described, it can be taken in neither of those senses; for Matter is said to be passive and inert, and so cannot be an agent or efficient cause. It is also unperceivable, as being devoid of all sensible qualities, and so cannot be the occasion of our perceptions in the latter sense; as when the burning my finger is said to be the occasion of the pain that attends it. What therefore can be meant by calling matter an occasion ? This term is either used in no sense at all, or else in some very distant from its received signification.

 70. You will perhaps say that Matter, though it be not perceived by us, is nevertheless perceived by God, to whom it is the occasion of exciting ideas in our minds.  For, say you, since we observe our sensations to be imprinted in an orderly and constant manner, it is but reasonable to suppose there are certain constant and regular occasions of their being produced. That is to say, that there are certain permanent and distinct parcels of Matter, corresponding to our ideas, which, though they do not excite them in our minds, or anywise immediately affect us, as being altogether passive, and unperceivable to us, they are nevertheless to God, by whom they are perceived, as it were so many occasions to remind Him when and what ideas to imprint on our minds: that so things may go on in a constant uniform manner.

71. In answer to this, I observe that, as the notion of Matter is here stated, the question is no longer concerning the existence of a thing distinct from Spirit and idea , from perceiving and being perceived; but whether there are not certain Ideas (of I know not what sort) in the mind of God, which are so many marks or notes that direct Him how to produce sensations in our minds in a constant and regular method: much after the same manner as a musician is directed by the notes of music to produce that harmonious train and composition of sound which is called a tune; though they who hear the music do not perceive the notes, and may be entirely ignorant of them. But this notion of Matter (which after all is the only intelligible one that I can pick from what is said of unknown occasions) seems too extravagant to deserve a confutation. Besides, it is in effect no objection against what we have advanced, viz. that there is no senseless unperceived substance.

72. If we follow the light of reason, we shall, from the constant uniform method of our sensations, collect the goodness and wisdom of the Spirit who excites them in our minds; but this is all that I can see reasonably concluded from thence. To me, I say, it is evident that the being of a Spirit — infinitely wise, good, and powerful — is abundantly sufficient to explain all the appearances of nature. But, as for inert, senseless Matter  , nothing that  I perceive has any the least connexion with it, or leads to the thoughts of it. And I would fain see any one explain any the meanest phenomenon in nature by it, or shew any manner of reason, though in the lowest rank of probability, that he can have for its existence; or even make any tolerable sense or meaning of that supposition. For, as to its being an occasion, we have, I think, evidently shewn that with regard to us it is no occasion. It remains therefore that it must be, if at all, the occasion to God of exciting ideas in us; and what this amounts to we have just now seen.

73. It is worth while to reflect a little on the motives which induced men to suppose the existence of material substance ; that so having observed the gradual ceasing and expiration of those motives or reasons, we may proportionably withdraw the assent that was grounded on them. First, therefore, it was thought that colour, figure, motion, and the rest of the sensible qualities or accidents, did really exist without the mind; and for this reason it seemed needful to suppose some unthinking substratum or substance wherein they did exist, since they could not be conceived to exist by themselves. Afterwards, in process of time, men being convinced that colours, sounds, and the rest of the sensible, secondary qualities had no existence without the mind, they stripped this substratum or material substance of those  qualities, leaving only the primary ones, figure, motion, and suchlike; which they still conceived to exist without the mind, and consequently to stand in need of a material support. But, it having been shewn that none even of these can possibly exist otherwise than in a Spirit or Mind which perceives them, it follows that we have no longer any reason to suppose the being of Matter, nay, that it is  utterly impossible there should be any such thing; — so long as that word is taken to denote an unthinking substratum of qualities or accidents, wherein they exist without the mind.

74. But — though it be allowed by the materialists themselves that Matter was thought of only for the sake of supporting accidents, and, the reason entirely ceasing, one might expect the mind should naturally, and without any reluctance at all, quit the belief of what was solely grounded thereon: yet the prejudice is riveted so deeply in our thoughts that we can scarce tell how to part with it, and are therefore inclined, since the thing itself is indefensible, at least to retain the name ; which we apply to I know not what abstracted and indefinite notions of being , or occasion , though without any shew of reason, at least so far as I can see. For, what is there on our part, or what do we perceive, amongst all the ideas, sensations, notions which are imprinted on our minds, either by sense or reflexion, from whence may be inferred the existence of an inert, thoughtless, unperceived occasion? and, on the other hand, on the part of an All-sufficient Spirit, what can there be that should make us believe or even suspect He is directed by an inert occasion to excite ideas in our minds?

75. It is a very extraordinary instance of the force of prejudice, and much to be lamented, that the mind of man retains so great a fondness, against all the evidence of reason, for a stupid thoughtless Somewhat , by the interposition whereof it would as it were screen itself from the Providence of God, and remove it farther off from the affairs of the world. But, though we do the utmost we can to secure the belief of Matter; though, when reason forsakes us, we endeavour to support our opinion on the bare possibility of the thing, and though we indulge ourselves in the full scope of an imagination not regulated by reason to make out that poor possibility; yet the upshot of all is — that there are certain unknown Ideas in the mind of God; for this, if anything, is all that I conceive to be meant by occasion  with regard to God. And this at the  bottom is no longer contending for the thing, but for the name.

76. Whether therefore there are such Ideas in the mind of God, and whether they may be called by the name Matter , I shall not dispute. But, if you stick to the notion of an unthinking substance or support of extension, motion, and other sensible qualities, then to me it is most evidently impossible there should be any such thing; since it is a plain repugnancy that those qualities should exist in, or be supported by, an unperceiving substance.

77. But, say you, though it be granted that there is no thoughtless support of extension, and the other qualities or accidents which we perceive, yet there may perhaps be some inert, unperceiving substance or substratum of some other qualities, as incomprehensible to us as colours are to a man born blind, because we have not a sense adapted to them. But, if we had a new sense, we should possibly no more doubt of their existence than a blind man made to see does of the existence of light and colours. — I answer, first, if what you mean by the word Matter be only the unknown support of unknown qualities, it is no matter whether there is such a thing or no, since it no way concerns us. And I do not see the advantage there is in disputing about what we know not what , and we know not why .

78. But, secondly, if we had a new sense, it could only furnish us with new ideas or sensations; and then we should have the same reason against their  existing in an unperceiving substance that has been already offered with  relation to figure, motion, colour, and the like. Qualities , as hath been shewn, are nothing else but sensations or ideas , which exist only in a mind perceiving them; and this is true not only of the ideas we are acquainted with at present, but likewise of all possible ideas whatsoever.

79. But you will insist, What if I have no reason to believe the existence of Matter? what if I cannot assign any use to it, or explain anything by it, or even conceive what is meant by that word? yet still it is no contradiction to say that Matter exists , and that this Matter is in general a substance , or occasion of ideas ; though indeed to go about to unfold the meaning, or adhere to any particular explication of those words may be attended with great difficulties. — I answer, when words are used without a meaning, you may put them together as you please, without danger of running into a contradiction. You may say, for example, that twice two is equal to seven ; so long as you declare you do not take the words of that proposition in their usual acceptation, but for marks of you know not what. And, by the same reason, you may say there is an inert thoughtless substance without accidents, which is the occasion of our ideas. And we shall understand just as much by one proposition as the other.

80. In the last place, you will say, What if we give up the cause of material Substance, and stand to it that Matter is an unknown Somewhat — neither substance nor accident, spirit nor idea — inert, thoughtless, indivisible, immoveable, unextended, existing in no place? For, say you, whatever may be urged against substance or occasion , or any other positive or relative notion of Matter, hath no place at all, so long as this negative definition of Matter is adhered to. — I answer, You may, if so it shall seem good, use the word matter in the same sense as other men use nothing  , and so make those terms convertible in your style. For, after all, this is what appears to me to be the result of that definition; the parts whereof, when I  consider with attention, either collectively or separate from each other, I do not find that there is any kind of effect or impression made on my mind, different from what is excited by the term nothing .

81. You will reply, perhaps, that in the foresaid definition is included what doth sufficiently distinguish it from nothing — the positive abstract idea of quiddity , entity , or existence . I own, indeed, that those who pretend to the faculty of framing abstract general ideas do talk as if they had such an idea, which is, say they, the most abstract and general notion of all: that is to me the most incomprehensible of all others. That there are a great variety of spirits of different orders and capacities, whose faculties, both in number and extent, are far exceeding those the Author of my being has bestowed on me, I see no reason to deny. And for me to pretend to determine, by my own few, stinted, narrow inlets of perception, what ideas the inexhaustible power of the Supreme Spirit may imprint upon them, were certainly the utmost folly and presumption. Since there may be, for aught that I know, innumerable sorts of ideas or sensations, as different from one another, and from all that I have perceived, as colours are from sounds. But, how ready soever I may be to acknowledge the scantiness of my comprehension, with regard to the endless variety of spirits and ideas that may possibly exist, yet for any one to pretend to a notion of Entity or Existence, abstracted from spirit and idea , from perceived and being perceived, is, I suspect, a downright repugnancy and trifling with words.

It remains that we consider the objections which may possibly be made on the part of Religion.

 82. Some there are who think that, though the arguments for the real existence of bodies which are drawn from Reason be allowed not to amount to demonstration, yet the Holy Scriptures are so clear in the point, as will  sufficiently convince every good Christian, that bodies do really exist, and are something more than mere ideas; there being in Holy Writ innumerable facts related which evidently suppose the reality of timber and stone, mountains and rivers, and cities, and human bodies — To which I answer that no sort of writings whatever, sacred or profane, which use those and the like words in the vulgar acceptation, or so as to have a meaning in them, are in danger of having their truth called in question by our doctrine. That all those things do really exist; that there are bodies, even corporeal substances, when taken in the vulgar sense, has been shewn to be agreeable to our principles: and the difference betwixt things and ideas , realities and chimeras , has been distinctly explained. See sect. 29, 30, 33, 36, &c. And I do not think that either what philosophers call Matter , or the existence of objects without the mind, is anywhere mentioned in Scripture.

83. Again, whether there be or be not external things, it is agreed on all hands that the proper use of words is the marking our conceptions, or things only as they are known and perceived by us: whence it plainly follows, that in the tenets we have laid down there is nothing inconsistent with the right use and significancy of language, and that discourse, of what kind soever, so far as it is intelligible, remains undisturbed. But all this seems so very manifest, from what has been largely set forth in the premises, that it is needless to insist any farther on it.

84. But, it will be urged that miracles do, at least, lose much of their stress and import by our principles. What must we think of Moses’ rod? was it not really turned into a serpent? or was there only a change of ideas  in the minds of the spectators? And, can it be supposed that our Saviour did no more at the marriage-feast in Cana than impose on the sight, and smell, and taste of  the guests, so as to create in them the appearance or idea only of wine? The same may be said of all other miracles: which, in consequence of the foregoing principles, must be looked upon only as so many cheats, or illusions of fancy. — To this I reply, that the rod was changed into a real serpent, and the water into real wine. That this does not in the least contradict what I have elsewhere said will be evident from sect. 34 and 35. But this business of real and imaginary has been already so plainly and fully explained, and so often referred to, and the difficulties about it are so easily answered from what has gone before, that it were an affront to the reader’s understanding to resume the explication of it in this place. I shall only observe that if at table all who were present should see, and smell, and taste, and drink wine, and find the effects of it, with me there could be no doubt of its reality. So that at bottom the scruple concerning real miracles has no place at all on ours, but only on the received principles, and consequently makes rather for than against what has been said.

 85. Having done with the Objections, which I endeavoured to propose in the clearest light, and gave them all the force and weight I could, we proceed in the next place to take a view of our tenets in their Consequences. Some of these appear at first sight — as that several difficult and obscure questions, on which abundance of speculation has been thrown away, are entirely banished from philosophy. Whether corporeal substance can think? Whether Matter be infinitely divisible? And how it operates on spirit? — these and the like inquiries have given infinite amusement to philosophers in all ages.  But, depending on the existence of Matter, they have no longer any place on our Principles. Many other advantages there are, as well with regard to religion as the sciences, which it is easy for any one to deduce from what has been premised. But this will appear more plainly in the sequel.

86. From the Principles we have laid down it follows human knowledge may naturally be reduced to two heads — that of ideas and that of Spirits . Of each of these I shall treat in order.

And First as to ideas , or unthinking things . Our knowledge of these has been very much obscured and confounded, and we have been led into very dangerous errors, by supposing a two-fold existence of sense — the one intelligible or in the mind, the other real and without the mind. Whereby unthinking things are thought to have a natural subsistence of their own, distinct from being perceived by spirits. This, which, if I mistake not, hath been shewn to be a most groundless and absurd notion, is the very root of Scepticism; for, so long as men thought that real things subsisted without the mind, and that their knowledge was only so far forth real as it was conformable to real things , it follows they could not be certain that they had any real knowledge at all. For how can it be known that the things which are perceived are conformable to those which are not perceived, or exist without the mind?

87. Colour, figure, motion, extension, and the like, considered only as so many sensations in the mind, are perfectly known; there being nothing in them which is not perceived. But, if they are looked on as notes or images, referred to things or archetypes existing without the mind  , then are we involved all in scepticism. We see only the appearances, and not the real qualities of things.  What may be the extension, figure, or motion of anything really and absolutely, or in itself, it is impossible for us to know, but only the proportion or relation they bear to our senses. Things remaining the same, our ideas vary; and which of them, or even whether any of them at all, represent the true quality really existing in the thing, it is out of our reach to determine. So that, for aught we know, all we see, hear, and feel, may be only phantom and vain chimera, and not at all agree with the real things existing in rerum natura . All this scepticism follows from our supposing a difference between things and ideas , and that the former have a subsistence without the mind, or unperceived. It were easy to dilate on this subject, and shew how the arguments urged by sceptics in all ages depend on the supposition of external objects. [But this is too obvious to need being insisted on.]

88. So long as we attribute a real existence to unthinking things, distinct from their being perceived, it is not only impossible for us to know with evidence the nature of any real unthinking being, but even that it exists. Hence it is that we see philosophers distrust their senses, and doubt of the existence of heaven and earth, of everything they see or feel, even of their own bodies. And after all their labouring and struggle of thought, they are forced to own we cannot attain to any self-evident or demonstrative knowledge of the existence of sensible things. But, all this doubtfulness, which so bewilders and confounds the mind and makes philosophy ridiculous in the eyes of the world, vanishes if we annex a meaning to our words, and do not amuse ourselves with the terms absolute , external , exist  , and such like, signifying we know not what. I can as well doubt of my own being as of the being of those things which I actually perceive by sense: it being a manifest contradiction that any sensible object should be immediately perceived by sight or touch, and at the same time have no existence in nature; since the very  existence of an unthinking being consists in being perceived .

89. Nothing seems of more importance towards erecting a firm system of sound and real knowledge, which may be proof against the assaults of Scepticism, than to lay the beginning in a distinct explication of what is meant by thing , reality , existence ; for in vain shall we dispute concerning the real existence of things, or pretend to any knowledge thereof, so long as we have not fixed the meaning of those words. Thing or being is the most general name of all: it comprehends under it two kinds, entirely distinct and heterogeneous, and which have nothing common but the name, viz. spirits and ideas . The former are active, indivisible, [incorruptible] substances: the latter are inert, fleeting, [perishable passions,] or dependent beings; which subsist not by themselves, but are supported by, or exist in, minds or spiritual substances.

[We comprehend our own existence by inward feeling or reflection, and that of other spirits by reason. We may be said to have some knowledge or notion of our own minds, of spirits and active beings; whereof in a strict sense we have not ideas . In like manner, we know and have a notion of relations between things or ideas; which relations are distinct from the ideas or things related, inasmuch as the latter may be perceived by us without our perceiving the former. To me it seems that ideas , spirits , and relations are all in their respective kinds the object of human knowledge and subject of discourse; and that the term idea would be improperly extended to signify everything we know or have any notion of.]

90. Ideas imprinted on the senses are real things, or do really exist: this we do not deny; but we deny they can    subsist without the minds which perceive them, or that they are resemblances of any archetypes existing without the mind; since the very being of a sensation or idea consists in being perceived, and an idea can be like nothing but an idea. Again, the things perceived by sense may be termed external , with regard to their origin; in that they are not generated from within by the mind itself, but imprinted by a Spirit distinct from that which perceives them. Sensible objects may likewise be said to be “without the mind” in another sense, namely when they exist in some other mind. Thus, when I shut my eyes, the things I saw may still exist; but it must be in another mind.

91. It were a mistake to think that what is here said derogates in the least from the reality of things. It is acknowledged, on the received principles, that extension, motion, and in a word all sensible qualities, have need of a support, as not being able to subsist by themselves. But the objects perceived by sense are allowed to be nothing but combinations of those qualities, and consequently cannot subsist by themselves. Thus far it is agreed on all hands. So that in denying the things perceived by sense an existence independent of a substance or support wherein they may exist, we detract nothing from the received opinion of their reality , and are guilty of no innovation in that respect. All the difference is that, according to us, the unthinking beings perceived by sense have no existence distinct from being perceived, and cannot therefore exist in any other substance than those unextended indivisible substances, or spirits , which act, and think and perceive them. Whereas philosophers vulgarly hold that the sensible qualities do exist in an inert, extended, unperceiving Substance, which they call Matter  , to which they attribute a natural subsistence, exterior to all thinking beings, or distinct from being perceived by any mind whatsoever,  even the Eternal Mind of the Creator; wherein they suppose only Ideas of the corporeal substances created by Him: if indeed they allow them to be at all created .

92. For, as we have shewn the doctrine of Matter or Corporeal Substance to have been the main pillar and support of Scepticism, so likewise upon the same foundation have been raised all the impious schemes of Atheism and Irreligion. Nay, so great a difficulty has it been thought to conceive Matter produced out of nothing, that the most celebrated among the ancient philosophers, even of those who maintained the being of a God, have thought Matter to be uncreated and co-eternal with Him. How great a friend material substance has been to Atheists in all ages were needless to relate. All their monstrous systems have so visible and necessary a dependence on it, that when this corner-stone is once removed, the whole fabric cannot choose but fall to the ground; insomuch that it is no longer worth while to bestow a particular consideration on the absurdities of every wretched sect of Atheists.

93. That impious and profane persons should readily fall in with those systems which favour their inclinations, by deriding immaterial substance  , and supposing the soul to be divisible, and subject to corruption as the body; which exclude all freedom, intelligence, and design from the formation of things, and instead thereof make a self-existent, stupid, unthinking substance the root and origin of all beings; that they should hearken to those who deny a Providence, or inspection of a Superior Mind  over the affairs of the world, attributing the whole series of events either to blind chance or fatal necessity, arising from the impulse of one body on another — all this is very natural. And, on the other hand, when men of better principles observe the enemies of religion lay so great a stress on unthinking Matter , and all of them use so much industry and artifice to reduce everything to it; methinks they should rejoice to see them deprived of their grand support, and driven from that only fortress, without which your Epicureans, Hobbists, and the like, have not even the shadow of a pretence, but become the most cheap and easy triumph in the world.

94. The existence of Matter, or bodies unperceived, has not only been the main support of Atheists and Fatalists, but on the same principle doth Idolatry likewise in all its various forms depend. Did men but consider that the sun, moon, and stars, and every other object of the senses, are only so many sensations in their minds, which have no other existence but barely being perceived, doubtless they would never fall down and worship their own ideas ; but rather address their homage to that Eternal Invisible Mind which produces and sustains all things.

95. The same absurd principle, by mingling itself with the articles of our faith, hath occasioned no small difficulties to Christians. For example, about the Resurrection, how many scruples and objections have been raised by Socinians and others? But do not the most plausible of them depend on the supposition that a body is denominated the same , with regard not to the form, or that which is perceived by sense, but the material substance, which remains the same under several forms? Take away this material substance — about the identity whereof all the dispute is — and mean by body what every plain ordinary person means by that word, to wit, that which is immediately seen and felt, which is only a combination of sensible qualities or ideas: and then their most unanswerable objections come to nothing.

 96. Matter being once expelled out of nature drags  with it so many sceptical and impious notions, such an incredible number of disputes and puzzling questions, which have been thorns in the sides of divines as well as philosophers, and made so much fruitless work for mankind, that if the arguments we have produced against it are not found equal to demonstration (as to me they evidently seem), yet I am sure all friends to knowledge, peace, and religion have reason to wish they were.

97. Beside the external existence of the objects of perception, another great source of errors and difficulties with regard to ideal knowledge is the doctrine of abstract ideas , such as it hath been set forth in the Introduction. The plainest things in the world, those we are most intimately acquainted with and perfectly know, when they are considered in an abstract way, appear strangely difficult and incomprehensible. Time, place, and motion, taken in particular or concrete, are what everybody knows; but, having passed through the hands of a metaphysician, they become too abstract and fine to be apprehended by men of ordinary sense. Bid your servant meet you at such a time , in such a place , and he shall never stay to deliberate on the meaning of those words. In conceiving that particular time and place, or the motion by which he is to get thither, he finds not the least difficulty. But if time be taken exclusive of all those particular actions and ideas that diversify the day, merely for the continuation of existence or duration in abstract, then it will perhaps gravel even a philosopher to comprehend it.

98. For my own part, whenever I attempt to frame a simple idea of time  , abstracted from the succession of ideas in my mind, which flows uniformly, and is participated by all beings, I am lost and embrangled in inextricable difficulties. I have no notion of it at all: only I hear others say it is infinitely divisible, and speak of it in such a manner as leads me to harbour odd thoughts of my existence: since that doctrine lays one under an absolute necessity of thinking, either that he passes away innumerable ages without a thought, or else that he is annihilated every moment of his life: both  which seem equally absurd. Time therefore being nothing, abstracted from the succession of ideas in our minds, it follows that the duration of any finite spirit must be estimated by the number of ideas or actions succeeding each other in that same spirit or mind. Hence, it is a plain consequence that the soul always thinks. And in truth whoever shall go about to divide in his thoughts or abstract the existence of a spirit from its cogitation , will, I believe, find it no easy task.

99. So likewise when we attempt to abstract extension and motion from all other qualities, and consider them by themselves, we presently lose sight of them, and run into great extravagances. [ Hence spring those odd paradoxes, that the fire is not hot, nor the wall white; or that heat and colour are in the objects nothing but figure and motion.] All which depend on a twofold abstraction: first, it is supposed that extension, for example, may be abstracted from all other sensible qualities; and, secondly, that the entity of extension may be abstracted from its being perceived. But, whoever shall reflect, and take care to understand what he says, will, if I mistake not, acknowledge that all sensible qualities are alike sensations , and alike real  ; that where the extension is, there is the colour too, to wit, in his mind, and that their archetypes can exist only in  some other mind : and that the objects of sense are nothing but those sensations, combined, blended, or (if one may so speak) concreted together; none of all which can be supposed to exist unperceived. [ And that consequently the wall is as truly white as it is extended, and in the same sense.]

100. What it is for a man to be happy, or an object good, every one may think he knows. But to frame an abstract idea of happiness, prescinded from all particular pleasure, or of goodness from everything that is good, this is what few can pretend to. So likewise a man may be just and virtuous without having precise ideas of justice and virtue. The opinion that those and the like words stand for general notions, abstracted from all particular persons and actions, seems to have rendered morality difficult, and the study thereof of less use to mankind. [And in effect one may make a great progress in school ethics without ever being the wiser or better man for it, or knowing how to behave himself in the affairs of life more to the advantage of himself or his neighbours than he did before.] And in effect the doctrine of abstraction has not a little contributed towards spoiling the most useful parts of knowledge.

101. The two great provinces of speculative science conversant about ideas received from sense and their relations, are Natural Philosophy and Mathematics. With regard to each of these I shall make some observations.

And first I shall say somewhat of Natural Philosophy. On this subject it is that the sceptics triumph. All that stock of arguments they produce to depreciate our faculties and make mankind appear ignorant and low, are drawn principally from this head, namely, that we are under an invincible blindness as to the true and real  nature of things. This they exaggerate, and love to enlarge on. We are miserably bantered, say they, by our senses, and amused only with the outside and shew of things. The real  essence, the internal qualities and constitution of every the meanest object, is hid from our view: something there is in every drop of water, every grain of sand, which it is beyond the power of human understanding to fathom or comprehend. But, it is evident from what has been shewn that all this complaint is groundless, and that we are influenced by false principles to that degree as to mistrust our senses, and think we know nothing of those things which we perfectly comprehend.

102. One great inducement to our pronouncing ourselves ignorant of the nature of things is, the current opinion that every thing includes within itself the cause of its properties: or that there is in each object an inward essence, which is the source whence its discernible qualities flow, and whereon they depend. Some have pretended to account for appearances by occult qualities; but of late they are mostly resolved into mechanical causes, to wit, the figure, motion, weight, and suchlike qualities, of insensible particles: whereas, in truth, there is no other agent or efficient cause than spirit , it being evident that motion, as well as all other ideas , is perfectly inert. See sect. 25. Hence, to endeavour to explain the production of colours or sounds, by figure, motion, magnitude, and the like, must needs be labour in vain. And accordingly we see the attempts of that kind are not at all satisfactory. Which may be said in general of those instances wherein one idea or quality is assigned for the cause of another. I need not say how many hypotheses and speculations are left out, and how much the study of nature is abridged by this doctrine.

103. The great mechanical principle now in vogue is attraction  . That a stone falls to the earth, or the sea swells towards the moon, may to some appear sufficiently explained thereby. But how are we enlightened by being told this is done by attraction? Is it that that word signifies the manner of the tendency, and that it is by the  mutual drawing of bodies instead of their being impelled or protruded towards each other? But nothing is determined of the manner or action, and it may as truly (for aught we know) be termed impulse , or protrusion , as attraction . Again, the parts of steel we see cohere firmly together, and this also is accounted for by attraction; but, in this, as in the other instances, I do not perceive that anything is signified besides the effect itself; for as to the manner of the action whereby it is produced, or the cause which produces it, these are not so much as aimed at.

104. Indeed, if we take a view of the several phenomena, and compare them together, we may observe some likeness and conformity between them. For example, in the falling of a stone to the ground, in the rising of the sea towards the moon, in cohesion and crystallization, there is something alike; namely, an union or mutual approach of bodies. So that any one of these or the like phenomena may not seem strange or surprising to a man who has nicely observed and compared the effects of nature. For that only is thought so which is uncommon, or a thing by itself, and out of the ordinary course of our observation. That bodies should tend towards the centre of the earth is not thought strange, because it is what we perceive every moment of our lives. But that they should have a like gravitation towards the centre of the moon may seem odd and unaccountable to most men, because it is discerned only in the tides. But a philosopher, whose thoughts take in a larger compass of nature, having observed a certain similitude of appearances, as well in the heavens as the earth, that argue innumerable bodies to have a mutual tendency towards each other, which he denotes by the general name attraction , whatever can be reduced to that, he thinks justly accounted for. Thus he explains the tides by the attraction of the terraqueous globe towards the moon; which to him doth not appear odd or anomalous, but only a particular example of a general rule or law of nature.

105. If therefore we consider the difference there is betwixt natural philosophers and other men, with regard to their knowledge of the phenomena, we shall find it consists, not in an exacter knowledge of the efficient cause that produces them — for that can be no other than the  will of a spirit — but only in a greater largeness of comprehension, whereby analogies, harmonies, and agreements are discovered in the works of nature, and the particular effects explained, that is, reduced to general rules, see sect. 62: which rules, grounded on the analogy and uniformness observed in the production of natural effects, are most agreeable and sought after by the mind; for that they extend our prospect beyond what is present and near to us, and enable us to make very probable conjectures touching things that may have happened at very great distances of time and place, as well as to predict things to come: which sort of endeavour towards Omniscience is much affected by the mind.

106. But we should proceed warily in such things: for we are apt to lay too great a stress on analogies, and, to the prejudice of truth, humour that eagerness of the mind, whereby it is carried to extend its knowledge into general theorems. For example, gravitation or mutual attraction, because it appears in many instances, some are straightway for pronouncing universal ; and that to attract and be attracted by every other body is an essential quality inherent in all bodies whatsoever. Whereas it is evident the fixed stars have no such tendency towards each other; and, so far is that gravitation from being essential to bodies that in some instances a quite contrary principle seems to shew itself; as in the perpendicular growth of plants, and the elasticity of the air. There is nothing necessary or essential in the case; but it depends entirely on the will of the Governing Spirit, who causes certain bodies to cleave together or tend towards each other according to various laws, whilst He keeps others at a fixed distance; and to some He gives a quite contrary tendency to fly asunder, just as He sees convenient.

 107. After what has been premised, I think we may lay down the following conclusions. First, it is plain philosophers  amuse themselves in vain, when they enquire for any natural efficient cause, distinct from a mind or spirit . Secondly, considering the whole creation is the workmanship of a wise and good Agent , it should seem to become philosophers to employ their thoughts (contrary to what some hold) about the final causes of things. [ For, besides that this would prove a very pleasing entertainment to the mind, it might be of great advantage, in that it not only discovers to us the attributes of the Creator, but may also direct us in several instances to the proper uses and applications of things.] And I must confess I see no reason why pointing out the various ends to which natural things are adapted, and for which they were originally with unspeakable wisdom contrived, should not be thought one good way of accounting for them, and altogether worthy a philosopher. Thirdly, from what has been premised, no reason can be drawn why the history of nature should not still be studied, and observations and experiments made; which, that they are of use to mankind, and enable us to draw any general conclusions, is not the result of any immutable habitudes or relations between things themselves, but only of God’s goodness and kindness to men in the administration of the world. See sects. 30 and 31. Fourthly, by a diligent observation of the phenomena within our view, we may discover the general laws of nature, and from them deduce other phenomena. I do not say demonstrate ; for all deductions of that kind depend on a supposition that the Author of Nature always operates uniformly, and in a constant observance of those rules we take for principles, which we cannot evidently know.

 108. It appears from sect. 66, &c. that the steady consistent methods of nature may not unfitly be styled the Language of its Author, whereby He discovers His attributes to our view and directs us how to act for the convenience and felicity of life. Those men who frame general rules from the phenomena, and afterwards derive  the phenomena from those rules, seem to consider signs rather than causes. A man may well understand natural signs without knowing their analogy, or being able to say by what rule a thing is so or so. And, as it is very possible to write improperly, through too strict an observance of general grammar-rules; so, in arguing from general laws of nature, it is not impossible we may extend the analogy too far, and by that means run into mistakes.

109. [ To carry on the resemblance.] As in reading other books a wise man will choose to fix his thoughts on the sense and apply it to use, rather than lay them out in grammatical remarks on the language; so, in perusing the volume of nature, methinks it is beneath the dignity of the mind to affect an exactness in reducing each particular phenomenon to general rules, or shewing how it follows from them. We should propose to ourselves nobler views, such as to recreate and exalt the mind with a prospect of the beauty, order, extent, and variety of natural things: hence, by proper inferences, to enlarge our notions of the grandeur, wisdom, and beneficence of the Creator: and lastly, to make the several parts of the creation, so far as in us lies, subservient to the ends they were designed for — God’s glory, and the sustentation and comfort of ourselves and fellow-creatures.

110. [ The best key for the aforesaid analogy, or natural Science, will be easily acknowledged to be a certain celebrated Treatise of Mechanics  .] In the entrance of  which justly admired treatise, Time, Space, and Motion are distinguished into absolute and relative , true and apparent , mathematical and vulgar : which distinction, as it is at large explained by the author, does suppose those quantities to have an existence without the mind: and that they are ordinarily conceived with relation to sensible things, to which nevertheless in their own nature they bear no relation at all.

III. As for Time , as it is there taken in an absolute or abstracted sense, for the duration or perseverance of the existence of things, I have nothing more to add concerning it after what has been already said on that subject. Sects. 97 and 98. For the rest, this celebrated author holds there is an absolute Space , which, being unperceivable to sense, remains in itself similar and immoveable; and relative space to be the measure thereof, which, being moveable and defined by its situation in respect of sensible bodies, is vulgarly taken for immoveable space. Place he defines to be that part of space which is occupied by any body: and according as the space is absolute or relative so also is the place. Absolute Motion  is said to be the translation of a body from absolute place to absolute place, as relative motion is from one relative place to another. And because the parts of absolute space do not fall under our senses, instead of them we are obliged to use their sensible measures; and so define both place and motion with respect to bodies which we regard as immoveable. But it is said, in philosophical matters we must abstract from our senses; since it may be that none of those bodies which seem to be quiescent are truly so; and the same thing which is moved relatively may be really at rest. As likewise one and the same body may be in relative rest and motion, or even moved with contrary relative motions at the same time, according as its place is variously defined. All which ambiguity is to be found in the apparent motions; but not at all in the true or absolute, which should therefore be alone regarded in philosophy. And the true we are told are distinguished from apparent or relative motions by the following properties. First, in true or absolute motion, all parts which preserve the same position with respect of the whole, partake of the motions of the whole. Secondly, the place being moved, that  which is placed therein is also moved: so that a body moving in a place which is in motion doth participate the motion of its place. Thirdly, true motion is never generated or changed otherwise than by force impressed on the body itself. Fourthly, true motion is always changed by force impressed on the body moved. Fifthly, in circular motion, barely relative, there is no centrifugal force, which nevertheless, in that which is true or absolute, is proportional to the quantity of motion.

112. But, notwithstanding what hath been said, I must confess it does not appear to me that there can be any motion other than relative : so that to conceive motion there must be conceived at least two bodies; whereof the distance or position in regard to each other is varied. Hence, if there was one only body in being it could not possibly be moved. This seems evident, in that the idea I have of motion doth necessarily include relation. — [Whether others can conceive it otherwise, a little attention may satisfy them.]

113. But, though in every motion it be necessary to conceive more bodies than one, yet it may be that one only is moved, namely, that on which the force causing the change in the distance or situation of the bodies is impressed. For, however some may define relative motion, so as to term that body moved which changes its distance from some other body, whether the force [or action] causing that change were impressed on it or no, yet, as relative motion is that which is perceived by sense, and regarded in the ordinary affairs of life, it follows that every man of common sense knows what it is as well as the best philosopher. Now, I ask any one whether, in his sense of motion as he walks along the streets, the stones he passes over may be said to move  , because they change distance with his feet? To me it appears that though motion includes a relation of one thing to another, yet it is not necessary that each term of the relation be denominated from it. As a man may think of somewhat which does  not think, so a body may be moved to or from another body which is not therefore itself in motion, [ I mean relative motion, for other I am not able to conceive.]

114. As the place happens to be variously defined, the motion which is related to it varies. A man in a ship may be said to be quiescent with relation to the sides of the vessel, and yet move with relation to the land. Or he may move eastward in respect of the one, and westward in respect of the other. In the common affairs of life, men never go beyond the Earth to define the place of any body; and what is quiescent in respect of that is accounted absolutely to be so. But philosophers, who have a greater extent of thought, and juster notions of the system of things, discover even the Earth itself to be moved. In order therefore to fix their notions, they seem to conceive the Corporeal World as finite, and the utmost unmoved walls or shell thereof to be the place whereby they estimate true motions. If we sound our own conceptions, I believe we may find all the absolute motion we can frame an idea of to be at bottom no other than relative motion thus defined. For, as has been already observed, absolute motion, exclusive of all external relation, is incomprehensible: and to this kind of relative motion all the above-mentioned properties, causes, and effects ascribed to absolute motion will, if I mistake not, be found to agree. As to what is said of the centrifugal force, that it does not at all belong to circular relative motion, I do not see how this follows from the experiment which is brought to prove it. See Newton’s Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, in Schol. Def. VIII . For the water in the vessel, at that time wherein it is said to have the greatest relative circular motion, hath, I think, no motion at all: as is plain from the foregoing section.

115. For, to denominate a body moved  , it is requisite, first, that it change its distance or situation with regard to some other body: and secondly, that the force occasioning that change be applied to it. If either of these be wanting, I do not think that, agreeably to the sense of mankind, or the propriety of language, a body  can be said to be in motion. I grant indeed that it is possible for us to think a body, which we see change its distance from some other, to be moved, though it have no force applied to it (in which sense there may be apparent motion); but then it is because the force causing the change of distance is imagined by us to be [applied or] impressed on that body thought to move. Which indeed shews we are capable of mistaking a thing to be in motion which is not, and that is all. [But it does not prove that, in the common acceptation of motion, a body is moved merely because it changes distance from another; since as soon as we are undeceived, and find that the moving force was not communicated to it, we no longer hold it to be moved. So, on the other hand, when one only body (the parts whereof preserve a given position between themselves) is imagined to exist, some there are who think that it can be moved all manner of ways, though without any change of distance or situation to any other bodies; which we should not deny, if they meant only that it might have an impressed force, which, upon the bare creation of other bodies, would produce a motion of some certain quantity and determination. But that an actual motion (distinct from the impressed force, or power, productive of change of place in case there were bodies present whereby to define it) can exist in such a single body, I must confess I am not able to comprehend.]

116. From what has been said, it follows that the philosophic consideration of motion doth not imply the being of an absolute Space , distinct from that which is perceived by sense, and related to bodies: which that it cannot exist without the mind is clear upon the same principles that demonstrate the like of all other objects of sense. And perhaps, if we inquire narrowly, we shall find we cannot even frame an idea of pure Space exclusive of all body  . This I must confess seems impossible, as  being a most abstract idea. When I excite a motion in some part of my body, if it be free or without resistance, I say there is Space . But if I find a resistance, then I say there is Body : and in proportion as the resistance to motion is lesser or greater, I say the space is more or less pure . So that when I speak of pure or empty space, it is not to be supposed that the word space stands for an idea distinct from, or conceivable without, body and motion. Though indeed we are apt to think every noun substantive stands for a distinct idea that may be separated from all others; which hath occasioned infinite mistakes. When, therefore, supposing all the world to be annihilated besides my own body, I say there still remains pure Space ; thereby nothing else is meant but only that I conceive it possible for the limbs of my body to be moved on all sides without the least resistance: but if that too were annihilated then there could be no motion, and consequently no Space. Some, perhaps, may think the sense of seeing doth furnish them with the idea of pure space; but it is plain from what we have elsewhere shewn, that the ideas of space and distance are not obtained by that sense. See the Essay concerning Vision .

117. What is here laid down seems to put an end to all those disputes and difficulties that have sprung up amongst the learned concerning the nature of pure Space . But the chief advantage arising from it is that we are freed from that dangerous dilemma, to which several who have employed their thoughts on that subject imagine themselves reduced, viz. of thinking either that Real Space is God, or else that there is something beside God which is eternal, uncreated, infinite, indivisible, immutable. Both which may justly be thought pernicious and absurd notions. It is certain that not a few divines, as well as philosophers of great note, have, from the difficulty they found in conceiving either limits or annihilation of space, concluded it must be divine  . And some of late have set themselves particularly to shew that the incommunicable attributes of God agree to it. Which doctrine, how unworthy soever it may seem of the Divine Nature, yet  I must confess I do not see how we can get clear of it, so long as we adhere to the received opinions.

118. Hitherto of Natural Philosophy. We come now to make some inquiry concerning that other great branch of speculative knowledge, to wit, Mathematics. These, how celebrated soever they may be for their clearness and certainty of demonstration, which is hardly anywhere else to be found, cannot nevertheless be supposed altogether free from mistakes, if in their principles there lurks some secret error which is common to the professors of those sciences with the rest of mankind. Mathematicians, though they deduce their theorems from a great height of evidence, yet their first principles are limited by the consideration of Quantity. And they do not ascend into any inquiry concerning those transcendental maxims which influence all the particular sciences; each part whereof, Mathematics not excepted, doth consequently participate of the errors involved in them. That the principles laid down by mathematicians are true, and their way of deduction from those principles clear and incontestible, we do not deny. But we hold there may be certain erroneous maxims of greater extent than the object of Mathematics, and for that reason not expressly mentioned, though tacitly supposed, throughout the whole progress of that science; and that the ill effects of those secret unexamined errors are diffused through all the branches thereof. To be plain, we suspect the mathematicians are no less deeply concerned than other men in the errors arising from the doctrine of abstract general ideas, and the existence of objects without the mind.

119. Arithmetic hath been thought to have for its object abstract ideas of number  . Of which to understand the properties and mutual habitudes, is supposed no mean part of speculative knowledge. The opinion of the pure and intellectual nature of numbers in abstract has made them  in esteem with those philosophers who seem to have affected an uncommon fineness and elevation of thought. It hath set a price on the most trifling numerical speculations, which in practice are of no use, but serve only for amusement; and hath heretofore so far infected the minds of some, that they have dreamed of mighty mysteries involved in numbers, and attempted the explication of natural things by them. But, if we narrowly inquire into our own thoughts, and consider what has been premised, we may perhaps entertain a low opinion of those high flights and abstractions, and look on all inquiries about numbers only as so many difficiles nugae , so far as they are not subservient to practice, and promote the benefit of life.

120. Unity in abstract we have before considered in sect. 13; from which, and what has been said in the Introduction, it plainly follows there is not any such idea. But, number being defined a collection of units , we may conclude that, if there be no such thing as unity, or unit in abstract, there are no ideas of number in abstract, denoted by the numeral names and figures. The theories therefore in Arithmetic, if they are abstracted from the names and figures, as likewise from all use and practice, as well as from the particular things numbered, can be supposed to have nothing at all for their object. Hence we may see how entirely the science of numbers is subordinate to practice, and how jejune and trifling it becomes when considered as a matter of mere speculation.

 121. However, since there may be some who, deluded by the specious show of discovering abstracted verities, waste their time in arithmetical theorems and problems which have not any use, it will not be amiss if we more fully consider and expose the vanity of that pretence. And this will plainly appear by taking a view of Arithmetic in its infancy, and observing what it was that originally put men on the study of that science, and to what scope they directed it. It is natural to think that at first, men, for ease of memory and help of computation, made use of counters, or in writing of single strokes, points, or the like, each whereof was made to signify an unit, i.e. some one thing of whatever kind they had occasion to  reckon. Afterwards they found out the more compendious ways of making one character stand in place of several strokes or points. And, lastly, the notation of the Arabians or Indians came into use; wherein, by the repetition of a few characters or figures, and varying the signification of each figure according to the place it obtains, all numbers may be most aptly expressed. Which seems to have been done in imitation of language, so that an exact analogy is observed betwixt the notation by figures and names, the nine simple figures answering the nine first numeral names and places in the former, corresponding to denominations in the latter. And agreeably to those conditions of the simple and local value of figures, were contrived methods of finding, from the given figures or marks of the parts, what figures and how placed are proper to denote the whole, or vice versa . And having found the sought figures, the same rule or analogy being observed throughout, it is easy to read them into words; and so the number becomes perfectly known. For then the number of any particular things is said to be known, when we know the name or figures (with their due arrangement) that according to the standing analogy belong to them. For, these signs being known, we can by the operations of arithmetic know the signs of any part of the particular sums signified by them; and thus computing in signs, (because of the connexion established betwixt them and the distinct multitudes of things, whereof one is taken for an unit), we may be able rightly to sum up, divide, and proportion the things themselves that we intend to number.

122. In Arithmetic, therefore, we regard not the things but the signs  ; which nevertheless are not regarded for their own sake, but because they direct us how to act with relation to things, and dispose rightly of them. Now, agreeably to what we have before observed of Words in general (sect. 19, Introd.), it happens here likewise, that abstract ideas are thought to be signified by numeral names or characters, while they do not suggest ideas of particular things to our minds. I shall not at present enter into a more particular dissertation on this subject; but only observe that it is evident from what has been said, those things which pass for abstract truths and  theorems concerning numbers, are in reality conversant about no object distinct from particular numerable things; except only names and characters, which originally came to be considered on no other account but their being signs , or capable to represent aptly whatever particular things men had need to compute. Whence it follows that to study them for their own sake would be just as wise, and to as good purpose, as if a man, neglecting the true use or original intention and subserviency of language, should spend his time in impertinent criticisms upon words, or reasonings and controversies purely verbal.

123. From numbers we proceed to speak of extension , which, considered as relative, is the object of Geometry. The infinite divisibility of finite extension, though it is not expressly laid down either as an axiom or theorem in the elements of that science, yet is throughout the same everywhere supposed, and thought to have so inseparable and essential a connexion with the principles and demonstrations in Geometry that mathematicians never admit it into doubt, or make the least question of it. And as this notion is the source from whence do spring all those amusing geometrical paradoxes which have such a direct repugnancy to the plain common sense of mankind, and are admitted with so much reluctance into a mind not yet debauched by learning; so is it the principal occasion of all that nice and extreme subtilty, which renders the study of Mathematics so very difficult and tedious. Hence, if we can make it appear that no finite extension contains innumerable parts, or is infinitely divisible, it follows that we shall at once clear the science of Geometry from a great number of difficulties and contradictions which have ever been esteemed a reproach to human reason, and withal make the attainment thereof a business of much less time and pains than it hitherto hath been.

124. Every particular finite extension which may possibly be the object of our thought is an idea existing only in the mind; and consequently each part thereof must be perceived. If, therefore, I cannot perceive  innumerable parts in any finite extension that I consider, it is certain they are not contained in it. But it is evident that  I cannot distinguish innumerable parts in any particular line, surface, or solid, which I either perceive by sense, or figure to myself in my mind. Wherefore I conclude they are not contained in it. Nothing can be plainer to me than that the extensions I have in view are no other than my own ideas; and it is no less plain that I cannot resolve any one of my ideas into an infinite number of other ideas; that is, that they are not infinitely divisible. If by finite extension be meant something distinct from a finite idea, I declare I do not know what that is, and so cannot affirm or deny anything of it. But if the terms extension , parts , and the like, are taken in any sense conceivable — that is, for ideas , — then to say a finite quantity or extension consists of parts infinite in number is so manifest and glaring a contradiction, that every one at first sight acknowledges it to be so. And it is impossible it should ever gain the assent of any reasonable creature who is not brought to it by gentle and slow degrees, as a converted Gentile to the belief of transubstantiation. Ancient and rooted prejudices do often pass into principles. And those propositions which once obtain the force and credit of a principle , are not only themselves, but likewise whatever is deducible from them, thought privileged from all examination. And there is no absurdity so gross, which, by this means, the mind of man may not be prepared to swallow.

125. He whose understanding is prepossessed with the doctrine of abstract general ideas may be persuaded that (whatever be thought of the ideas of sense) extension in abstract  is infinitely divisible. And one who thinks the objects of sense exist without the mind will perhaps, in virtue thereof, be brought to admit that a line but an inch long may contain innumerable parts really existing, though too small to be discerned. These errors are  grafted as well in the minds of geometricians as of other men, and have a like influence on their reasonings; and it were no difficult thing to shew how the arguments from Geometry made use of to support the infinite divisibility of extension are bottomed on them. [ But this, if it be thought necessary, we may hereafter find a proper place to treat of in a particular manner.] At present we shall only observe in general whence it is the mathematicians are all so fond and tenacious of that doctrine.

126. It has been observed in another place that the theorems and demonstrations in Geometry are conversant about universal ideas (sect. 15, Introd.): where it is explained in what sense this ought to be understood, to wit, the particular lines and figures included in the diagram are supposed to stand for innumerable others of different sizes; or, in other words, the geometer considers them abstracting from their magnitude: which doth not imply that he forms an abstract idea, but only that he cares not what the particular magnitude is, whether great or small, but looks on that as a thing indifferent to the demonstration. Hence it follows that a line in the scheme but an inch long must be spoken of as though it contained ten thousand parts, since it is regarded not in itself, but as it is universal; and it is universal only in its signification, whereby it represents innumerable lines greater than itself, in which may be distinguished ten thousand parts or more, though there may not be above an inch in it . After this manner, the properties of the lines signified are (by a very usual figure) transferred to the sign; and thence, through mistake, thought to appertain to it considered in its own nature.

 127. Because there is no number of parts so great but it is possible there may be a line containing more, the inch-line is said to contain parts more than any assignable number; which is true, not of the inch taken absolutely, but only for the things signified by it. But men, not retaining that distinction in their thoughts, slide into a belief that the small particular line described on paper contains in itself parts innumerable. There  is no such thing as the ten thousandth part of an inch; but there is of a mile or diameter of the earth, which may be signified by that inch. When therefore I delineate a triangle on paper, and take one side, not above an inch for example in length, to be the radius, this I consider as divided into 10,000 or 100,000 parts, or more. For, though the ten thousandth part of that line considered in itself, is nothing at all, and consequently may be neglected without any error or inconveniency, yet these described lines, being only marks standing for greater quantities, whereof it may be the ten thousandth part is very considerable, it follows that, to prevent notable errors in practice, the radius must be taken of 10,000 parts, or more.

128. From what has been said the reason is plain why, to the end any theorem may become universal in its use, it is necessary we speak of the lines described on paper as though they contained parts which really they do not. In doing of which, if we examine the matter throughly, we shall perhaps discover that we cannot conceive an inch itself as consisting of, or being divisible into, a thousand parts, but only some other line which is far greater than an inch, and represented by it; and that when we say a line is infinitely divisible , we must mean a line which is infinitely great . What we have here observed seems to be the chief cause, why to suppose the infinite divisibility of finite extension has been thought necessary in geometry.

129. The several absurdities and contradictions which flowed from this false principle might, one would think, have been esteemed so many demonstrations against it. But, by I know not what logic, it is held that proofs a posteriori  are not to be admitted against propositions relating to Infinity. As though it were not impossible even for an Infinite Mind to reconcile contradictions; or as if anything absurd and repugnant could have a necessary connexion with truth, or flow from it. But whoever considers the weakness of this pretence, will think it was contrived on purpose to humour the laziness of the mind, which had rather acquiesce in an  indolent scepticism than be at the pains to go through with a severe examination of those principles it has ever embraced for true.

130. Of late the speculations about Infinites have run so high, and grown to such strange notions, as have occasioned no small scruples and disputes among the geometers of the present age. Some there are of great note who, not content with holding that finite lines may be divided into an infinite number of parts, do yet farther maintain, that each of those Infinitesimals is itself subdivisible into an infinity of other parts, or Infinitesimals of a second order, and so on ad infinitum . These, I say, assert there are Infinitesimals of Infinitesimals of Infinitesimals, without ever coming to an end. So that according to them an inch does not barely contain an infinite number of parts, but an infinity of an infinity of an infinity ad infinitum of parts. Others there be who hold all orders of Infinitesimals below the first to be nothing at all; thinking it with good reason absurd to imagine there is any positive quantity or part of extension which, though multiplied infinitely, can ever equal the smallest given extension. And yet on the other hand it seems no less absurd to think the square, cube, or other power of a positive real root, should itself be nothing at all; which they who hold Infinitesimals of the first order, denying all of the subsequent orders, are obliged to maintain.

131. Have we not therefore reason to conclude they are both  in the wrong, and that there is in effect no such thing as parts infinitely small, or an infinite number of parts contained in any finite quantity? But you will say that if this doctrine obtains it will follow the very foundations of Geometry are destroyed, and those great men who have raised that science to so astonishing a height, have been all the while building a castle in the air. To this it may be replied, that whatever is useful in geometry, and promotes the benefit of human life, does still remain firm and unshaken on our Principles; that science considered as practical will rather receive advantage than any prejudice from what has been said. But to set this in a due light,[ and shew how lines and figures may be  measured, and their properties investigated, without supposing finite extension to be infinitely divisible,] may be the proper business of another place. For the rest, though it should follow that some of the more intricate and subtle parts of Speculative Mathematics may be pared off without any prejudice to truth, yet I do not see what damage will be thence derived to mankind. On the contrary, I think it were highly to be wished that men of great abilities and obstinate application would draw off their thoughts from those amusements, and employ them in the study of such things as lie nearer the concerns of life, or have a more direct influence on the manners.

132. If it be said that several theorems, undoubtedly true, are discovered by methods in which Infinitesimals are made use of, which could never have been if their existence included a contradiction in it: — I answer, that upon a thorough examination it will not be found that in any instance it is necessary to make use of or conceive infinitesimal parts of finite lines, or even quantities less than the minimum sensibile : nay, it will be evident this is never done, it being impossible. [ And whatever mathematicians may think of Fluxions, or the Differential Calculus, and the like, a little reflexion will shew them that, in working by those methods, they do not conceive or imagine lines or surfaces less than what are perceivable to sense. They may indeed call those little and almost insensible quantities Infinitesimals, or Infinitesimals of Infinitesimals, if they please. But at bottom this is all, they being in truth finite; nor does the solution of problems require the supposing any other. But this will be more clearly made out hereafter.]

 133. By what we have hitherto said, it is plain that very numerous and important errors have taken their rise from those false Principles which were impugned in the foregoing parts of this Treatise; and the opposites  of those erroneous tenets at the same time appear to be most fruitful Principles, from whence do flow innumerable consequences, highly advantageous to true philosophy as well as to religion. Particularly Matter , or the absoluteexistence of corporeal objects , hath been shewn to be that wherein the most avowed and pernicious enemies of all knowledge, whether human or divine, have ever placed their chief strength and confidence. And surely if by distinguishing the real existence of unthinking things from their being perceived, and allowing them a subsistence of their own, out of the minds of spirits, no one thing is explained in nature, but on the contrary a great many inexplicable difficulties arise; if the supposition of Matter is barely precarious, as not being grounded on so much as one single reason; if its consequences cannot endure the light of examination and free inquiry, but screen themselves under the dark and general pretence of infinites being incomprehensible ; if withal the removal of this Matter be not attended with the least evil consequence; if it be not even missed in the world, but everything as well, nay much easier conceived without it; if, lastly, both Sceptics and Atheists are for ever silenced upon supposing only spirits and ideas, and this scheme of things is perfectly agreeable both to Reason and Religion: methinks we may expect it should be admitted and firmly embraced, though it were proposed only as an hypothesis , and the existence of Matter had been allowed possible; which yet I think we have evidently demonstrated that it is not.

 134. True it is that, in consequence of the foregoing Principles, several disputes and speculations which are esteemed no mean parts of learning are rejected as useless [ and in effect conversant about nothing at all]. But how great a prejudice soever against our notions this may give to those who have already been deeply engaged, and made large advances in studies of that nature, yet by others we hope it will not be thought  any just ground of dislike to the principles and tenets herein laid down, that they abridge the labour of study, and make human sciences more clear, compendious, and attainable than they were before.

135. Having despatched what we intended to say concerning the knowledge of ideas , the method we proposed leads us in the next place to treat of spirits : with regard to which, perhaps, human knowledge is not so deficient as is vulgarly imagined. The great reason that is assigned for our being thought ignorant of the nature of Spirits is our not having an idea of it. But, surely it ought not to be looked on as a defect in a human understanding that it does not perceive the idea of Spirit, if it is manifestly impossible there should be any such idea. And this if I mistake not has been demonstrated in section 27. To which I shall here add that a Spirit has been shewn to be the only substance or support wherein unthinking beings or ideas can exist: but that this substance which supports or perceives ideas should itself be an idea, or like an idea, is evidently absurd.

136. It will perhaps be said that we want a sense (as some have imagined) proper to know substances withal; which, if we had, we might know our own soul as we do a triangle. To this I answer, that in case we had a new sense bestowed upon us, we could only receive thereby some new sensations or ideas of sense . But I believe nobody will say that what he means by the terms soul and substance is only some particular sort of idea or sensation. We may therefore infer that, all things duly considered, it is not more reasonable to think our faculties defective, in that they do not furnish us with an idea of Spirit, or active thinking substance, than it would be if we should blame them for not being able to comprehend a round square .

137. From the opinion that Spirits are to be known after the manner of an idea or sensation have risen many absurd and heterodox tenets, and much scepticism about the nature of the soul. It is even probable that this opinion may have produced a doubt in some whether they had any soul at all distinct from their body; since upon inquiry they could not find they had an idea of it. That an idea , which is inactive, and the existence whereof consists in being perceived, should be the image or likeness of an agent subsisting by itself, seems to need no other refutation than barely attending to what is meant by those words. But perhaps you will say that though an idea cannot resemble a Spirit in its thinking, acting, or subsisting by itself, yet it may in some other respects; and it is not necessary that an idea or image be in all respects like the original.

138. I answer, If it does not in those mentioned, it is impossible it should represent it in any other thing. Do but leave out the power of willing, thinking, and perceiving ideas, and there remains nothing else wherein the idea can be like a spirit. For, by the word spirit we mean only that which thinks, wills, and perceives; this, and this alone, constitutes the signification of that term. If therefore it is impossible that any degree of those powers should be represented in an idea [or notion], it is evident there can be no idea [or notion] of a Spirit.

139. But it will be objected that, if there is no idea signified by the terms soul , spirit , and substance , they are wholly insignificant, or have no meaning in them. I answer, those words do mean or signify a real thing; which is neither an idea nor like an idea, but that which perceives ideas, and wills, and reasons about them. What I am myself , that which I denote by the term I , is the same with what is meant by soul , or spiritual substance . [But if I should say that I was nothing, or that I was an idea or notion  , nothing could be more evidently absurd than either of these propositions.] If it be said that  this is only quarrelling at a word, and that, since the immediate significations of other names are by common consent called ideas , no reason can be assigned why that which is signified by the name spirit or soul may not partake in the same appellation. I answer, all the unthinking objects of the mind agree in that they are entirely passive, and their existence consists only in being perceived: whereas a soul or spirit is an active being, whose existence consists, not in being perceived, but in perceiving ideas and thinking. It is therefore necessary, in order to prevent equivocation and confounding natures perfectly disagreeing and unlike, that we distinguish between spirit and idea . See sect. 27.

140. In a large sense indeed, we may be said to have an idea [or rather a notion] of spirit . That is, we understand the meaning of the word, otherwise we could not affirm or deny anything of it. Moreover, as we conceive the ideas that are in the minds of other spirits by means of our own, which we suppose to be resemblances of them, so we know other spirits by means of our own soul: which in that sense is the image or idea of them; it having a like respect to other spirits that blueness or heat by me perceived has to those ideas perceived by another.

 141. [The natural immortality of the soul is a necessary consequence of the foregoing doctrine. But before we attempt to prove this, it is fit that we explain the meaning of that tenet.] It must not be supposed that they who assert the natural immortality of the soul are of opinion that it is absolutely incapable of annihilation even by the infinite power of the Creator who first gave it being, but only that it is not liable to be broken or  dissolved by the ordinary laws of nature or motion They indeed who hold the soul of man to be only a thin vital flame, or system of animal spirits, make it perishing and corruptible as the body; since there is nothing more easily dissipated than such a being, which it is naturally impossible should survive the ruin of the tabernacle wherein it is inclosed. And this notion hath been greedily embraced and cherished by the worst part of mankind, as the most effectual antidote against all impressions of virtue and religion. But it hath been made evident that bodies, of what frame or texture soever, are barely passive ideas in the mind, which is more distant and heterogeneous from them than light is from darkness. We have shewn that the soul is indivisible, incorporeal, unextended; and it is consequently incorruptible. Nothing can be plainer than that the motions, changes, decays, and dissolutions which we hourly see befal natural bodies (and which is what we mean by the course of nature ) cannot possibly affect an active, simple, uncompounded substance: such a being therefore is indissoluble by the force of nature; that is to say, the soul of man is naturally immortal .

142. After what has been said, it is, I suppose, plain that our souls are not to be known in the same manner as senseless, inactive objects, or by way of idea . Spirits and ideas  are things so wholly different, that when we say “they exist,” “they are known,” or the like, these words  must not be thought to signify anything common to both natures. There is nothing alike or common in them; and to expect that by any multiplication or enlargement of our faculties, we may be enabled to know a spirit as we do a triangle, seems as absurd as if we should hope to see a sound . This is inculcated because I imagine it may be of moment towards clearing several important questions, and preventing some very dangerous errors concerning the nature of the soul.

[We may not, I think, strictly be said to have an idea of an active being, or of an action; although we may be said to have a notion of them. I have some knowledge or notion of my mind , and its acts about ideas; inasmuch as I know or understand what is meant by these words. What I know, that I have some notion of. I will not say that the terms idea and notion may not be used convertibly, if the world will have it so. But yet it conduceth to clearness and propriety, that we distinguish things very different by different names. It is also to be remarked that, all relations including an act of the mind, we cannot so properly be said to have an idea, but rather a notion, of the relations and habitudes between things. But if, in the modern way, the word idea is extended to spirits , and relations , and acts , this is, after all, an affair of verbal concern.]

143. It will not be amiss to add, that the doctrine of abstract ideas has had no small share in rendering those sciences intricate and obscure which are particularly conversant about spiritual things. Men have imagined they could frame abstract notions of the powers and acts  of the mind, and consider them prescinded as well from the mind or spirit itself, as from their respective objects and effects. Hence a great number of dark and ambiguous  terms, presumed to stand for abstract notions, have been introduced into metaphysics and morality; and from these have grown infinite distractions and disputes amongst the learned.

144. But, nothing seems more to have contributed towards engaging men in controversies and mistakes with regard to the nature and operations of the mind, than the being used to speak of those things in terms borrowed from sensible ideas. For example, the will is termed the motion of the soul: this infuses a belief that the mind of man is as a ball in motion, impelled and determined by the objects of sense, as necessarily as that is by the stroke of a racket. Hence arise endless scruples and errors of dangerous consequence in morality. All which, I doubt not, may be cleared, and truth appear plain, uniform, and consistent, could but philosophers be prevailed on to [depart from some received prejudices and modes of speech, and] retire into themselves, and attentively consider their own meaning. [But the difficulties arising on this head demand a more particular disquisition than suits with the design of this treatise.]

145. From what hath been said, it is plain that we cannot know the existence of other spirits otherwise than by their operations, or the ideas by them, excited in us. I perceive several motions, changes, and combinations of ideas, that inform me there are certain particular agents, like myself, which accompany them, and concur in their production. Hence, the knowledge I have of other spirits is not immediate, as is the knowledge of my ideas; but depending on the intervention of ideas, by me referred to agents or spirits distinct from myself, as effects or concomitant signs.

146. But, though there be some things which convince us human agents are concerned in producing them, yet it is evident to every one that those things which are called the Works of Nature, that is, the far greater part of the ideas or sensations perceived by us, are not produced by, or dependent on, the wills of men . There is therefore some other Spirit that causes them; since it is repugnant that they should subsist by themselves. See sect. 29. But, if we attentively consider the constant regularity, order, and concatenation of natural things, the surprising magnificence, beauty and perfection of the larger, and the exquisite contrivance of the smaller parts of the creation, together with the exact harmony and correspondence of the whole, but above all the never-enough-admired laws of pain and pleasure, and the instincts or natural inclinations, appetites, and passions of animals; — I say if we consider all these things, and at the same time attend to the meaning and import of the attributes One, Eternal, Infinitely Wise, Good, and Perfect, we shall clearly perceive that they belong to the aforesaid Spirit, “who works all in all” and “by whom all things consist.”

 147. Hence, it is evident that God is known as certainly and immediately as any other mind or spirit whatsoever, distinct from ourselves. We may even assert that the existence of God is far more evidently perceived than the existence of men; because the effects of Nature are infinitely more numerous and considerable than those ascribed to human agents. There is not any one mark that denotes a man, or effect produced by him, which does not more strongly evince the being of that Spirit who is the Author of Nature. For it is evident that, in affecting other persons, the will of man hath no other object than barely the motion of the limbs of his body; but that such a motion should be attended by, or excite  any idea in the mind of another, depends wholly on the will of the Creator. He alone it is who, “upholding all things by the word of His power,” maintains that intercourse between spirits whereby they are able to perceive the existence of each other. And yet this pure and clear Light which enlightens everyone is itself invisible [to the greatest part of mankind].

148. It seems to be a general pretence of the unthinking herd that they cannot see God. Could we but see Him, say they, as we see a man, we should believe that He is, and believing obey His commands. But alas, we need only open our eyes to see the Sovereign Lord of all things, with a more full and clear view than we do any one of our fellow-creatures. Not that I imagine we see God (as some will have it) by a direct and immediate view; or see corporeal things, not by themselves, but by seeing that which represents them in the essence of God; which doctrine is, I must confess, to me incomprehensible. But I shall explain my meaning. A human spirit or person is not perceived by sense, as not being an idea. When therefore we see the colour, size, figure, and motions of a man, we perceive only certain sensations or ideas excited in our own minds; and these being exhibited to our view in sundry distinct collections, serve to mark out unto us the existence of finite and created spirits like ourselves. Hence it is plain we do not see a man, if by man  is meant, that which lives, moves, perceives, and thinks as we do: but only such a certain collection of ideas, as directs us to think there is a distinct principle of thought and motion, like to ourselves, accompanying and represented by it. And after the same manner we see  God: all the difference is that, whereas some one finite and narrow assemblage of ideas denotes a particular human mind, whithersoever we direct our view we do at all times and in all places perceive manifest tokens of the Divinity: everything we see, hear, feel, or anywise perceive by sense, being a sign or effect of the power of God; as is our perception of those very motions which are produced by men.

149. It is therefore plain that nothing can be more evident to any one that is capable of the least reflexion than the existence of God, or a Spirit who is intimately present to our minds, producing in them all that variety of ideas or sensations which continually affect us, on whom we have an absolute and entire dependence, in short “in whom we live, and move, and have our being.” That the discovery of this great truth, which lies so near and obvious to the mind, should be attained to by the reason of so very few, is a sad instance of the stupidity and inattention of men, who, though they are surrounded with such clear manifestations of the Deity, are yet so little affected by them that they seem, as it were, blinded with excess of light.

150. But you will say — Hath Nature no share in the production of natural things, and must they be all ascribed to the immediate and sole operation of God? I answer, If by Nature is meant only the visible series of effects or sensations imprinted on our minds according to certain fixed and general laws, then it is plain that Nature, taken in this sense, cannot produce anything at all. But if by Nature  is meant some being distinct from God, as well as from the laws of nature and things perceived by sense, I must confess that word is to me an empty sound, without any intelligible meaning annexed to it. Nature, in this acceptation, is a vain chimera, introduced by those heathens who had not just notions of the omnipresence  and infinite perfection of God. But it is more unaccountable that it should be received among Christians, professing belief in the Holy Scriptures, which constantly ascribe those effects to the immediate hand of God that heathen philosophers are wont to impute to Nature. “The Lord, He causeth the vapours to ascend; He maketh lightnings with rain; He bringeth forth the wind out of His treasures.” Jerem. x. 13. “He turneth the shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark with night.” Amos v. 8. “He visiteth the earth, and maketh it soft with showers: He blesseth the springing thereof, and crowneth the year with His goodness; so that the pastures are clothed with flocks, and the valleys are covered over with corn.” See Psal. lxv. But, notwithstanding that this is the constant language of Scripture, yet we have I know not what aversion from believing that God concerns Himself so nearly in our affairs. Fain would we suppose Him at a great distance off, and substitute some blind unthinking deputy in His stead; though (if we may believe Saint Paul) “He be not far from every one of us.”

151. It will, I doubt not, be objected that the slow, gradual, and roundabout methods observed in the production of natural things do not seem to have for their cause the immediate  hand of an Almighty Agent: besides, monsters, untimely births, fruits blasted in the blossom, rains falling in desert places, miseries incident to human life, and the like, are so many arguments that the whole frame of nature is not immediately actuated and superintended by a Spirit of infinite wisdom and goodness. But the answer to this objection is in a good measure plain from sect. 62; it being visible that the aforesaid methods of nature are absolutely necessary in order to working by the most simple and general rules, and after a steady and consistent manner; which argues both the wisdom and goodness of God. [For, it doth hence follow that the finger of God is not so conspicuous to the resolved and careless sinner; which gives him an opportunity to harden in his impiety and grow ripe for vengeance. (Vid. sect. 57.)] Such is the artificial contrivance of this mighty  machine of Nature that, whilst its motions and various phenomena strike on our senses, the Hand which actuates the whole is itself unperceivable to men of flesh and blood. “Verily” (saith the prophet) “thou art a God that hidest thyself.” Isaiah xlv. 15. But, though the Lord conceal Himself from the eyes of the sensual and lazy, who will not be at the least expense of thought, yet to an unbiassed and attentive mind, nothing can be more plainly legible than the intimate presence of an All-wise Spirit, who fashions, regulates, and sustains the whole system of Being. It is clear, from what we have elsewhere observed, that the operating according to general and stated laws is so necessary for our guidance in the affairs of life, and letting us into the secret of nature, that without it all reach and compass of thought, all human sagacity and design, could serve to no manner of purpose. It were even impossible there should be any such faculties or powers in the mind. See sect. 31. Which one consideration abundantly outbalances whatever particular inconveniences may thence arise.

152. We should further consider, that the very blemishes and defects of nature are not without their use, in that they make an agreeable sort of variety, and augment the beauty of the rest of the creation, as shades in a picture serve to set off the brighter and more enlightened parts. We would likewise do well to examine, whether our taxing the waste of seeds and embryos, and accidental destruction of plants and animals before they come to full maturity, as an imprudence in the Author of nature, be not the effect of prejudice contracted by our familiarity with impotent and saving mortals. In man  indeed a thrifty management of those things which he cannot procure without much pains and industry may be esteemed wisdom. But we must not imagine that the inexplicably fine machine of an animal or vegetable costs the great Creator any more pains or trouble in its production than a pebble does; nothing being more evident than that an Omnipotent Spirit can indifferently  produce everything by a mere fiat or act of his will. Hence it is plain that the splendid profusion of natural things should not be interpreted weakness or prodigality in the Agent who produces them, but rather be looked on as an argument of the riches of His power.

153. As for the mixture of pain or uneasiness which is in the world, pursuant to the general laws of Nature, and the actions of finite, imperfect Spirits, this, in the state we are in at present, is indispensably necessary to our well-being. But our prospects are too narrow. We take, for instance, the idea of some one particular pain into our thoughts, and account it evil . Whereas, if we enlarge our view, so as to comprehend the various ends, connexions, and dependencies of things, on what occasions and in what proportions we are affected with pain and pleasure, the nature of human freedom, and the design with which we are put into the world; we shall be forced to acknowledge that those particular things which, considered in themselves, appear to be evil, have the nature of good, when considered as linked with the whole system of beings.

 154. From what hath been said, it will be manifest to any considering person, that it is merely for want of attention and comprehensiveness of mind that there are any favourers of Atheism or the Manichean Heresy to be found. Little and unreflecting souls may indeed burlesque the works of Providence; the beauty and order whereof they have not capacity, or will not be at the pains, to comprehend. But those who are masters of any justness and extent of thought, and are withal used to reflect, can never sufficiently admire the divine traces  of Wisdom and Goodness that shine throughout the economy of Nature. But what truth is there which glares so strongly on the mind that, by an aversion of thought, a wilful shutting of the eyes, we may not escape seeing it? Is it therefore to be wondered at, if the generality of men, who are ever intent on business or pleasure, and little used to fix or open the eye of their mind, should not have all that conviction and evidence of the Being of God which might be expected in reasonable creatures?

 155. We should rather wonder that men can be found so stupid as to neglect, than that neglecting they should be unconvinced of such an evident and momentous truth. And yet it is to be feared that too many of parts and leisure, who live in Christian countries, are, merely through a supine and dreadful negligence, sunk into a sort of Atheism. [They cannot say there is not a God, but neither are they convinced that there is. For what else can it be but some lurking infidelity, some secret misgivings of mind with regard to the existence and attributes of God, which permits sinners to grow and harden in impiety?] Since it is downright impossible that a soul pierced and enlightened with a thorough sense of the omnipresence, holiness, and justice of that Almighty Spirit should persist in a remorseless violation of His laws. We ought, therefore, earnestly to meditate and dwell on those important points; that so we may attain conviction without all scruple “that the eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good; that He is with us and keepeth us in all places whither we go, and giveth us bread to eat and raiment to put on;” that He is present and conscious  to our innermost thoughts; and, that we have a most absolute and immediate dependence on Him. A clear view of which great truths cannot choose but fill our hearts with an awful circumspection and holy fear, which is the strongest incentive to Virtue, and the best guard against Vice.

156. For, after all, what deserves the first place in our studies is, the consideration of God and our Duty; which to promote, as it was the main drift and design of my labours, so shall I esteem them altogether useless and ineffectual if, by what I have said, I cannot inspire my readers with a pious sense of the Presence of God; and, having shewn the falseness or vanity of those barren speculations which make the chief employment of learned men, the better dispose them to reverence and embrace the salutary truths of the Gospel; which to know and to practise is the highest perfection of human nature.

 A Discourse on Passive Obedience (1712) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

SECOND EDITION TEXT

Passive obedience is a religious and political doctrine, which states that people have a moral duty to obey the law, in particular accepting punishment as part of this obedience. The most notable publication describing this doctrine was Berkeley’s A Discourse on Passive Obedience (1712), now regarded as a major contribution to moral and political philosophy. Berkeley defends the thesis that people have “a moral duty to observe the negative precepts (prohibitions) of the law, including the duty not to resist the execution of punishment.” However, the author does make exceptions to this sweeping moral statement, stating that we can discard the precepts of “usurpers or even madmen” and that people can obey different supreme authorities if there are more than one claims to the highest authority.

On the other hand, Berkeley insists that disobedience to a tyrant remains wrong, even when the tyrant’s violation of moral law is a worse violation than rebellion would be; when such immoral tyranny becomes insufferable, Berkeley upholds that rebellion is predictable, and violates no rights of the tyrant, yet may still violate moral law. Berkeley’s argument for blind obedience to a de facto authority resembles Thomas Hobbes’ argument in Leviathan , on the grounds that rebellion can lead to anarchic violence and chaos, which is worse than the worst tyranny. However, Berkeley disagrees with Hobbes’ concept that moral and political obligation ultimately rests on the law of self-preservation.

 [image "img70.png" file=Image00069.jpg] 

Thomas Hobbes by John Michael Wright, c. 1670.  Hobbes (1588-1679) was an English philosopher, considered to be one of the founders of modern political philosophy. His works would serve as an early source of inspiration to Berkeley.

CONTENTSTO THE READER.

 PASSIVE OBEDIENCE

 

PASSIVE OBEDIENCE

OR, THE Christian Doctrine Of Not Resisting the SUPREME POWER, Proved and Vindicated upon the PRINCIPLES OF THE LAW of NATURE. In a DISCOURSE Deliver’d at the College-Chapel.

By GEORGE BERKELEY, M.

A. Fellow of Trinity-College, Dublin.

Nec vero aut per Senatum aut per Populum solvi hac lege possumus.
Cicero Fragment. de Repub.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed for H. CLEMENTS, at the Half-Moon in St. Paul’s Church-Yard.

1712.

 TO THE READER. [image "img71.jpg" file=Image00070.jpg] 

T HAT AN A BSOLUTE Passive Obedience ought not to be paid any Civil Power: But that Submission to Government shou’d be Measured and Limited by the Public Good of the Society; and that therefore Subjects may Lawfully Resist the Supreme Authority, in those Cases where the Public Good shall plainly seem to require it: Nay, that it is their Duty to do so, inasmuch as they are all under an indispensable Obligation to promote the Common Interest: These and the like Notions, which I cannot help thinking Pernicious to Mankind and Repugnant to Right Reason, having of late Years been Industriously Cultivated, and set in the most Advantageous Lights by Men of Parts and Learning, it seemed necessary to Arm the Youth of our University against them, and take care they go into the World well Principled; I do not mean Obstinately Prejudic’d in favour of a Party, but from an early Acquaintance with their Duty, and the clear Rational Grounds of it, Determin’d to such Practices as may speak them Good Christians and Loyal Subjects.

In this View, I made three Discourses not many Months since in the College-Chapel, which some who heard them thought it might be of Use to make more Public: And indeed, the false Accounts that are gone abroad concerning them, have made it necessary. Accordingly I now send them into the World under the Form of one entire Discourse.

To Conclude; As in Writing these Thoughts it was my Endeavour to Preserve that Cool and Impartial Temper which becomes every sincere Enquirer after Truth, so I heartily wish they may be Read with the same Disposition.

 PASSIVE OBEDIENCERomans Ch. 13. Ver. 2.

 [image "img71.jpg" file=Image00070.jpg] 

Whosoever Resisteth the Power, Resisteth the Ordinance of God.

 I. IT is not my Design to enquire into the particular Nature of the Government and Constitution of these Kingdoms; much less to pretend to determine concerning the Merits of the different Parties now reigning in the State. Those Topicks I profess to lie out of my Sphere, and they will probably be thought by most Men, improper to be Treated of in an Audience almost wholly made up of young Persons, set apart from the business and noise of the World, for their more convenient instruction in Learning and Piety. But surely it is in no respect unsuitable to the circumstances of this place to inculcate and explain every branch of the Law of Nature; or those Virtues and Duties which are equally binding in every Kingdom or Society of Men under Heaven; and of this kind I take to be that Christian Duty of not Resisting the Supreme Power implied in my Text. Whosoever Resisteth the Power, Resisteth the Ordinance of God. In Treating on which Words I shall observe the following Method.

II. First, I shall endeavour to prove, That there is an absolute unlimited Non-Resistance or Passive Obedience due to the Supreme Civil Power, whereever placed in any Nation. Secondly, I shall enquire into the Grounds and Reasons of the contrary Opinion. Thirdly, I shall consider the Objections drawn from the pretended consequences of Non-Resistance to the Supreme Power. In handling these Points, I intend not to build on the Authority of Holy Scripture, but altogether on the Principles of Reason common to all mankind; and that, because there are some very rational and learned Men, who being verily perswaded, an absolute passive Subjection to any earthly Power, is repugnant to right Reason, can never bring themselves to admit such an Interpretation of Holy Scripture (however natural and obvious from the words) as shall make that a part of Christian Religion, which seems to them in it self manifestly absurd, and destructive of the Original inherent Rights of humane Nature.

III. I do not mean to Treat of that submission, which Men are either in Duty or Prudence obliged to pay inferior or executive Powers; neither shall I consider where, or in what Persons the Supreme or Legislative Power is lodged in this or that Government. Only thus much I shall take for granted, That there is in every Civil Community, some where or other, placed a Supreme Power of making Laws, and enforcing the Observation of them. The fulfilling of those Laws, either by a punctual performance of what is enjoyned in them, or, if that be inconsistent with Reason or Conscience, by a patient Submission to whatever Penalties the Supreme Power hath annexed to the Neglect or Transgression of them, is termed Loyalty; as on the other hand, the making Use of Force and open Violence, either to withstand the execution of the Laws, or ward off the Penalties appointed by the Supreme Power, is properly Named Rebellion. Now to make it evident, that every degree of Rebellion is Criminal in the Subject; I shall in the first place endeavour to prove that Loyalty is a natural or moral Duty; and Disloyalty or Rebellion in the most strict and proper Sense, ae Vice or Breach of the Law of Nature. And Secondly, I propose to shew that the Prohibitions of Vice, or Negative Precepts of the Law of Nature, as, Thou shalt not commit Adultery, Thou shalt not Forswear thy self, Thou shalt not Resist the Supreme Power, and the like, ought to be taken in a most absolute, necessary, and immutable Sense: Insomuch, that the attainment of the greatest Good, or deliverance from the greatest Evil, that can befal any Man or number of Men in this Life, may not justifie the least Violation of them. First then I am to shew that Loyalty is a Moral Duty, and Disloyalty or Rebellion in the most strict and proper Sense a Vice, or breach of the Law of Nature.

IV. Tho’ it be a Point agreed amongst all Wise Men, that there are certain Moral Rules or Laws of Nature, which carry with them an eternal and indispensable Obligation; yet concerning the proper Methods for discovering those Laws, and distinguishing them from others dependent on the Humour and Discretion of Men, there are various Opinions; some direct us to look for them in the Divine Ideas, others in the natural Inscriptions on the Mind; some derive them from the Authority of Learned Men, and the Universal Agreement and Consent of Nations. Lastly, others hold that they are only to be discovered by the deductions of Reason. The three first Methods must be acknowledg’d to labour under great Difficulties, and the last has not, that I know, been any where distinctly explained, or treated of so fully as the importance of the Subject doth deserve. I hope therefore it will be Pardon’d, if in a Discourse of Passive Obedience, in order to lay the Foundation of that Duty the deeper, we make some Enquiry into the Origine, Nature, and Obligation of Moral Duties in general, and the Criterions whereby they are to be known.

V. Self-Love being a Principle of all others the most Universal, and the most deeply engraven in our Hearts, it is natural for us to regard things, as they are fitted to augment or impair our own Happiness; and accordingly we denominate them Good or Evil. Our Judgment is ever employ’d in distinguishing between these two, and it is the whole business of our Lives, to endeavour, by a proper application of our Faculties, to procure the one and avoid the other. At our first coming into the World, we are entirely guided by the Impressions of Sense, sensible Pleasure being the infallible Characteristic of present Good, as Pain is of Evil. But by degrees, as we grow up in our acquaintance with the Nature of Things, experience informs us that present Good is afterwards oft attended with a greater Evil; and on the other side, that present Evil is not less frequently the occasion of procuring to us a greater future Good. Besides, as the Nobler Faculties of the human Soul begin to display themselves, they discover to us Goods far more excellent than those which affect the Senses. Hence an alteration is wrought in our Judgments, we no longer comply with the first solicitations of Sense, but stay to consider the remote consequences of an Action, what Good may be hoped, or what Evil feared from it, according to the wonted Course of things. This obliges us frequently to overlook present momentary Enjoyments, when they come in competition with greater and more lasting Goods, tho’ too far off, or of too refin’d a Nature to affect our Senses.

VI. But as the whole Earth, and the entire duration of those perishing Things contained in it, is altogether inconsiderable, or in the Prophet’s expressive Stile, less than nothing in respect of Eternity, who sees not that every reasonable Man ought so to frame his Actions, as that they may most effectually contribute to promote his Eternal Interest? And since it is a Truth evident by the Light of Nature, that there is a Sovereign Omniscient Spirit, who alone can make us for ever Happy, or for ever Miserable; it plainly follows, that a Conformity to his Will, and not any Prospect of Temporal Advantage, is the sole Rule whereby every Man who acts up to the Principles of Reason, must Govern and Square his Actions. The same Conclusion doth likewise evidently Result from the Relation which God bears to his Creatures. God alone is Maker and Preserver of all Things. He is therefore with the most undoubted Right the great Legislator of the World; and Mankind are by all the Ties of Duty, no less than Interest, bound to Obey his Laws.

VII. Hence we should above all things endeavour to trace out the Divine Will, or the general design of Providence with regard to Mankind, and the Methods most directly tending to the accomplishment of that design, and this seems the genuine and proper way for discovering the Laws of Nature. For Laws being Rules directive of our Actions to the end intended by the Legislator, in order to attain the Knowledge of God’s Laws, we ought first to enquire what that end is, which he designs should be carried on by human Actions. Now, as God is a Being of Infinite Goodness, it is plain the end he proposes is Good. But God enjoying in himself all possible Perfection, it follows that it is not his own Good, but that of his Creatures. Again, the Moral Actions of Men are entirely terminated within themselves, so as to have no influence on the other orders of Intelligences or reasonable Creatures: The end therefore to be procured by them, can be no other than the good of Men. But as nothing in a natural State can entitle one Man more than another to the favour of God, except only Moral Goodness, which consisting in a Conformity to the Laws of God, doth presuppose the being of such Laws, and Law ever supposing an end, to which it guides our Actions, it follows that Antecedent to the end proposed by God, no distinction can be conceived between Men; that end therefore it self or general design of Providence is not determined or limited by any Respect of Persons: It is not therefore the private Good of this or that Man, Nation or Age, but the general well-being of all Men, of all Nations, of all Ages of the World, which God designs should be procured by the concurring Actions of each individual. Having thus discover’d the great end, to which all Moral Obligations are Subordinate; it remains, that we enquire what Methods are necessary for the obtaining that End.

VIII. The well-being of Mankind must necessarily be carried on one of these two ways: Either first, without the injunction of any certain universal Rules of Morality, only by obliging every one upon each particular Occasion, to consult the publick Good, and always to do that, which to him shall seem in the present time and circumstances, most to conduce to it. Or Secondly, by enjoining the Observation of some determinate, establish’d Laws, which, if Universally practis’d, have from the Nature of things an Essential fitness to procure the well-being of Mankind; tho’ in their particular Application, they are sometimes through untoward accidents, and the perverse irregularity of human Wills, the occasions of great Sufferings, and Misfortunes, it may be, to very many good Men. Against the former of these Methods there lie several strong Objections. For brevity I shall mention only two.

IX. First, it will thence follow, that the Best Men for want of Judgment, and the Wisest for want of knowing all the hidden circumstances and consequences of an Action, may very often be at a loss how to behave themselves; which they would not be, in case they judged of each Action, by comparing it with some particular Precept, rather than by examining the Good or Evil which in that single instance it tends to procure: It being far more easy to Judge with certainty, whether such or such an Action be a Transgression of this or that Precept, than whether it will be attended with more good or ill Consequences. In short, to calculate the events of each particular Action is impossible, and tho’ it were not, would yet take up too much time to be of Use in the affairs of Life. Secondly, if that Method be observ’d, it will follow that we can have no sure Standard, to which comparing the Actions of another, we may pronounce them good or bad, Virtues or Vices. For since the measure and rule of every good Man’s Actions is supposed to be nothing else, but his own private disinterested Opinion, of what makes most for the publick Good at that juncture: And since this Opinion must unavoidably in different Men, from their particular Views and Circumstances, be very different: It is impossible to know, whether any one instance of Parricide or Perjury, for example, be Criminal. The Man may have had his Reasons for it, and that which in me would have been a heinous Sin, may be in him a Duty. Every Man’s particular Rule is buried in his own Breast, invisible to all but himself, who therefore can only tell whether he Observes it or no. And since that Rule is fitted to particular Occasions, it must ever change as they do: Hence it is not only various in different Men, but in one and the same Man at different times.

X. From all which it follows, there can be no Harmony or Agreement between the Actions of good Men: No apparent Steddiness or Consistency of one Man with himself, no adhering to Principles: The best Actions may be Condemn’d, and the most Villanous meet with Applause. In a Word, there ensues the most horrible confusion of Vice and Virtue, Sin and Duty, that can possibly be imagined. It follows therefore that the great end, to which God requires the concurrence of human Actions, must of necessity be carried on by the second Method proposed, namely, the observation of certain, universal, determinate Rules or Moral Precepts, which, in their own Nature, have a necessity tendency to promote the Well being of the Sum of Mankind, taking in all Nations and Ages, from the beginning to the end of the World.

XI. Hence upon an equal comprehensive Survey of the general Nature, the Passions, Interests, and mutual Respects of Mankind; whatsoever practical Proposition doth to right Reason evidently appear to have a necessary connexion with the universal Well-being included in it, is to be look’d upon as enjoined by the Will of God. For he that willeth the end, doth will the necessary means conducive to that end; but it hath been shewn, that God willeth the Universal Well-being of Mankind should be promoted by the concurrence of each particular Person; therefore every such practical Proposition, necessarily tending thereto, is to be esteemed a Decree of God, and is consequently a Law to Man.

XII. These Propositions are called Laws of Nature, because they are universal, and do not derive their Obligation from any Civil Sanction, but immediately from the Author of Nature himself. They are said to be stamped on the Mind, to be engraven on the Tables of the Heart, because they are well known to Mankind, and suggested and inculcated by Conscience. Lastly, they are termed Eternal Rules of Reason, because they necessarily result from the Nature of Things, and may be demonstrated by the infallible deductions of Reason.

XIII. And notwithstanding that these Rules are too often, either by the unhappy concurrence of events, or more especially by the wickedness of perverse Men, who will not Conform to them, made accidental causes of Misery to those good Men, who do; yet this doth not vacate their Obligation, they are ever to be esteemed the fixed unalterable Standards of Moral Good and Evil; no private Interest, no Love of Friends, no Regard to the publick Good, should make us depart from them. Hence, when any doubt arises concerning the Morality of an Action, ’tis plain, this cannot be determined by computing the publick Good, which in that particular Case it is attended with, but only by comparing it with the Eternal Law of Reason. He who squares his actions by this Rule, can never do amiss, tho’ thereby he should bring himself to Poverty, Death, or Disgrace: No, not tho’ he should involve his Family, his Friends, his Country in all those Evils, which are accounted the Greatest, and most insupportable to human Nature. Tenderness and Benevolence of Temper are often motives to the best and greatest Actions; but we must not make them the sole Rule of our Actions; they are Passions rooted in our nature, and like all other Passions must be restrain’d and kept under, otherwise they may possibly betray us into as great Enormities, as any other unbridled Lust. Nay, they are more dangerous than other Passions, insomuch as they are more plausible, and apt to dazzle, and corrupt the Mind, with the appearance of Goodness and Generosity.

 XIV. For the Illustration of what has been said, it will not be amiss, if from the Moral we turn our Eyes on the Natural World. Homo ortus est (says Balbus in Cicero) ad Mundum contemplandum, & imitandum: And surely, it is not possible for free intellectual Agents to propose a nobler Pattern for their imitation than Nature, which is nothing else but a series of free Actions produced by the best and wisest Agent. But it is evident that those Actions are not adapted to particular Views, but all conformed to certain general Rules, which being collected from Observation, are by Philosophers termed Laws of Nature. And these indeed are excellently suited to promote the general well-being of the Creation: But what from casual combinations of events, and what from the voluntary motions of Animals, it often falls out, that the natural good not only of private Men, but of entire Cities and Nations, wou’d be better promoted by a particular Suspension, or Contradiction, than an exact Observation of those Laws. Yet for all that, Nature still takes its course; nay, it is plain that Plagues, Famines, Inundations, Earthquakes, with an infinite variety of Pains and Sorrows; in a word all kinds of Calamities publick and private do arise from a uniform steddy observation of those general Laws, which are once establish’d by the Author of Nature, and which he will not change or deviate from upon any of those Accounts, how wise or benevolent soever it may be thought by foolish Men to do so. As for the Miracles Recorded in Scripture, they were always wrought for Confirmation of some Doctrine or Mission from God, and not for the sake of the particular natural goods, as Health or Life, which some Men might have reaped from them. From all which it seems sufficiently plain, that we cannot be at a loss, which way to determine, in case we think God’s own Methods the properest to obtain his ends, and that it is our Duty to Copy after them, so far as the frailty of our Nature will permit.

XV. Thus far in general, of the nature and necessity of moral Rules, and the Criterion or Mark whereby they may be known. As for the particulars, from the foregoing Discourse, the principal of them may without much difficulty be deduced. It hath been shewn that the Law of Nature is a System of such Rules or Precepts, as that if they be all of them, at all times, in all places, and by all Men observed, they will necessarily promote the well-being of Mankind, so far as it is attainable by human Actions. Now, let any one who hath the use of Reason, take but an impartial Survey of the general frame and circumstances of human Nature, and it will appear plainly to him, that the constant observation of Truth, for instance, of Justice, and Chastity, hath a necessary connexion with their universal well-being, that therefore they are to be esteemed Virtues or Duties, and that, Thou shalt not Forswear thy self, Thou shalt not Commit Adultery, Thou shalt not Steal, are so many unalterable Moral Rules, which to violate in the least degree is Vice or Sin. I say, the agreement of these particular practical Propositions, with the Definition, or Criterion premised, doth so clearly result from the nature of Things, that it were a needless digression, in this place to enlarge upon it. And from the same Principle, by the very same Reasoning, it follows that Loyalty is a moral Virtue, and, Thou shalt not Resist the Supreme Power, a Rule or Law of Nature, the least breach whereof hath the inherent stain of Moral Turpitude.

XVI. The Miseries inseparable from a State of Anarchy are easily imagined. So insufficient is the Wit or Strength of any single Man, either to avert the Evils, or procure the Blessings of Life, and so apt are the Wills of different Persons to contradict and thwart each other, that it is absolutely necessary, several independent Powers be combin’d together, under the Direction (if I may so speak) of one and the same Will, I mean the Law of the Society. Without this there is no Politeness, no Order, no Peace among Men, but the World is one great heap of Misery and Confusion; the Strong as well as the Weak, the Wise as well as the Foolish, standing on all sides exposed to all those Calamities, which Man can be liable to in a State where he has no other Security, than the not being possessed of any thing which may raise Envy or Desire in another. A State! by so much more ineligible than that of Brutes, as a reasonable Creature hath a greater reflexion and foresight of Miseries than they. From all which it plainly follows, that Loyalty or Submission to the Supreme Civil Authority, hath, if universally practis’d in conjunction with all other Virtues, a necessary connexion with the well-being of the whole Sum of Mankind; and by consequence, if the Criterion we have laid down, be True, it is, strictly speaking, a Moral Duty, or branch of Natural Religion. And therefore, the least degree of Rebellion is with the utmost strictness and propriety, a Sin: Not only in Christians, but also in those who haxe the Light of Reason alone for their Guide. Nay, upon a thorough and impartial View, this Submission will, I think, appear one of the very first and fundamental Laws of Nature, inasmuch as it is Civil Government which ordains and marks out the various Relations between Men, and regulates Property, thereby giving Scope and laying a foundation for the exercise of all other Duties. And in Truth, whoever considers the Condition of Man, will scarce conceive it possible that the practice of any one Moral Virtue shou’d Obtain, in the naked, forlorn State of Nature.

XVII. But since it must be confess’d, that in all Cases our Actions come not within the Direction of certain fixed Moral Rules, it may possibly be still questioned, whether Obedience to the Supreme Power be not one of those exempted Cases, and consequently to be regulated by the Prudence and Discretion of every single Person, rather than adjusted to the Rule of absolute Non-Resistance. I shall therefore endeavour to make it yet more plain, that, Thou shalt not Resist the Supreme Power, is an undoubted Precept of Morality; as will appear from the following Considerations. First then, Submission to Government is a Point important enough to be established by a Moral Rule. Things of insignificant and trifling Concern are, for that very Reason, exempted from the Rules of Morality. But Government, on which so much depend the Peace, Order, and Well-being of Mankind, cannot surely be thought of too small Importance to be Secur’d and Guarded by a Moral Rule. Government, I say, which is it self the principal Source under Heaven, of those particular Advantages, for the procurement and conservation whereof, several unquestionable Moral Rules were prescribed to Men.

XVIII. Secondly, Obedience to Government is a Case Universal enough to fall under the Direction of a Law of Nature. Numberless Rules there may be for regulating Affairs of great Concernment, at certain Junctures, and to some particular Persons or Societies, which notwithstanding are not to be esteemed Moral or Natural Laws, but may be either totally abrogated or dispensed with; because the private Ends they were intended to promote, respect only some particular Persons, as engaged in Relations not founded in the general Nature of Man, who on various Occasions, and in different Postures of Things, may prosecute their own Designs by different Measures, as in Humane Prudence shall seem convenient. But what relation is there more extensive and universal than that of Subject and Law? This is confin’d to no particular Age or Climate, but universally obtains at all Times, and in all Places, wherever Men live in a state exalted above that of Brutes. It is therefore evident, that the Rule forbidding Resistance to the Law or Supreme Power, is not upon pretence of any defect in point of Universality, to be excluded from the Number of the Laws of Nature.

XIX. Thirdly, There is another Consideration, which confirms the Necessity of admitting this Rule for a Moral or Natural Law; namely, because the Case it regards is of too Nice and Difficult a Nature to be left to the Judgment and Determination of each private Person. Some Cases there are so plain and obvious to judge of, that they may safely be trusted to the Prudence of every reasonable Man; but in all Instances, to determine, whether a Civil Law is fitted to promote the Publick Interest; or whether Submission or Resistance will prove most advantageous in the Consequence; or when it is, that the general Good of a Nation may require an Alteration of Government, either in its Form, or in the Hands which Administer it: these are Points too arduous and intricate, and which require too great a degree of Parts, Leisure, and liberal Education, as well as Disinterestedness and thorough Knowledge in the particular State of a Kingdom, for every Subject to take upon him the Determination of them. From which it follows, that upon this account also, Non-Resistance, which, in the main, no body can deny to be a most profitable and wholsome Duty, ought not to be limited by the Judgment of private Persons to particular Occasions, but esteemed a most Sacred Law of Nature.

XX. The foregoing Arguments do, I think, make it manifest, that the Precept against Rebellion is on a Level with other Moral Rules. Which will yet farther appear from this fourth and last Consideration. It cannot be denied, that Right Reason doth require some common stated Rule or Measure, whereby Subjects ought to shape their Submission to the Supreme Power. Since any clashing or disagreement in this Point must unavoidably tend to weaken, and dissolve the Society And it is unavoidable, that there shou’d be great clashing, where it is left to the breast of each Individual to suit his Fancy with a different measure of Obedience. But this common stated Measure must be either the general Precept forbidding Resistance, or else the publick Good of the whole Nation: Which last, tho’ it is allowed to be in it self something certain and determinate; yet, forasmuch as Men can regulate their Conduct only by what appears to them, whether in Truth it be what it appears or no; and since the Prospects Men form to themselves of a Country’s publick Good, are commonly as various as its Landschapes which meet the Eye in several Situations: It clearly follows, that to make the publick Good the Rule of Obedience, is in effect, not to establish any determinate, agreed, common Measure of Loyalty, but to leave every Subject to the Guidance of his own particular mutable Fancy.

 XXI. From all which Arguments and Considerations it is a most evident Conclusion, That the Law prohibiting Rebellion is in strict Truth a Law of Nature, Universal Reason, and Morality. But to this, it will perhaps be objected by some, that whatever may be concluded with regard to Resistance, from the tedious Deductions of Reason, yet there is I know not what turpitude and deformity in some Actions, which at first Blush, shews them to be vicious; but they, not finding themselves struck with such a sensible and immediate Horror at the thought of Rebellion, cannot think it on a level with other Crimes against Nature. To which I answer, that it is True, there are certain natural Antipathies implanted in the Soul, which are ever the most lasting and insurmountable; but as Custom is a second Nature, whatever Aversions are from our early Childhood continually infused into the Mind, give it so deep a stain as is scarce to be distinguished from natural Complexion. And as it doth hence follow, that to make all the inward horrors of Soul, pass for infallible marks of Sin, were the way to establish Error and Superstition in the World: So, on the other hand, to suppose all Actions lawful, which are unattended with those starts of Nature, wou’d prove of the last dangerous consequence to Virtue and Morality. For these pertaining to us as Men, we must not be directed in respect of them, by any emotions in our Blood and Spirits, but by the dictates of sober and impartial Reason. And if there be any, who find they have a less Abhorrence of Rebellion than of other Villanies, all that can be inferred from it, is, that this part of their Duty was not so much reflected on, or so early and frequently inculcated into their Hearts, as it ought to have been. Since without question there are other Men who have as thorough an Aversion for that, as for any other Crime.

XXII. Again, it will probably be objected, that Submission to Government differs from moral Duties, in that it is founded in a Contract, which upon the Violation of its Conditions doth of course become void, and in such Case Rebellion is lawful; it hath not therefore the Nature of a Sin or Crime, which is in it self absolutely unlawful, and must be committed on no Pretext whatsoever. Now, passing over all Enquiry and Dispute concerning the first obscure Rise of Government, I observe its being founded on a Contract, may be understood in a twofold Sense, either, first, that several independent Persons finding the unsufferable Inconvenience of a State of Anarchy, where every one was governed by his own Will, consented and agreed together to pay an absolute Submission, to the Decrees of some certain Legislative; which, tho sometimes they may bear hard on the Subject, yet, must surely prove easier to be governed by, than the violent Humours, and unsteddy opposite Wills of a multitude of Savages. And in case we admit such a Compact to have been the original Foundation of Civil Government; it must even on that Supposition be held Sacred and Inviolable.

XXIII. Or Secondly, it is meant that Subjects have contracted with their respective Sovereigns or Legislators, to pay, not an absolute, but conditional and limited Submission to their Laws, that is, upon Condition, and so far forth, as the Observation of them shall contribute to the publick Good: Reserving still to themselves a Right of Superintending the Laws, and Judging whether they are fitted to promote the publick Good or no. And (in case they or any of them think it needful) of Resisting the higher Powers, and changing the whole Frame of Government by Force; which is a Right that all Mankind, whether single Persons or Societies, have over those that are deputed by them. But in this Sense a Contract cannot be admitted for the Ground and Measure of civil Obedience, except one of these two Things be clearly shewn: Either, First, That such a Contract is an express known Part of the Fundamental Constitution of a Nation, equally allowed and unquestioned by all as the common Law of the Land. Or, Secondly, If it be not express, that it is at least necessarily implied in the very Nature or Notion of Civil Polity, which supposes it is a thing manifestly absurd, that a Number of Men shou’d be oblig’d to live under an unlimited Subjection to Civil Law, rather than continue wild and independent of each other. But to me it seems most evident, that neither of those Points will ever be proved.

XXIV. And till they are proved beyond all Contradiction, the Doctrine built upon them, ought to be rejected with Detestation. Since to represent the Higher Powers as Deputies of the People, manifestly tends to diminish that Awe and Reverence, which all good Men should have for the Laws and Government of their Countrey. And to speak of a conditioned, limited Loyalty, and I know not what vague and undetermined Contracts, is a most effectual Means to loosen the Bands of Civil Society; than which nothing can be of more mischievous Consequence to Mankind. But after all, if there be any Man, who either cannot or will not see the Absurdity and perniciousness of those Notions, he wou’d, I doubt not, be convinced with a Witness, in case they should once become current, and every private Man take it in his Head to believe them true, and put them in practice.

XXV. But there still remains an Objection, which hath the Appearance of some Strength against what has been said. Namely, That whereas Civil Polity is a thing entirely of human Institution, it seems contrary to Reason, to make Submission to it part of the Law of Nature, and not rather of the Civil Law. For how can it be imagin’d that Nature shou’d dictate or prescribe a natural Law about a thing, which depends on the Arbitrary Humour of Men, not only as to its Kind or Form, which is very various and mutable, but even as to its Existence; there being no where to be found a Civil Government set up by Nature. In answer to this, I observe first, that most Moral Precepts do presuppose some voluntary Actions, or Pacts of Men, and are nevertheless esteemed Laws of Nature. Property is assigned, the Signification of Words ascertained, and Matrimony contracted by the Agreement and Consent of Mankind; and for all that it is not doubted, whether Theft, Falsehood and Adultery be prohibited by the Law of Nature. Loyalty, therefore, tho it should suppose and be the Result of human Institutions, may, for all that, be of natural Obligation. I say, Secondly, that, notwithstanding particular Societies are formed by Men, and are not in all Places alike, as Things esteemed natural are wont to be, yet there is implanted in Mankind a natural Tendency or Disposition to a social Life. I call it natural, because it is universal, and because it necessarily results from the Differences which distinguish Man from Beast: The peculiar Wants, Appetites, Faculties, and Capacities of Man, being exactly calculated, and framed for such a State, insomuch that without it, it is impossible he should live in a Condition in any Degree suitable to his Nature. And since the Bond and Cement of Society is a Submission to its Laws, it plainly follows, that this Duty hath an equal Right with any other to be thought a Law of Nature. And, surely that Precept which enjoyns Obedience to Civil Laws, cannot it self with any Propriety be accounted a Civil Law; it must therefore either have no Obligation at all on the Conscience, or if it hath, it must be derived from the universal Voice of Nature and Reason.

XXVI. And thus the first Point proposed seems clearly made out. Namely, That Loyalty is a Virtue or Moral Duty; and Disloyalty or Rebellion, in the most strict and proper Sense, a Vice or Crime against the Law of Nature. We are now come to the Second Point, which was to shew, that the Prohibitions of Vice, or negative Precepts of Morality, are to be taken in a most absolute, necessary, and immutable Sense; insomuch that the Attainment of the greatest Good, or Deliverance from the greatest Evil, that can befal any Man or Number of Men in this Life, may not justify the least Violation of them. But in the first place, I shall explain the Reason of distinguishing between Positive and Negative Precepts, the latter only being included in this general Proposition. Now the Ground of that Distinction may be resolved into this; namely, that very often, either through the Difficulty or Number of Moral Actions, or their Inconsistence with each other, it is not possible for one Man to perform several of them at the same time; whereas it is plainly consistent and possible, that any Man shou’d, at the same time, abstain from all manner of positive Actions whatsoever. Hence it comes to pass, that Prohibitions or Negative Precepts must by every one, in all Times and Places, be all actually observed: Whereas those which enjoin the Doing of an Action, allow room for Human Prudence and Discretion, in the Execution of them: it for the most part depending on various accidental Circumstances; all which ought to be consider’d, and Care taken that Duties of less Moment do not interfere with, and hinder the fulfilling of those which are more important. And for this Reason, if not the Positive Laws themselves, at least the Exercise of them admits of Suspension, Limitation, and Diversity of Degrees. As to the Indispensibleness of the Negative Precepts of the Law of Nature, I shall in its Proof offer Two Arguments, the First from the Nature of the Thing, and the Second from the Imitation of God in his Government of the World.

XXVII. First then, from the Nature of the Thing, it hath been already shewn, that the great End of Morality can never be carried on, by leaving each particular Person to promote the Publick Good, in such a manner as he shall think most convenient, without prescribing certain determinate, universal Rules to be the common Measure of Moral Actions; and, if we allow the Necessity of these, and at the same time think it lawful to transgress them, whenever the Publick Good shall seem to require it, what is this, but in Words indeed to enjoin the Observation of Moral Rules, but in effect to leave every one to be guided by his own Judgment; than which nothing can be imagined more pernicious and destructive to Mankind, as hath been already proved. Secondly, This same Point may be collected from the Example set us by the Author of Nature, who, as we have above observed, acts according to certain fixed Laws, which he will not transgress upon the Account of Accidental Evils arising from them. Suppose a Prince, on whose Life the Welfare of a Kingdom depends, to fall down a Precipice, we have no Reason to think, that the Universal Law of Gravitation wou’d be suspended in that Case. The like may be said of all other Laws of Nature, which we do not find to admit of Exceptions on particular Accounts.

XXVIII. And, as without such a Steddiness in Nature, we shou’d soon, instead of this beautiful Frame, see nothing but a disorderly, and confused Chaos: So if once it become current, that the Moral Actions of Men are not to be guided by certain definite inviolable Rules, there will be no longer found that Beauty, Order, and Agreement, in the System of Rational Beings, or Moral World, which will then be all cover’d over with Darkness and Violence. It is true, he who stands close to a Palace, can hardly make a right Judgment of the Architecture and Symmetry of its several Parts, the nearer ever appearing disproportionably great. And if we have a mind to take a fair Prospect of the Order and general Well-being, which the inflexible Laws of Nature and Morality derive on the World, we must, if I may so say, go out of it, and imagine our selves to be distant Spectators of all that is transacted and contained in it; otherwise we are sure to be deceived, by the too near View of the little present Interests of our Selves, our Friends, or our Country. The right Understanding of what hath been said, will, I think, afford a clear Solution to the following Difficulties.

XXIX. First, it may perhaps seem to some, that in Consequence of the foregoing Doctrine, Men will be left to their own private Judgments as much as ever. For, First, the very being of the Laws of Nature; Secondly, the Criterion whereby to know them; and, Thirdly, the Agreement of any particular Precept with that Criterion, are all to be discovered by Reason and Argumentation, in which every Man doth necessarily judge for himself; hence upon that Supposition, there is Place for as great Confusion, Unsteddiness, and Contrariety of Opinions and Actions, as upon any other. I answer, that however Men may differ, as to what were most proper and beneficial to the Publick to be done or omitted on particular Occasions, when they have for the most part narrow and interested Views; yet in general Conclusions, drawn from an equal and enlarged View of Things, it is not possible there should be so great, if any Disagreement at all amongst Candid, Rational Enquirers after Truth.

XXX. Secondly, The most plausible Pretence of all, against the Doctrine we have premised concerning a rigid indispensible Observation of Moral Rules, is that which is founded on the Consideration of the Publick Weal; for since the common Good of Mankind is confessedly the End which God requires shou’d be promoted by the free Actions of Men, it may seem to follow, that all good Men ought ever to have this in View, as the great Mark to which all their Endeavours should be directed; if therefore in any particular Case, a strict keeping to the Moral Rule shall prove manifestly inconsistent with the Publick Good, it may be thought agreeable to the Will of God, that in that Case the Rule does not restrain an honest disinterested Person, from acting for that End to which the Rule it self was Ordained. For it is an Axiom, that the End is more Excellent than the Means, which deriving their Goodness from the End, may not come in Competition with it.

XXXI. In Answer to this, let it be observ’d, that nothing is a Law merely because it conduceth to the Publick Good, but because it is decreed by the Will of God, which alone can give the Sanction of a Law of Nature to any Precept; neither is any thing, how expedient or plausible soever, to be esteemed lawful on any other Account, than its being coincident with, or not repugnant to the Laws promulgated by the Voice of Nature and Reason. It must indeed be allowed, that the rational Deduction of those Laws is founded in the intrinsick Tendency they have to promote the Well-being of Mankind, on Condition they are universally and constantly observed. But tho’ it afterwards comes to pass, that they accidentally fail of that End, or even promote the contrary, they are nevertheless binding, as hath been already proved. In short, that whole Difficulty may be resolved by the following Distinction. In framing the general Laws of Nature, it is granted, we must be entirely guided by the Publick Good of Mankind, but not in the ordinary Moral Actions of our Lives. Such a Rule, if universally observ’d, hath from the Nature of Things, a necessary Fitness to promote the general Well-being of Mankind; therefore it is a Law of Nature: This is good Reasoning. But if we shou’d say such an Action doth in this Instance produce much Good, and no Harm to Mankind; therefore it is lawful: This were wrong. The Rule is framed with respect to the Good of Mankind, but our Practice must be always shaped immediately by the Rule. They who think the Publick Good of a Nation to be the sole Measure of the Obedience due to the Civil Power, seem not to have considered this Distinction.

XXXII. If it be said that some Negative Precepts, e. g. Thou shalt not kill, do admit of Limitation, since otherwise it were unlawful for the Magistrate, for a Soldier in a Battel, or a Man in his own Defence to kill another: I answer, when a Duty is expressed in too general Terms, as in this Instance, in Order to a distinct Declaration of it, either those Terms may be changed for others of a more limited Sense, as Kill for Murder, or else from the general Proposition remaining in its full Latitude, Exceptions may be made of those precise Cases, which not agreeing with the Notion of Murder, are not prohibited by the Law of Nature. In the former Case there is a Limitation, but it is only of the Signification of a single Term too general and improper, by substituting another more proper and particular in its Place. In the latter Case there are Exceptions, but then they are not from the Law of Nature, but from a more general Proposition, which besides that Law, includes somewhat more, which must be taken away in order to eave the Law by it self clear and determinate. From neither of which Concessions will it follow, that any Negative Law of Nature is limited to those Cases only where its particular Application promotes the Publick Good, or admits all other Cases to be excepted from it, wherein its being actually observed produceth Harm to the Publick. But of this I shall have Occasion to say more in the Sequel. I have now done with the first Head, which was to shew, that there is an Absolute, Unlimited Passive Obedience due to the Supreme Power, where-ever placed in any Nation; and come to enquire into the Grounds and Reasons of the contrary Opinion; which was the Second Thing proposed.

XXXIII. One great Principle, which the Pleaders for Resistance make the Ground-Work of their Doctrine, is, that the Law of Self-Preservation is Prior to all other Engagement, being the very first and fundamental Law of Nature. Hence, say they, Subjects are obliged by Nature, and it is their Duty, to resist the cruel Attempts of Tyrants, however authorized by unjust and Bloody Laws, which are nothing else but the Decrees of Men, and consequently must give way to those of God, or Nature. But, perhaps, if we narrowly examine this Notion, it will not be found so just and clear as some Men may imagine, or, indeed, as at first Sight it seems to be. For we ought to distinguish between a Two-fold Signification of the Terms Law of Nature; which Words do either denote ae Rule or Precept for the Direction of the voluntary Actions of reasonable Agents, and in that Sense they imply a Duty; or else they are used to signify any general Rule, which we observe to obtain in the Works of Nature, independent of the Wills of Men; in which Sense no Duty is implied. And in this last Acceptation, I grant it is a general Law of Nature, that in every Animal there be implanted a Desire of Self-Preservation, which, tho’ it is the earliest, the deepest, and most lasting of all, whether Natural or Acquired Appetites, yet cannot with any Propriety be termed a Moral Duty. But if in the former Sense of the Words, they mean that Self-Preservation is the first and most fundamental Law of Nature, which therefore must take place of all other Natural or Moral Duties: I think that Assertion to be manifestly false, for this plain Reason, because it wou’d thence follow, a Man may lawfully commit any Sin whatsoever to preserve his Life, than which nothing can be more absurd.

XXXIV. It cannot indeed be denied, that the Law of Nature restrains us from doing those Things which may injure the Life of any Man, and consequently our own. But, notwithstanding all that is said of the Obligativeness and Priority of the Law of Self-Preservation, yet, for ought I can see, there is no particular Law, which oblige; any Man to prefer his own Temporal Good, not even Life it self, to that of another Man, much less to the Observation of any one Moral Duty. This is what we are too ready to perform of our own Accord; and there is more Need of a Law to curb and restrain, than there is of one to excite and inflame our Self-Love.

XXXV. But, Secondly, tho’ we shou’d grant the Duty of Self-Preservation to be the first and most necessary of all the Positive or Affirmative Laws of Nature; yet, forasmuch as it is a Maxim allowed by all Moralists, that Evil is never to be committed, to the end Good may come of it, it will thence plainly follow, that no Negative Precept ought to be transgressed for the sake of observing a Positive one; and therefore, since we have shewn, Thou shalt not resist the Supreme Power, to be a Negative Law of Nature, it is a necessary Consequence, that it may not be transgressed under pretence of fulfilling the Positive Duty of Self-Preservation.

XXXVI. A second erroneous Ground of our Adversaries, whereon they lay a main Stress, is that they hold the Publick Good of a particular Nation to be the Measure of the Obedience due from the Subject to the Civil Power, which therefore may be resisted whensoever the Publick Good shall verily seem to require it. But this Point hath been already consider’d, and in Truth it can give small Difficulty to whoever understands Loyalty to be on the same Foot with other Moral Duties enjoyned in negative Precepts, all which tho’ equally calculated to promote the general Well-being, may not nevertheless be limited or suspended under pretext of giving way to the end, as is plain from what hath been premised on that Subject.

XXXVII. A Third Reason which they insist on, is to this Effect. All Civil Authority or Right is derived originally from the People; but no Body can transfer that to another, which he hath not himself; therefore since no Man hath an absolute unlimited Right over his own Life, the Subject cannot transfer such a Right to the Prince (or Supreme Power) who consequently hath no such unlimited Right to dispose of the Lives of his Subjects. In case therefore a Subject resist his Prince, who acting according to Law, maketh an unjust, tho’ legal, Attempt on his Life, he does him no Wrong, since Wrong it is not, to prevent another from seizing what he hath no Right to; whence it shou’d seem to follow, that agreeably to Reason, the Prince or Supreme Power wheresoever placed may be resisted. Having thus endeavoured to state their Argument in its clearest Light, I make this Answer. First, it is granted, no Civil Power hath an unlimited Right to dispose of the Life of any Man. Secondly, in case one Man resist another invading that which he hath no Right to, it is granted he doth him no Wrong. But in the Third Place, I deny that it doth thence follow, the Supreme Power may consonantly to Reason be resisted, because that altho’ such Resistance wronged not the Prince or Supreme Power wheresoever placed, yet it were injurious to the Author of Nature, and a Violation of his Law, which Reason obligeth us to Transgress upon no Account whatsoever, as hath been demonstrated.

XXXVIII. A Fourth Mistake or Prejudice which influenceth the Impugners of Non-Resistance, arises from the natural Dread of Slavery, Chains, and Fetters which inspires them with an Aversion for any thing, which even metaphorically comes under those Denominations. Hence they cry out against us that we wou’d deprive them of their natural Freedom, that we are making Chains for Mankind, that we are for enslaving them, and the like. But how harsh soever the Sentence may appear, yet it is most true, that our Appetites, even the most natural, as of Ease, Plenty, or Life it self, must be chain’d and fetter’d by the Laws of Nature and Reason. This Slavery, if they will call it so, or Subjection of our Passions to the immutable Decrees of Reason, though it may be Galling to the sensual Part or the Beast, yet sure I am, it addeth much to the Dignity of that which is peculiarly Human in our Composition. This leads me to the Fifth fundamental Error:

XXXIX. Namely, the mistaking the Object of Passive Obedience. We shou’d consider, that when a Subject endures the Insolence and Oppression of one or more Magistrates, armed with the Supreme Civil Power, the Object of his Submission is, in strict Truth, nothing else but right Reason, which is the Voice of the Author of Nature. Think not we are so senseless, as to imagine Tyrants cast in a better Mould than other Men: No, they are the worst and vilest of Men, and for their own Sakes, have not the least Right to our Obedience. But the Laws of God and Nature must be obey’d, and our Obedience to them is never more acceptable and sincere, than when it exposeth us to Temporal Calamities.

XL. A Sixth false Ground of Persuasion to those we argue against, is their not distinguishing between the Natures of Positive and Negative Duties. For, say they, since our active Obedience to the Supreme Civil Power is acknowledged to be limited, why may not our Duty of Non-Resistance be thought so too? The Answer is plain; because Positive and Negative Moral Precepts are not of the same Nature, the former admitting such Limitations and Exceptions as the latter are on no Account liable to, as hath been already proved. It is very possible that a Man in obeying the Commands of his lawful Governors, might transgress some Law of God contrary to them; which it is not possible for him to do, meerly by a patient Suffering and Non-Resistance for Conscience sake. And this furnishes such a Satisfactory and obvious Solution of the forementioned Difficulty, that I am not a little surprized to see it insisted on, by Men, otherwise, of good Sense and Reason. And so much for the Grounds and Reasons of the Adversaries of Non-Resistance. I now proceed to the third and last Thing proposed, Namely, the Consideration of the Objections drawn from the pretended Consequences of Non-Resistance.

XLI. First then it will be objected, that in Consequence of that Notion, we must believe that God hath, in several Instances, laid the innocent Part of Mankind under an unavoidable Necessity of enduring the greatest Sufferings and Hardships without any Remedy; which is plainly inconsistent with the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, and therefore the Principle from whence that Consequence flows, ought not to be admitted as a Law of God of Nature. In Answer to which I observe, we must carefully distinguish between the necessary and accidental Consequences of a Moral Law. The former Kind are those which the Law is in its own Nature calculated to produce, and which have an inseparable Connexion with the Observation of it; and indeed if these are bad, we may justly conclude the Law to be so too, and consequently not from God. But the accidental Consequences of a Law, have no intrinsic natural Connexion with, nor do they strictly speaking flow from its Observation, but are the genuine Result of something foreign and circumstantial, which happens to be joyned with it. And these accidental Consequences of a very good Law, may nevertheless be very bad; which Badness of theirs is to be charged on their own proper and necessary Cause, and not on the Law, which hath no Essential Tendency to produce them. Now though it must be granted, that a Lawgiver infinitely wise and good will constitute such Laws for the Regulation of human Actions, as have in their own Nature a necessary inherent Aptness to promote the common Good of all Mankind, and that in the greatest Degree that the present Circumstances and Capacities of human Nature will admit; yet we deny that the Wisdom and Goodness of the Lawgiver are concerned, or may be called in Question, on Account of the particular Evils which arise, necessarily and properly, from the Transgression of some one or more good Laws, and but accidentally from the Observation of others. But it is plain that the several Calamities and Devastations, which oppressive Governments bring on the World, are not the genuine necessary Effects of the Law, that enjoineth a Passive Subjection to the Supreme Power, neither are they included in the primary Intention thereof, but spring from Avarice, Ambition, Cruelty, Revenge, and the like inordinate Affections and Vices raging in the Breasts of Governors. They may not therefore argue a defect of Wisdom or Goodness in God’s Law, but of Righteousness in Men.

XLII. Such is the present State of Things, so irregular are the Wills, and so unrestrained the Passions of Men, that we every Day see manifest Breaches and Violations of the Laws of Nature, which being always committed in Favour of the Wicked, must surely be sometimes attended with heavy Disadvantages and Miseries, on the Part of those who by a firm Adhesion to his Laws endeavour to approve themselves in the Eyes of their Creator. There are in short, no Rules of Morality, not excepting the best, but what may subject good Men to great Sufferings and Hardships, which necessarily follows from the Wickedness of those they have to deal with, and but accidentally from those good Rules. And as on the one Hand it were inconsistent with the Wisdom of God, by suffering a retaliation of Fraud, Perjury, or the like on the Head of Offenders, to punish one Transgression by another: So on the other Hand, it were inconsistent with his Justice, to leave the Good and Innocent a hopeless Sacrifice to the Wicked. God therefore hath appointed a Day of Retribution in another Life, and in this we have his Grace and a good Conscience for our Support. We shou’d not therefore repine at the Divine Laws, or shew a frowardness or impatience of those transient Sufferings they accidentally expose us to, which however grating to Flesh and Blood, will yet seem of small moment, if we compare the littleness and fleetingness of this present World with the Glory and Eternity of the next.

XLIII. From what hath been said I think it is plain, that the premised Doctrine of Non-Resistance were safe, tho’ the Evils incurred thereby shou’d be allowed never so great. But perhaps upon a strict examination, they will be found much less than by many they are thought to be. The mischievous effects which are charged on that Doctrine may be reduced to these two Points. First, that it is an encouragement for all Governors to become Tyrants, by the prospect it gives them of Impunity or Non-Resistance. Secondly, that it renders the Oppression and Cruelty of those who are Tyrants, more insupportable and violent, by cutting off all Opposition, and consequently all means of Redress. I shall consider each of these distinctly. As to the first Point, either you’ll suppose the Governors to be good or ill Men. If they are Good, there is no fear of their becoming Tyrants. And if they are ill Men, that is, such as postpone the Observation of God’s Laws to the satisfying of their own Lusts, then it can be no Security to them, that others will rigidly observe those Moral Precepts, which they find themselves so prone to Transgress.

XLIV. It is indeed a Breach of the Law of Nature for a Subject, tho’ under the greatest and most unjust Sufferings, to lift up his Hand against the Supreme Power. But it is a more heinous and inexcusable Violation of it, for the Persons invested with the Supreme Power, to use that Power to the Ruin and Destruction of the People committed to their Charge. What encouragement therefore can any Man have, to think that others will not be push’d on by the strong implanted Appetite of Self-Preservation, to commit a Crime, when he himself commits a more brutish and unnatural Crime, perhaps without any provocation at all? Or is it to be imagined that they who daily break God’s Laws, for the sake of some little Profit or transient Pleasure, will not be tempted by the love of Property, Liberty, or Life it self, to Transgress that single Precept which forbids Resistance to the Supreme Power?

XLV. But it will be demanded, to what purpose then is this Duty of Non-Resistance Preached and Proved, and Recommended to our Practice, if in all likelihood, when things come to an extremity, Men will never observe it? I Answer, to the very same purpose that any other Duty is Preached. For what Duty is there which many, too many, upon some consideration or other may not be prevail’d on to Transgress? Moralists and Divines do not Preach the Duties of Nature and Religion, with the View of Gaining Mankind to a perfect Observation of them; that they know is not to be done. But, however, our Pains are Answered, if we can make Men less Sinners than otherwise they wou’d be; if by opposing the force of Duty to that of present Interest and Passion, we can get the better of some Temptations, and Balance others, while the greatest still remain Invincible.

XLVI. But granting those who are invested with the Supreme Power to have all imaginable Security, that no cruel and barbarous Treatment whatever cou’d provoke their Subjects to Rebellion: Yet I believe it may be justly questioned, whether such Security would tempt them to more or greater Acts of Cruelty, than Jealousie, Distrust, Suspicion and Revenge may do in a State less Secure. And so far in consideration of the first Point, Namely, that the Doctrine of Non-Resistance is an encouragement for Governors to become Tyrants.

 XLVII. The second Mischievous Effect it was Charged with, is, that it renders the Oppression and Cruelty of those who are Tyrants more insupportable and violent, by cutting off all Opposition, and consequently all means of Redress. But, if things are rightly consider’d, it will appear, that Redressing the Evils of Government by Force, is at best, a very hazardous Attempt, and what often puts the Publick in a worse State than it was before. For either you suppose the Power of the Rebels to be but small, and easily Crushed, and then this is apt to inspire the Governors with Confidence and Cruelty. Or, in case you suppose it more considerable, so as to be a Match for the Supreme Power supported by the Publick Treasure, Forts and Armies, and that the whole Nation is engaged in a Civil War; the certain effects of this are Rapine, Bloodshed, Misery, and Confusion to all Orders and Parties of Men, greater and more insupportable by far, than are known under any the most absolute and severe Tyranny upon Earth. And it may be that after much mutual Slaughter, the Rebellious Party will prevail. And if they do prevail to Destroy the Government in Being, it may be they will Substitute a better in its Place, or change it into better Hands. And may not this come to pass without the expence, and toil, and blood of War? Is not the Heart of a Prince in the Hand of God? May he not therefore give him a right Sense of his Duty, or may he not call him out of the World by Sickness, Accident, or the Hand of some desperate Ruffian, and send a better in his Stead. When I speak as of a Monarchy, I would be understood to mean all sorts of Government, wheresoever the Supreme Power is Lodged. Upon the whole, I think we may close with the Heathen Philosopher, who thought it the part of a Wise Man, never to attempt the Change of Government by Force, when it cou’d not be mended without the Slaughter and Banishment of his Countrymen: But to Sit still, and Pray for better Times. For this way may do, and the other may not do; there is uncertainty in both Courses. The difference is, that in the way of Rebellion, we are sure to increase the Publick Calamities, for a time at least, tho’ we are not sure of lessening them for the future.

XLVIII. But tho’ it should be acknowledged, that in the main, Submission and Patience ought to be recommended; yet, Men will be still apt to demand, whether extraordinary Cases may not require extraordinary Measures; and therefore in case the Oppression be insupportable, and the Prospect of Deliverance sure, whether Rebellion may not be allowed of? I Answer, By no means. Perjury, or Breach of Faith, may, in some possible Cases, bring great Advantage to a Nation, by freeing it from Conditions inconsistent with its Liberty and Publick Welfare. So likewise, may Adultery, by procuring a Domestick Heir, prevent a Kingdom’s falling into the Hands of a Foreign Power, which wou’d in all probability prove its Ruin. Yet will any Man say, the extraordinary Nature of those Cases can take away the Guilt of Perjury and Adultery? This is what I will not suppose. But it hath been shewn, that Rebellion is as truly a Crime against Nature and Reason as either of the foregoing, it may not therefore be Justified upon any Account whatever, any more than they.

XLIX. What! Must we then Submit our Necks to the Sword? And is there no Help, no Refuge against extream Tyranny established by Law? In Answer to this, I say in the first place, it is not to be feared that Men in their Wits shou’d seek the Destruction of their People, by such cruel and unnatural Decrees as some are forward to suppose. I say, Secondly, that in case they shou’d, yet most certainly the Subordinate Magistrates may not, nay, they ought not, in Obedience to those Decrees to act any thing contrary to the express Laws of God. And perhaps all things considered, it will be thought, that representing this Limitation of their active Obedience by the Laws of God or Nature, as a Duty to the Ministers of the Supreme Power, may prove in those extravagant supposed Cases no less effectual for the Peace and Safety of a Nation, than Preaching up the Power of Resistance to the People.

L. Further, It will probably be Objected as an Absurdity in the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, that it enjoyneth Subjects a blind implicit Submission to the Decrees of other Men; which is unbecoming the Dignity and Freedom of reasonable Agents; who indeed ought to pay Obedience to their Superiors, but it shou’d be a rational Obedience, such as arises from a knowledge of the Equity of their Laws, and the Tendency they have to promote the Public Good. To which I Answer, That it is not likely a Government shou’d suffer much for want of having its Laws inspected and amended, by those who are not legally intitled to a share in the management of Affairs of that Nature. And it must be confessed, the Bulk of Mankind are by their Circumstances and Occupations, so far unqualified to judge of such Matters, that they must necessarily pay an implicit deference to some or other, and to whom so properly as to those invested with the Supreme Power?

 LI. There is another Objection against absolute Submission, which I shou’d not have mentioned, but that I find it insisted on by Men of so great Note, as Grotius and Pufendorf, who think our Non-Resistance shou’d be measured by the intention of those who first framed the Society. Now, say they, if we suppose the question put to them, Whether they meant to lay every Subject under a Necessity of chusing Death, rather than in any Case to Resist the Cruelty of his Superiors, it cannot be imagined, they wou’d Answer in the Affirmative. For this were to put themselves in a worse Condition, than that which they endeavoured to avoid by entring into Society. For altho’ they were obnoxious to the Injuries of many, they had nevertheless the Power of Resisting them. But now they are bound, without any Opposition at all, to endure the greatest Injuries from those whom they have Armed with their own Strength. Which is by so much worse than the former State, as the undergoing an Execution is worse than the hazard of a Battle. But (passing by all other Exceptions which this Method of arguing may be liable to) it is evident, that a Man had better be exposed to the absolute irresistible Decrees, even of one single Person, whose own and Posterities true Interest it is to preserve him in Peace and Plenty, and Protect him from the Injuries of all Mankind beside, than remain an open Prey to the Rage and Avarice of every Wicked Man upon Earth, who either exceeds him in Strength, or takes him at an Advantage. The Truth of this is confirmed, as well by the constant Experience of the far greater Part of the World, as by what we have already observ’d concerning Anarchy, and the Inconsistence of such a State, with that manner of Life which Human Nature requires. Hence it is plain, the Objection last mentioned is Built on a false Supposition; Viz. That Men, by quitting the Natural State of Anarchy for that of absolute Non-Resisting Obedience to Government, wou’d put themselves in a worse Condition than they were in before.

LII. The last Objection I shall take Notice of is, that in pursuance of the premised Doctrine, where no Exceptions, no Limitations are to be allowed of, it shou’d seem to follow, Men were bound to submit without making any Opposition to Usurpers, or even Madmen possessed of the Supreme Authority. Which is a Notion so absurd and repugnant to common Sense, that the Foundation on which it is Built, may justly be called in Question. Now, in order to clear this Point, I observe the Limitation of Moral Duties may be understood in a Twofold Sense, either first as a Distinction applied to the Terms of a Proposition, whereby that which was expressed before too generally is limited to a particular Acceptation; and this, in truth, is not so properly limiting the Duty as defining it. Or, Secondly, it may be understood as a Suspending the Observation of a Duty for avoiding some extraordinary Inconvenience, and thereby confining it to certain Occasions. And in this last Sense only, We have shewn Negative Duties not to admit of Limitation. Namely, that by Vertue of the Duty of Non-Resistance, We are not obliged to Submit the Disposal of our Lives and Fortunes to the Discretion either of Madmen, or of all those who by Craft or Violence invade the Supreme Power. Because the Object of the Submission enjoyned Subjects by the Law of Nature is, from the Reason of the thing, Manifestly limited so as to exclude both the one and the other. Which I shall not go about to prove, because I believe no Body has denied it. Nor doth the Annexing such Limits to the Object of our Obedience, at all limit the Duty it self, in the Sense we except against.

LIII. In the Various Changes and Fluctuations of Government, it is impossible to prevent that Controversies shou’d sometimes arise concerning the Seat of the Supreme Power. And in such Cases Subjects cannot be Denied the Liberty of Judging for Themselves, or of taking part with some, and opposing others, according to the best of their Judgments; all which is Consistent with an exact Observation of their Duty, so long as, when the Constitution is clear in the Point, and the Object of their Submission undoubted, no Pretext of Interest, Friends, or the Publick Good, can make them depart from it. In short, it is acknowledged, that the Precept enjoyning Non-Resistance is Limited to particular Objects, but not to particular Occasions. And in this it is like all other Moral Negative Duties, which consider’d as general Propositions, do admit of Limitations and Restrictions, in order to a distinct Definition of the Duty; but what is once known to be a Duty of that sort, can never become otherwise by any good or ill Effect, Circumstance, or Event whatsoever. And in Truth if it were not so, if there were no General Inflexible Rules, but all Negative as well as Positive Duties might be Dispensed with, and Warpt to Serve particular Interests and Occasions, there were an end of all Morality.

LIV. It is therefore Evident, that as the Observation of any other Negative Moral Law, is not to be limited to those Instances only, where it may produce good Effects; so neither is the Observation of Non-Resistance limited in such sort, as that any Man may Lawfully Transgress it, whensoever in his Judgment, the Publick Good of his Particular Country shall require it. And it is with Regard to this Limitation by the Effects, that I speak of Non-Resistance, as an absolute, unconditioned, unlimited Duty. Which must inevitably be granted, unless one of these three Things can be prov’d: Either, First, that Non-Resistance is no Moral Duty. Or, Secondly, that other Negative Moral Duties are limited by the Effects. Or, Lastly, that there is something peculiar in the Nature of Non-Resistance, which necessarily subjects it to such a Limitation, as no other Negative Moral Duty can admit. The contrary to each of which Points, if I mistake not, hath been clearly made out.

LV. I have now briefly gone through the Objections drawn from the Consequences of Non-Resistance, which was the last General Head I proposed to Treat of. In handling this and the other Points, I have endeavour’d to be as full and clear, as the usual length of these Discourses would permit, and throughout to consider the Argument with the same Indifference, as I shou’d any other part of General Knowledge, being verily perswaded that Men, as Christians, are obliged to the Practice of no one Moral Duty, which may not abide the severest Test of Reason.

FINIS .

 Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous (1713) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

OXFORD CLARENDON PRESS 1901 TEXT

This 1713 work on metaphysics and idealism takes the form of a dialogue and was written as a response to the criticism Berkeley experienced after publishing A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge . The dialogues analyse three concepts: perceptual relativity, the conceivability/master argument and Berkeley’s phenomenalism . Perceptual relativity argues that the same object can appear to have different characteristics (e.g. shape) depending on the observer’s perspective. Since objective features of objects cannot change without an inherent change in the object itself, shape must not be an objective feature.

Berkeley’s ideas are represented by Philonous (Greek for ‘lover of mind’), while Hylas (Greek for ‘matter’) embodies the arguments of his opponents, in particular John Locke. In The First Dialogue , Hylas expresses his disdain for skepticism, adding that he has heard Philonous to have “maintained the most extravagant opinion... namely, that there is no such thing as material substance in the world.” Philonous argues that it is actually Hylas who is the skeptic and that he can prove it. Thus, a philosophical battle of wit ensues.

Philonous questions Hylas systematically regarding what humans know of the world, first examining secondary qualities, such as heat, to show that such qualities do not exist outside the individual mind. He then moves on to primary qualities such as extension and shape, arguing that they, too, are dependent entirely on one’s perception. Hylas’ view of matter is systematically destroyed by Philonous, the representative of Berkeley’s thinking. The basic argument states that matter is only known to us by its sensible qualities; it is impossible to describe or even imagine matter without these qualities. For in the absence of sensible qualities, matter, by definition, loses its essential qualities. Berkeley upholds that sensible qualities are not inherent in matter. Instead, they are ascribed and understood by the mind. Colour, sound, temperature and even shape are qualities entirely dependent on a mind. Indeed, without a “mind,” it becomes impossible to imagine “matter.”

CONTENTSEditor’s Preface

Dedication

The Preface

The First Dialogue

The Second Dialogue

 The Third Dialogue

 

 Editor’s Preface [image "img71.jpg" file=Image00070.jpg] 

T HIS WORK IS the gem of British metaphysical literature. Berkeley’s claim to be the great modern master of Socratic dialogue rests, perhaps, upon Alciphron , which surpasses the conversations between Hylas and Philonous in expression of individual character, and in dramatic effect. Here conversation is adopted as a convenient way of treating objections to the conception of the reality of Matter which had been unfolded systematically in the book of Principles . But the lucid thought, the colouring of fancy, the glow of human sympathy, and the earnestness that pervade the subtle reasonings pursued through these dialogues, are unique in English metaphysical literature. Except perhaps Hume and Ferrier, none approach Berkeley in the art of uniting metaphysical thought with easy, graceful, and transparent style. Our surprise and admiration are increased when we recollect that this charming production of reason and imagination came from Ireland, at a time when that country was scarcely known in the world of letters and philosophy.

 The immediate impression produced by the publication  of the Principles , is shewn in Berkeley’s correspondence with Sir John Percival. Berkeley was eager to hear what people had to say for or against what looked like a paradox apt to shock the reader; but in those days he was not immediately informed by professional critics. “If when you receive my book” — he wrote from Dublin in July, 1710, to Sir John Percival, then in London,— “you can procure me the opinion of some of your acquaintances who are thinking men, addicted to the study of natural philosophy and mathematics, I shall be extremely obliged to you.” In the following month he was informed by Sir John that it was “incredible what prejudice can work in the best geniuses, even in the lovers of novelty. For I did but name the subject matter of your book of Principles to some ingenious friends of mine and they immediately treated it with ridicule, at the same time refusing to read it, which I have not yet got one to do. A physician of my acquaintance undertook to discover your person, and argued you must needs be mad, and that you ought to take remedies. A bishop pitied you, that a desire of starting something new should put you upon such an undertaking. Another told me that you are not gone so far as a gentleman in town, who asserts not only that there is no such thing as Matter, but that we ourselves have no being at all.”

 Berkeley’s reply is interesting. “I am not surprised,” he says, “that I should be ridiculed by those who won’t take the pains to understand me. If the raillery and scorn of those who criticise what they will not be at the pains to understand had been sufficient to deter men from making any attempts towards curing the ignorance and errors of mankind, we should not have been troubled with some very fair improvements in knowledge. The common  cry’s being against any opinion seems to me, so far from proving false, that it may with as good reason pass for an argument of its truth. However, I imagine that whatever doctrine contradicts vulgar and settled opinion had need be introduced with great caution into the world. For this reason it was that I omitted all mention of the non-existence of Matter in the title-page, dedication, preface and introduction to the Treatise on the Principles of Human Knowledge ; that so the notion might steal unawares upon the reader, who probably might never have meddled with the book if he had known that it contained such paradoxes.”

With characteristic fervour he disclaims “variety and love of paradox” as motives of the book of Principles  , and professes faith in the unreality of abstract unperceived Matter, a faith which he has held for some years, “the conceit being at first warm in my imagination, but since carefully examined, both by my own judgment and that of ingenious friends.” What he especially complained of was “that men who have never considered my book should confound me with the sceptics, who doubt the existence of sensible things, and are not positive as to any one truth, no, not so much as their own being — which I find by your letter is the case of some wild visionist now in London. But whoever reads my book with attention will see that there is a direct opposition between the principles that are contained in it and those of the sceptics, and that I question not the existence of anything we perceive by our senses. I do not deny the existence of the sensible things which Moses says were created by God. They existed from all eternity, in the Divine Intellect; and they became perceptible (i.e. were created) in the same manner and order as is described in Genesis. For I take creation to belong to things only as they respect finite spirits; there being nothing new to God. Hence it follows that the act of creation consists in  God’s willing that those things should become perceptible to other spirits which before were known only to Himself. Now both reason and scripture assure us that there are other spirits besides men, who, ’tis possible, might have perceived this visible world as it was successively exhibited to their view before man’s creation. Besides, for to agree with the Mosaic account of the creation, it’s sufficient if we suppose that a man, in case he was existing at the time of the chaos of sensible things, might have perceived all things formed out of it, in the very order set down in scripture; all which is in no way repugnant to my principles.”

Sir John in his next letter, written from London in October, 1716, reports that the book of Principles had fallen into the hands of the highest living English authority in metaphysical theology, Samuel Clarke, who had produced his Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God four years before. The book had also been read by Whiston, Newton’s successor at Cambridge. “I can only report at second-hand,” he says, “that they think you a fair arguer, and a clear writer; but they say your first principles you lay down are false. They look upon you as an extraordinary genius, ranking you with Father Malebranche, Norris, and another whose name I forget, all of whom they think extraordinary men, but of a particular turn of mind, and their labours of little use to mankind, on account of their abstruseness. This may arise from these gentlemen not caring to think after a new manner, which would oblige them to begin their studies anew; or else it may be the strength of prejudice.”

 Berkeley was vexed by this treatment on the part of Clarke and Whiston. He sent under Sir John’s care a letter to each of them, hoping through him to discover “their reasons against his notions, as truth is his sole aim.” “As to what is said of ranking me with Father Malebranche  and Mr. Norris, whose writings are thought to be too fine-spun to be of any great use to mankind, I have this answer, that I think the notions I embrace are not in the least agreeing with theirs, but indeed plainly inconsistent with them in the main points, inasmuch as I know few writers I take myself at bottom to differ more from than from them. Fine-spun metaphysics are what on all occasions I declare against, and if any one shall shew anything of that sort in my Treatise I will willingly correct it.” Sir John delivered the letters to two friends of Clarke and Whiston, and reported that “Dr. Clarke told his friend in reply, that he did not care to write you his thoughts, because he was afraid it might draw him into a dispute upon a matter which was already clear to him. He thought your first principles you go on are false; but he was a modest man, his friend said, and uninclined to shock any one whose opinions on things of this nature differed from his own.” This was a disappointment to the ardent Berkeley. “Dr. Clarke’s conduct seems a little surprising,” he replies. “That an ingenious and candid person (as I take him to be) should refuse to shew me where my error lies is something unaccountable. I never expected that a gentleman otherwise so well employed as Dr. Clarke should think it worth his while to enter into a dispute with me concerning any notions of mine. But, seeing it was clear to him I went upon false principles, I hoped he would vouchsafe, in a line or two, to point them out to me, that so I may more closely review and examine them. If he but once did me this favour, he need not apprehend I should give him any further trouble. I should be glad if you have opportunity that you would let his friend know this. There is nothing that I more desire than to know thoroughly all that can be said against what I take for truth.” Clarke, however, was not to be drawn. The incident is thus referred to by Whiston, in his Memoirs  of Clarke. “Mr. Berkeley,” he  says, “published in 1710, at Dublin, the metaphysical notion, that matter was not a real thing; nay, that the common opinion of its reality was groundless, if not ridiculous. He was pleased to send Mr. Clarke and myself each of us a book. After we had perused it, I went to Mr. Clarke to discourse with him about it, to this effect, that I, being not a metaphysician, was not able to answer Mr. Berkeley’s subtle premises, though I did not believe his absurd conclusions. I therefore desired that he, who was deep in such subtleties, but did not appear to believe Mr. Berkeley’s conclusion, would answer him. Which task he declined .”

What Clarke’s criticism of Berkeley might have been is suggested by the following sentences in his Remarks on Human Liberty  , published seven years after this correspondence: “The case as to the proof of our free agency is exactly the same as in that notable question, whether the [material] world exists or no? There is no demonstration of it from experience. There always remains a bare possibility that the Supreme Being may have so framed my mind, that I shall always be necessarily deceived in every one of my perceptions as in a dream — though possibly there be no material world, nor any other creature existing besides myself. And yet no man in his senses argues from thence, that experience is no proof to us of the existence of things. The bare physical possibility too of our being so framed by the Author of Nature as to be unavoidably deceived in this matter by every experience of every action we perform, is no more any ground to doubt the truth of our liberty, than the bare natural possibility of our being all our lifetime in a dream, deceived in our [natural] belief of the existence of  the material world, is any just ground to doubt the reality of its existence.” Berkeley would hardly have accepted this analogy. Does the conception of a material world being dependent on percipient mind for its reality imply deception on the part of the “Supreme Being”? “Dreams,” in ordinary language, may signify illusory fancies during sleep, and so understood the term is misapplied to a universally mind-dependent universe with its steady natural order. Berkeley disclaims emphatically any doubt of the reality of the sensible world, and professes only to shew in what its reality consists, or its dependence upon percipient life as the indispensable realising factor. To suppose that we can be “necessarily deceived in every one of our perceptions” is to interpret the universe atheistically, and virtually obliges us in final nescience to acknowledge that it is wholly uninterpretable; so that experience is impossible, because throughout unintelligible. The moral trustworthiness or perfect goodness of the Universal Power is I suppose the fundamental postulate of science and human life. If all our temporal experience can be called a dream it must at any rate be a dream of the sort supposed by Leibniz. “Nullo argumento absolute demonstrari potest, dari corpora; nec quidquam prohibet somnia quædam bene ordinata menti nostræ, objecta esse, quæ a nobis vera judicentur, et ob consensum inter se quoad usum veris equivalent.”

The three Dialogues discuss what Berkeley regarded as the most plausible Objections, popular and philosophical, to his account of living Mind or Spirit, as the indispensable factor and final cause of the reality of the material world.

The principal aim of the First Dialogue  is to illustrate  the contradictory or unmeaning character and sceptical tendency of the common philosophical opinion — that we perceive in sense a material world which is real only in as far as it can exist in absolute independence of perceiving mind. The impossibility of any of the qualities in which Matter is manifested to man — the primary qualities not less than the secondary — having real existence in a mindless or unspiritual universe is argued and illustrated in detail. Abstract Matter, unrealised in terms of percipient life, is meaningless, and the material world becomes real only in and through living perception. And Matter, as an abstract substance without qualities, cannot, without a contradiction, it is also argued, be presented or represented, in sense. What is called matter is thus melted in a spiritual solution, from which it issues the flexible and intelligible medium of intercourse for spiritual beings such as men are; whose faculties moreover are educated in interpreting the cosmical order of the phenomena presented to their senses.

The Second Dialogue is in the first place directed against modifications of the scholastic account of Matter, which attributes our knowledge of it to inference, founded on sense-ideas assumed to be representative, or not presentative of the reality. The advocates of Matter independent and supreme, are here assailed in their various conjectures — that this Matter may be the active Cause, or the Instrument, or the Occasion of our sense-experience; or that it is an Unknowable Something somehow connected with that experience. It is argued in this and in the preceding Dialogue, by Philonous  (who personates Berkeley), that unrealised Matter — intending by that term either a qualified substance, or a Something of which we cannot affirm anything — is not merely unproved, but a proved impossibility: it must mean nothing,  or it must mean a contradiction, which comes to the same thing. It is not perceived ; nor can it be suggested by what we perceive; nor demonstrated by reasoning; nor believed in as an article in the fundamental faith of intuitive reason. The only consistent theory of the universe accordingly implies that concrete realities must all be either (a) phenomena presented to the senses, or else (b) active spirits percipient of presented phenomena. And neither of these two sorts of concrete realities is strictly speaking independent of the other; although the latter, identical amid the variations of the sensuous phenomena, are deeper and more real than the mere data of the senses. The Second Dialogue ends by substituting, as concrete and intelligible Realism, the universal and constant dependence of the material world upon active living Spirit, in place of the abstract hypothetical and unintelligible Realism, which defends Matter unrealised in percipient life, as the type of reality.

In the Third Dialogue plausible objections to this conception of what the reality of the material world means are discussed.

Is it said that the new conception is sceptical, and Berkeley another Protagoras, on account of it? His answer is, that the reality of sensible things, as far as man can in any way be concerned with them, does not consist in what cannot be perceived, suggested, demonstrated, or even conceived, but in phenomena actually seen and touched, and in the working faith that future sense-experience may be anticipated by the analogies of present sense-experience.

 But is not this negation of the Matter that is assumed to be real and independent of Spirit, an unproved conjecture? It is answered, that the affirmation of this abstract matter is itself a mere conjecture, and one self-convicted  by its implied contradictions, while its negation is only a simple falling back on the facts of experience, without any attempt to explain them.

Again, is it objected that the reality of sensible things involves their continued reality during intervals of our perception of them? It is answered, that sensible things are indeed permanently dependent on Mind, but not on this, that, or the other finite embodied spirit.

Is it further alleged that the reality of Spirit or Mind is open to all the objections against independent Matter; and that, if we deny this Matter, we must in consistency allow that Spirit can be only a succession of isolated feelings? The answer is, that there is no parity between self-conscious Spirit, and Matter out of all relation to any Spirit. We find, in memory, our own personality and identity; that we are not our ideas, “but somewhat else” — a thinking, active principle, that perceives, knows, wills, and operates about ideas, and that is revealed as continuously real. Each person is conscious of himself; and may reasonably infer the existence of other self-conscious persons, more or less like what he is conscious of in himself. A universe of self-conscious persons, with their common sensuous experiences all under cosmical order, is not open to the contradictions involved in a pretended universe of Matter, independent of percipient realising Spirit.

Is it still said that sane people cannot help distinguishing between the real existence of a thing and its being perceived ? It is answered, that all they are entitled to mean is, to distinguish between being perceived exclusively by me, and being independent of the perception of all sentient or conscious beings.

Does an objector complain that this ideal realism dissolves the distinction between facts and fancies? He is reminded of the meaning of the word idea  . That term  is not limited by Berkeley to chimeras of fancy: it is applied also to the objective phenomena of our sense-experience.

Is the supposition that Spirit is the only real Cause of all changes in nature declaimed against as baseless? It is answered, that the supposition of unthinking Power at the heart of the cosmos of sensible phenomena is absurd.

Is the negation of Abstract Matter repugnant to the common belief of mankind? It is argued in reply, that this unrealised Matter is foreign to common belief, which is incapable of even entertaining the conception; and which only requires to reflect upon what it does entertain to be satisfied with a relative or ideal reality for sensible things.

But, if sensible things are the real things, the real moon, for instance, it is alleged, can be only a foot in diameter. It is maintained, in opposition to this, that the term real moon is applied only to what is an inference from the moon, one foot in diameter, which we immediately perceive; and that the former is a part of our previsive or mediate inference, due to what is perceived.

The dispute, after all, is merely verbal, it is next objected; and, since all parties refer the data of the senses and the things which they compose to a Power external to each finite percipient, why not call that Power, whatever it may be, Matter, and not Spirit? The reply is, that this would be an absurd misapplication of language.

 But may we not, it is next suggested, assume the possibility of a third nature — neither idea nor Spirit? Not, replies Philonous, if we are to keep to the rule of having meaning in the words we use. We know what is meant by a spirit, for each of us has immediate experience of one; and we know what is meant by sense-ideas and  sensible things, for we have immediate and mediate experience of them. But we have no immediate, and therefore can have no mediate, experience of what is neither perceived by our senses, nor realised in inward consciousness: moreover, “entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter necessitatem.”

Again, this conception of the realities implies, it is said, imperfection, because sentient experience, in God. This objection, it is answered, implies a confusion between being actually sentient and merely conceiving sensations, and employing them, as God does, as signs for expressing His conceptions to our minds.

Further, the negation of independent powerful Matter seems to annihilate the explanations of physical phenomena given by natural philosophers. But, to be assured that it does not, we have only to recollect what physical explanation means — that it is the reference of an apparently irregular phenomenon to some acknowledged general rule of co-existence or succession among sense-ideas. It is interpretation of sense-signs.

Is the proposed ideal Realism summarily condemned as a novelty? It can be answered, that all discoveries are novelties at first; and moreover that this one is not so much a novelty as a deeper interpretation of the common faith.

Yet it seems, at any rate, it is said, to change real things into mere ideas. Here consider on the contrary what we mean when we speak of sensible things as real. The changing appearances of which we are percipient in sense, united objectively in their cosmical order, are what is truly meant by the realities of sense.

But this reality is inconsistent with the continued identity of material things, it is complained, and also with the fact that different persons can be percipient of the same thing. Not so, Berkeley explains, when we attend to the true meaning of the word same  , and dismiss from  our thoughts a supposed abstract idea of identity which is nonsensical.

But some may exclaim against the supposition that the material world exists in mind, regarding this as an implied assertion that mind is extended, and therefore material. This proceeds, it is replied, on forgetfulness of what “existence in mind” means. It is intended to express the fact that matter is real in being an objective appearance of which a living mind is sensible.

Lastly, is not the Mosaic account of the creation of Matter inconsistent with the perpetual dependence of Matter for its reality upon percipient Spirit? It is answered that the conception of creation being dependent on the existence of finite minds is in perfect harmony with the Mosaic account: it is what is seen and felt, not what is unseen and unfelt, that is created.

The Third Dialogue closes with a representation of the new principle regarding Matter being the harmony of two apparently discordant propositions — the one-sided proposition of ordinary common sense; and the one-sided proposition of the philosophers. It agrees with the mass of mankind in holding that the material world is actually presented to our senses, and with the philosophers in holding that this same material world is realised only in and through the percipient experience of living Spirit.

Most of the objections to Berkeley’s conception of Matter which have been urged in the last century and a half, by its British, French, and German critics, are discussed by anticipation in these Dialogues  . The history of objections is very much a history of misconceptions. Conceived or misconceived, it has tacitly simplified and  purified the methods of physical science, especially in Britain and France.

The first elaborate criticism of Berkeley by a British author is found in Andrew Baxter’s Inquiry into the Nature of the Human Soul , published in 1735, in the section entitled “Dean Berkeley’s Scheme against the existence of Matter examined, and shewn to be inconclusive.” Baxter alleges that the new doctrine tends to encourage scepticism. To deny Matter, for the reasons given, involves, according to this critic, denial of mind, and so a universal doubt. Accordingly, a few years later, Hume sought, in his Treatise of Human Nature , to work out Berkeley’s negation of abstract Matter into sceptical phenomenalism — against which Berkeley sought to guard by anticipation, in a remarkable passage introduced in his last edition of these Dialogues .

In Scotland the writings of Reid, Beattie, Oswald, Dugald Stewart, Thomas Brown, and Sir W. Hamilton form a magazine of objections. Reid — who curiously seeks to refute Berkeley by refuting, not more clearly than Berkeley had done before him, the hypothesis of a wholly representative sense-perception — urges the spontaneous belief or common sense of mankind, which obliges us all to recognise a direct presentation of the external material world to our senses. He overlooks what with Berkeley is the only question in debate, namely, the meaning of the term external ; for, Reid and Berkeley are agreed in holding to the reality of a world regulated independently of the will of finite percipients, and is sufficiently objective to be a medium of social intercourse. With Berkeley, as with Reid, this  is practically self-evident. The same objection, more scientifically defined — that we have a natural belief in the existence of Matter, and in our own immediate perception of its qualities — is Sir W. Hamilton’s assumption against Berkeley; but Hamilton does not explain the reality thus  claimed for it. “Men naturally believe,” he says, “that they themselves exist — because they are conscious of a Self or Ego; they believe that something different from themselves exists — because they believe that they are conscious of this Not-self or Non-ego.” (Discussions , .) Now, the existence of a Power that is independent of each finite Ego is at the root of Berkeley’s principles. According to Berkeley and Hamilton alike, we are immediately percipient of solid and extended phenomena; but with Berkeley the phenomena are dependent on, at the same time that they are “entirely distinct” from, the percipient. The Divine and finite spirits, signified by the phenomena that are presented to our senses in cosmical order, form Berkeley’s external world.

That Berkeley sows the seeds of Universal Scepticism; that his conception of Matter involves the Panegoism or Solipsism which leaves me in absolute solitude; that his is virtually a system of Pantheism, inconsistent with personal individuality and moral responsibility — these are probably the three most comprehensive objections that have been alleged against it. They are in a measure due to Berkeley’s imperfect criticism of first principles, in his dread of a departure from the concrete data of experience in quest of empty abstractions.

In England and France, Berkeley’s criticism of Matter, taken however only on its negative side, received a countenance denied to it in Germany. Hartley and Priestley shew signs of affinity with Berkeley. Also an anonymous Essay on the Nature and Existence of the Material World , dedicated to Dr. Priestley and Dr. Price, which appeared in 1781, is an argument, on empirical grounds, which virtually makes the data of the senses at last a chaos of isolated sensations. The author of the Essay  is said to have been a certain  Russell, who died in the West Indies in the end of the eighteenth century. A tendency towards Berkeley’s negations, but apart from his synthetic principles, appears in James Mill and J.S. Mill. So too with Voltaire and the Encyclopedists.

The Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous were published in London in 1713, “printed by G. James, for Henry Clements, at the Half-Moon, in St. Paul’s churchyard,” unlike the Essay on Vision and the Principles , which first appeared in Dublin. The second edition, which is simply a reprint, issued in 1725, “printed for William and John Innys, at the West End of St. Paul’s.” A third, the last in the author’s lifetime, “printed by Jacob Tonson,” which contains some important additions, was published in 1734, conjointly with a new edition of the Principles . The Dialogues were reprinted in 1776, in the same volume with the edition of the Principles, with Remarks .

The Dialogues have been translated into French and German. The French version appeared at Amsterdam in 1750. The translator’s name is not given, but it is attributed to the Abbé Jean Paul de Gua de Malves, by Barbier, in his Dictionnaire des Ouvrages anonymes et pseudonymes  , tom. i. . It contains a Prefatory Note by the translator, with three curious vignettes (given in the note below) meant to symbolise the leading thought in each Dialogue. A German translation,  by John Christopher Eschenbach, Professor of Philosophy in Rostock, was published at Rostock in 1756. It forms the larger part of a volume entitled Sammlung der vornehmsten Schriftsteller die die Wirklichkeit ihres eignen Körpers und der ganzen Körperwelt läugnen  . This professed Collection of the most eminent authors  who are supposed to deny the reality of their own bodies and of the whole material world, consists of Berkeley’s Dialogues, and Arthur Collier’s Clavis Universalis , or Demonstration of the Non-existence or Impossibility of an  External World . The volume contains some annotations, and an Appendix in which a counter-demonstration of the existence of Matter is attempted. Eschenbach’s principal argument is indirect, and of the nature of a reductio ad absurdum . He argues (as others have done) that the reasons produced against the independent reality of Matter are equally conclusive against the independent reality of Spirit.

An interesting circumstance connected with the Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous was the appearance, also in 1713, of the Clavis Universalis , or demonstration of the impossibility of Matter, of Arthur Collier, in which the merely ideal existence of the sensible world is maintained. The production, simultaneously, without concert, of conceptions of the material world which verbally at least have much in common, is a curious coincidence. It shews that the intellectual atmosphere of the Lockian epoch in England contained elements favourable to a reconsideration of the ultimate meaning of Matter. They are both the genuine produce of the age of Locke and Malebranche. Neither Berkeley nor Collier were, when they published their books, familiar with ancient Greek speculations; those of modern Germany had only begun to loom in the distance. Absolute Idealism, the Panphenomenalism of Auguste Comte, and the modern evolutionary conception of nature, have changed the conditions under which the universal problem is studied, and are making intelligible to this generation a manner of conceiving the Universe which, for nearly a century and a half, the British and French critics of Berkeley were unable to entertain.

Berkeley’s Principles appeared three years before the Clavis Universalis  . Yet Collier tells us that it was “after a ten years’ pause and deliberation,” that, “rather than the world should finish its course without once offering to inquire in what manner it exists,” he had “resolved  to put himself upon the trial of the common reader, without pretending to any better art of gaining him than dry reason and metaphysical demonstration.” Mr. Benson, his biographer, says that it was in 1703, at the age of twenty-three, that Collier came to the conclusion that “there is no such thing as an external world”; and he attributes the premises from which Collier drew this conclusion to his neighbour, John Norris. Among Collier’s MSS., there remains the outline of an essay, in three chapters, dated January, 1708, on the non-externality of the visible world.

There are several coincidences between Berkeley and Collier. Berkeley virtually presented his new theory of Vision as the first instalment of his explanation of the Reality of Matter. The first of the two Parts into which Collier’s Clavis is divided consists of proofs that the Visible World is not, and cannot be, external. Berkeley, in the Principles and the Dialogues , explains the reality of Matter. In like manner the Second Part of the Clavis consists of reasonings in proof of the impossibility of an external world independent of Spirit. Finally, in his full-blown theory, as well as in its visual germ, Berkeley takes for granted, as intuitively known, the existence of sensible Matter; meaning by this, its relative existence, or dependence on living Mind. The third proposition of Collier’s system asserts the real existence of visible matter in particular, and of sensible matter in general.

 The invisibility of distances, as well as of real magnitudes and situations, and their suggestion by interpretation of visual symbols, propositions which occupy so large a space in Berkeley’s Theory of Vision, have no counterpart in Collier. His proof of the non-externality of the visible world consists of an induction of instances of visible objects that are allowed by all not to be external, although they seem to be as much so as any that are called external. His Demonstration consists of nine proofs,  which may be compared with the reasonings and analyses of Berkeley. Collier’s Demonstration concludes with answers to objections, and an application of his account of the material world to the refutation of the Roman doctrine of the substantial existence of Christ’s body in the Eucharist.

  The universal sense-symbolism of Berkeley, and his pervading recognition of the distinction between physical or symbolical, and efficient or originative causation, are wanting in the narrow reasonings of Collier. Berkeley’s more comprehensive philosophy, with its human sympathies and beauty of style, is now recognised as a striking expression and partial solution of fundamental problems, while Collier is condemned to the obscurity of the Schools.

 DedicationTO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD BERKELEY OF STRATTON,

 [image "img71.jpg" file=Image00070.jpg] 

 MASTER OF THE ROLLS IN THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND, CHANCELLOR OF THE DUCHY OF LANCASTER, AND ONE OF THE LORDS OF HER MAJESTY’S MOST HONOURABLE PRIVY COUNCIL.

My Lord,

 The virtue, learning, and good sense which are acknowledged to distinguish your character, would tempt me to indulge myself the pleasure men naturally take in giving applause to those whom they esteem and honour: and it should seem of importance to the subjects of Great Britain that they knew the eminent share you enjoy in the favour of your sovereign, and the honours she has conferred upon you, have not been owing to any application from your lordship, but entirely to her majesty’s own thought, arising from a sense of your personal merit,  and an inclination to reward it. But, as your name is prefixed to this treatise with an intention to do honour to myself alone, I shall only say that I am encouraged by the favour you have treated me with to address these papers to your lordship. And I was the more ambitious of doing this, because a Philosophical Treatise could not so properly be addressed to any one as to a person of your lordship’s character, who, to your other valuable distinctions, have added the knowledge and relish of Philosophy.

I am, with the greatest respect,

My Lord,

Your lordship’s most obedient and
most humble servant,

  GEORGE BERKELEY.

 The Preface [image "img71.jpg" file=Image00070.jpg] 

T HOUGH IT SEEMS the general opinion of the world, no less than the design of nature and providence, that the end of speculation be Practice, or the improvement and regulation of our lives and actions; yet those who are most addicted to speculative studies, seem as generally of another mind. And indeed if we consider the pains that have been taken to perplex the plainest things, that distrust of the senses, those doubts and scruples, those abstractions and refinements that occur in the very entrance of the sciences; it will not seem strange that men of leisure and curiosity should lay themselves out in fruitless disquisitions, without descending to the practical parts of life, or informing themselves in the more necessary and important parts of knowledge.

Upon the common principles of philosophers, we are not assured of the existence of things from their being perceived. And we are taught to distinguish their real nature from that which falls under our senses. Hence arise scepticism and paradoxes. It is not enough that we see and feel, that we taste and smell a thing: its true nature, its absolute external entity, is still concealed. For, though it be the fiction of our own brain, we have made it inaccessible to all our faculties. Sense is fallacious, reason defective. We spend our lives in doubting of those things which other men evidently know, and believing those things which they laugh at and despise.

 In order, therefore, to divert the busy mind of man from vain researches, it seemed necessary to inquire into the source of its perplexities; and, if possible, to  lay down such Principles as, by an easy solution of them, together with their own native evidence, may at once recommend themselves for genuine to the mind, and rescue it from those endless pursuits it is engaged in. Which, with a plain demonstration of the Immediate Providence of an all-seeing God, and the natural Immortality of the soul, should seem the readiest preparation, as well as the strongest motive, to the study and practice of virtue.

This design I proposed in the First Part of a treatise concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge , published in the year 1710. But, before I proceed to publish the Second Part, I thought it requisite to treat more clearly and fully of certain Principles laid down in the First, and to place them in a new light. Which is the business of the following Dialogues .

In this Treatise, which does not presuppose in the reader any knowledge of what was contained in the former, it has been my aim to introduce the notions I advance into the mind in the most easy and familiar manner; especially because they carry with them a great opposition to the prejudices of philosophers, which have so far prevailed against the common sense and natural notions of mankind.

If the Principles which I here endeavour to propagate are admitted for true, the consequences which, I think, evidently flow from thence are, that Atheism and Scepticism will be utterly destroyed, many intricate points made plain, great difficulties solved, several useless parts of science retrenched, speculation referred to practice, and men reduced from paradoxes to common sense.

 And although it may, perhaps, seem an uneasy reflexion to some, that when they have taken a circuit through so many refined and unvulgar notions, they should at last come to think like other men; yet, methinks, this return to the simple dictates of nature, after having wandered through the wild mazes of philosophy, is not unpleasant. It is like coming home from a long voyage: a man reflects with pleasure on the many difficulties  and perplexities he has passed through, sets his heart at ease, and enjoys himself with more satisfaction for the future.

As it was my intention to convince Sceptics and Infidels by reason, so it has been my endeavour strictly to observe the most rigid laws of reasoning. And, to an impartial reader, I hope it will be manifest that the sublime notion of a God, and the comfortable expectation of Immortality, do naturally arise from a close and methodical application of thought: whatever may be the result of that loose, rambling way, not altogether improperly termed Free-thinking by certain libertines in thought, who can no more endure the restraints of logic than those of religion or government.

It will perhaps be objected to my design that, so far as it tends to ease the mind of difficult and useless inquiries, it can affect only a few speculative persons. But if, by their speculations rightly placed, the study of morality and the law of nature were brought more into fashion among men of parts and genius, the discouragements that draw to Scepticism removed, the measures of right and wrong accurately defined, and the principles of Natural Religion reduced into regular systems, as artfully disposed and clearly connected as those of some other sciences; there are grounds to think these effects would not only have a gradual influence in repairing the too much defaced sense of virtue in the world, but also, by shewing that such parts of revelation as lie within the reach of human inquiry are most agreeable to right reason, would dispose all prudent, unprejudiced persons to a modest and wary treatment of those sacred mysteries which are above the comprehension of our faculties.

It remains that I desire the reader to withhold his censure of these Dialogues  till he has read them through. Otherwise, he may lay them aside in a mistake of their design, or on account of difficulties or objections which he would find answered in the sequel. A Treatise of this nature would require to be once read over coherently, in order to comprehend its design, the proofs, solution of difficulties, and the connexion and disposition of its parts. If it be thought to deserve a second reading, this, I imagine, will make the entire scheme very plain.  Especially if recourse be had to an Essay I wrote some years since upon Vision , and the Treatise concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge ; wherein divers notions advanced in these Dialogues   are farther pursued, or placed in different lights, and other points handled which naturally tend to confirm and illustrate them.

 The First Dialogue [image "img71.jpg" file=Image00070.jpg] 

P HILONOUS . G OOD MORROW , Hylas: I did not expect to find you abroad so early.

Hylas. It is indeed something unusual; but my thoughts were so taken up with a subject I was discoursing of last night, that finding I could not sleep, I resolved to rise and take a turn in the garden.

Phil. It happened well, to let you see what innocent and agreeable pleasures you lose every morning. Can there be a pleasanter time of the day, or a more delightful season of the year? That purple sky, those wild but sweet notes of birds, the fragrant bloom upon the trees and flowers, the gentle influence of the rising sun, these and a thousand nameless beauties of nature inspire the soul with secret transports; its faculties too being at this time fresh and lively, are fit for those meditations, which the solitude of a garden and tranquillity of the morning naturally dispose us to. But I am afraid I interrupt your thoughts: for you seemed very intent on something.

Hyl.  It is true, I was, and shall be obliged to you if you will permit me to go on in the same vein; not that I would by any means deprive myself of your company, for my thoughts always flow more easily in conversation  with a friend, than when I am alone: but my request is, that you would suffer me to impart my reflexions to you.

Phil. With all my heart, it is what I should have requested myself if you had not prevented me.

Hyl. I was considering the odd fate of those men who have in all ages, through an affectation of being distinguished from the vulgar, or some unaccountable turn of thought, pretended either to believe nothing at all, or to believe the most extravagant things in the world. This however might be borne, if their paradoxes and scepticism did not draw after them some consequences of general disadvantage to mankind. But the mischief lieth here; that when men of less leisure see them who are supposed to have spent their whole time in the pursuits of knowledge professing an entire ignorance of all things, or advancing such notions as are repugnant to plain and commonly received principles, they will be tempted to entertain suspicions concerning the most important truths, which they had hitherto held sacred and unquestionable.

Phil. I entirely agree with you, as to the ill tendency of the affected doubts of some philosophers, and fantastical conceits of others. I am even so far gone of late in this way of thinking, that I have quitted several of the sublime notions I had got in their schools for vulgar opinions. And I give it you on my word; since this revolt from metaphysical notions to the plain dictates of nature and common sense, I find my understanding strangely enlightened, so that I can now easily comprehend a great many things which before were all mystery and riddle.

Hyl. I am glad to find there was nothing in the accounts I heard of you.

Phil. Pray, what were those?

Hyl. You were represented, in last night’s conversation, as one who maintained the most extravagant opinion that ever entered into the mind of man, to wit, that there is no such thing as material substance in the world.

Phil. That there is no such thing as what philosophers call material substance , I am seriously persuaded: but, if I were made to see anything absurd or sceptical in this, I should then have the same reason to renounce this that I imagine I have now to reject the contrary opinion.

Hyl. What! can anything be more fantastical, more repugnant to Common Sense, or a more manifest piece of Scepticism, than to believe there is no such thing as matter ?

Phil. Softly, good Hylas. What if it should prove that you, who hold there is, are, by virtue of that opinion, a greater sceptic, and maintain more paradoxes and repugnances to Common Sense, than I who believe no such thing?

Hyl. You may as soon persuade me, the part is greater than the whole, as that, in order to avoid absurdity and Scepticism, I should ever be obliged to give up my opinion in this point.

Phil. Well then, are you content to admit that opinion for true, which upon examination shall appear most agreeable to Common Sense, and remote from Scepticism?

Hyl. With all my heart. Since you are for raising disputes about the plainest things in nature, I am content for once to hear what you have to say.

Phil. Pray, Hylas, what do you mean by a sceptic ?

Hyl. I mean what all men mean — one that doubts of everything.

Phil. He then who entertains no doubt concerning some particular point, with regard to that point cannot be thought a sceptic.

Hyl. I agree with you.

Phil. Whether doth doubting consist in embracing the affirmative or negative side of a question?

Hyl. In neither; for whoever understands English cannot but know that doubting signifies a suspense between both.

Phil. He then that denies any point, can no more be said to doubt of it, than he who affirmeth it with the same degree of assurance.

Hyl. True.

Phil. And, consequently, for such his denial is no more to be esteemed a sceptic than the other.

Hyl. I acknowledge it.

Phil. How cometh it to pass then, Hylas, that you pronounce me a sceptic , because I deny what you affirm, to wit, the existence of Matter? Since, for aught you can tell, I am as peremptory in my denial, as you in your affirmation.

Hyl. Hold, Philonous, I have been a little out in my definition; but every false step a man makes in discourse is not to be insisted on. I said indeed that a sceptic was one who doubted of everything; but I should have added, or who denies the reality and truth of things.

Phil. What things? Do you mean the principles and theorems of sciences? But these you know are universal intellectual notions, and consequently independent of Matter. The denial therefore of this doth not imply the denying them.

Hyl. I grant it. But are there no other things? What think you of distrusting the senses, of denying the real existence of sensible things, or pretending to know nothing of them. Is not this sufficient to denominate a man a sceptic ?

Phil. Shall we therefore examine which of us it is that denies the reality of sensible things, or professes the greatest ignorance of them; since, if I take you rightly, he is to be esteemed the greatest sceptic ?

Hyl. That is what I desire.

Phil. What mean you by Sensible Things?

Hyl. Those things which are perceived by the senses. Can you imagine that I mean anything else?

Phil. Pardon me, Hylas, if I am desirous clearly to apprehend your notions, since this may much shorten our inquiry. Suffer me then to ask you this farther question. Are those things only perceived by the senses which are perceived immediately? Or, may those things properly be said to be sensible which are perceived mediately, or not without the intervention of others?

Hyl. I do not sufficiently understand you.

Phil.  In reading a book, what I immediately perceive  are the letters; but mediately, or by means of these, are suggested to my mind the notions of God, virtue, truth, &c. Now, that the letters are truly sensible things, or perceived by sense, there is no doubt: but I would know whether you take the things suggested by them to be so too.

Hyl. No, certainly: it were absurd to think God or virtue sensible things; though they may be signified and suggested to the mind by sensible marks, with which they have an arbitrary connexion.

Phil. It seems then, that by sensible things you mean those only which can be perceived immediately by sense?

Hyl. Right.

Phil. Doth it not follow from this, that though I see one part of the sky red, and another blue, and that my reason doth thence evidently conclude there must be some cause of that diversity of colours, yet that cause cannot be said to be a sensible thing, or perceived by the sense of seeing?

Hyl. It doth.

Phil. In like manner, though I hear variety of sounds, yet I cannot be said to hear the causes of those sounds?

Hyl. You cannot.

Phil. And when by my touch I perceive a thing to be hot and heavy, I cannot say, with any truth or propriety, that I feel the cause of its heat or weight?

Hyl. To prevent any more questions of this kind, I tell you once for all, that by sensible things I mean those only which are perceived by sense; and that in truth the senses perceive nothing which they do not perceive immediately : for they make no inferences. The deducing therefore of causes or occasions from effects and appearances, which alone are perceived by sense, entirely relates to reason.

Phil. This point then is agreed between us — That sensible things are those only which are immediately perceived by sense . You will farther inform me, whether we immediately perceive by sight anything beside light, and colours, and figures; or by hearing, anything but sounds; by the palate, anything beside tastes; by the smell, beside odours; or by the touch, more than tangible qualities.

Hyl. We do not.

Phil. It seems, therefore, that if you take away all sensible qualities, there remains nothing sensible?

Hyl. I grant it.

Phil. Sensible things therefore are nothing else but so many sensible qualities, or combinations of sensible qualities?

Hyl. Nothing else.

Phil. Heat then is a sensible thing?

Hyl. Certainly.

Phil. Doth the reality of sensible things consist in being perceived? or, is it something distinct from their being perceived, and that bears no relation to the mind?

Hyl. To exist is one thing, and to be perceived is another.

Phil. I speak with regard to sensible things only. And of these I ask, whether by their real existence you mean a subsistence exterior to the mind, and distinct from their being perceived?

Hyl. I mean a real absolute being, distinct from, and without any relation to, their being perceived.

Phil. Heat therefore, if it be allowed a real being, must exist without the mind?

Hyl. It must.

Phil. Tell me, Hylas, is this real existence equally compatible to all degrees of heat, which we perceive; or is there any reason why we should attribute it to some, and deny it to others? And if there be, pray let me know that reason.

Hyl. Whatever degree of heat we perceive by sense, we may be sure the same exists in the object that occasions it.

Phil. What! the greatest as well as the least?

Hyl. I tell you, the reason is plainly the same in respect of both. They are both perceived by sense; nay, the greater degree of heat is more sensibly perceived; and consequently, if there is any difference, we are more certain of its real existence than we can be of the reality of a lesser degree.

Phil. But is not the most vehement and intense degree of heat a very great pain?

Hyl. No one can deny it.

Phil. And is any unperceiving thing capable of pain or pleasure?

Hyl. No, certainly.

Phil. Is your material substance a senseless being, or a being endowed with sense and perception?

Hyl. It is senseless without doubt.

Phil. It cannot therefore be the subject of pain?

Hyl. By no means.

Phil. Nor consequently of the greatest heat perceived by sense, since you acknowledge this to be no small pain?

Hyl. I grant it.

Phil. What shall we say then of your external object; is it a material Substance, or no?

Hyl. It is a material substance with the sensible qualities inhering in it.

Phil. How then can a great heat exist in it, since you own it cannot in a material substance? I desire you would clear this point.

Hyl. Hold, Philonous, I fear I was out in yielding intense heat to be a pain. It should seem rather, that pain is something distinct from heat, and the consequence or effect of it.

Phil. Upon putting your hand near the fire, do you perceive one simple uniform sensation, or two distinct sensations?

Hyl. But one simple sensation.

Phil. Is not the heat immediately perceived?

Hyl. It is.

Phil. And the pain?

Hyl. True.

Phil. Seeing therefore they are both immediately perceived at the same time, and the fire affects you only with one simple or uncompounded idea, it follows that this same simple idea is both the intense heat immediately perceived, and the pain; and, consequently, that the intense heat immediately perceived is nothing distinct from a particular sort of pain.

Hyl. It seems so.

Phil. Again, try in your thoughts, Hylas, if you can conceive a vehement sensation to be without pain or pleasure.

Hyl. I cannot.

Phil. Or can you frame to yourself an idea of sensible pain or pleasure in general, abstracted from every particular idea of heat, cold, tastes, smells? &c.

Hyl. — I do not find that I can.

Phil. Doth it not therefore follow, that sensible pain is nothing distinct from those sensations or ideas, in an intense degree?

Hyl. It is undeniable; and, to speak the truth, I begin to suspect a very great heat cannot exist but in a mind perceiving it.

Phil. What! are you then in that sceptical state of suspense, between affirming and denying?

Hyl. I think I may be positive in the point. A very violent and painful heat cannot exist without the mind.

Phil. It hath not therefore, according to you, any real being?

Hyl. I own it.

Phil. Is it therefore certain, that there is no body in nature really hot?

Hyl. I have not denied there is any real heat in bodies. I only say, there is no such thing as an intense real heat.

Phil. But, did you not say before that all degrees of heat were equally real; or, if there was any difference, that the greater were more undoubtedly real than the lesser?

Hyl. True: but it was because I did not then consider the ground there is for distinguishing between them, which I now plainly see. And it is this: because intense heat is nothing else but a particular kind of painful sensation; and pain cannot exist but in a perceiving being; it follows that no intense heat can really exist in an unperceiving corporeal substance. But this is no reason why we should deny heat in an inferior degree to exist in such a substance.

Phil. But how shall we be able to discern those degrees of heat which exist only in the mind from those which exist without it?

Hyl. That is no difficult matter. You know the least pain cannot exist unperceived; whatever, therefore, degree of heat is a pain exists only in the mind. But, as for all other degrees of heat, nothing obliges us to think the same of them.

Phil. I think you granted before that no unperceiving being was capable of pleasure, any more than of pain.

Hyl. I did.

Phil. And is not warmth, or a more gentle degree of heat than what causes uneasiness, a pleasure?

Hyl. What then?

Phil. Consequently, it cannot exist without the mind in an unperceiving substance, or body.

Hyl. So it seems.

Phil. Since, therefore, as well those degrees of heat that are not painful, as those that are, can exist only in a thinking substance; may we not conclude that external bodies are absolutely incapable of any degree of heat whatsoever?

Hyl. On second thoughts, I do not think it so evident that warmth is a pleasure as that a great degree of heat is a pain.

Phil. I do not pretend that warmth is as great a pleasure as heat is a pain. But, if you grant it to be even a small pleasure, it serves to make good my conclusion.

Hyl. I could rather call it an indolence ! It seems to be nothing more than a privation of both pain and pleasure. And that such a quality or state as this may agree to an unthinking substance, I hope you will not deny.

Phil. If you are resolved to maintain that warmth, or a gentle degree of heat, is no pleasure, I know not how to convince you otherwise than by appealing to your own sense. But what think you of cold?

Hyl. The same that I do of heat. An intense degree of cold is a pain; for to feel a very great cold, is to perceive a great uneasiness: it cannot therefore exist without the mind; but a lesser degree of cold may, as well as a lesser degree of heat.

Phil. Those bodies, therefore, upon whose application to our own, we perceive a moderate degree of heat, must be concluded to have a moderate degree of heat or warmth in them; and those, upon whose application we feel a like degree of cold, must be thought to have cold in them.

Hyl. They must.

Phil. Can any doctrine be true that necessarily leads a man into an absurdity?

Hyl. Without doubt it cannot.

Phil. Is it not an absurdity to think that the same thing should be at the same time both cold and warm?

Hyl. It is.

Phil. Suppose now one of your hands hot, and the other cold, and that they are both at once put into the same vessel of water, in an intermediate state; will not the water seem cold to one hand, and warm to the other?

Hyl. It will.

Phil. Ought we not therefore, by your principles, to conclude it is really both cold and warm at the same time, that is, according to your own concession, to believe an absurdity?

Hyl. I confess it seems so.

Phil. Consequently, the principles themselves are false, since you have granted that no true principle leads to an absurdity.

Hyl. But, after all, can anything be more absurd than to say, there is no heat in the fire ?

Phil. To make the point still clearer; tell me whether, in two cases exactly alike, we ought not to make the same judgment?

Hyl. We ought.

Phil. When a pin pricks your finger, doth it not rend and divide the fibres of your flesh?

Hyl. It doth.

Phil. And when a coal burns your finger, doth it any more?

Hyl. It doth not.

Phil. Since, therefore, you neither judge the sensation itself occasioned by the pin, nor anything like it to be in the pin; you should not, conformably to what you have now granted, judge the sensation occasioned by the fire, or anything like it, to be in the fire.

Hyl. Well, since it must be so, I am content to yield this point, and acknowledge that heat and cold are only sensations existing in our minds. But there still remain qualities enough to secure the reality of external things.

Phil.  But what will you say, Hylas, if it shall appear that the case is the same with regard to all other sensible  qualities, and that they can no more be supposed to exist without the mind, than heat and cold?

Hyl. Then indeed you will have done something to the purpose; but that is what I despair of seeing proved.

Phil. Let us examine them in order. What think you of tastes — do they exist without the mind, or no?

Hyl. Can any man in his senses doubt whether sugar is sweet, or wormwood bitter?

Phil. Inform me, Hylas. Is a sweet taste a particular kind of pleasure or pleasant sensation, or is it not?

Hyl. It is.

Phil. And is not bitterness some kind of uneasiness or pain?

Hyl. I grant it.

Phil. If therefore sugar and wormwood are unthinking corporeal substances existing without the mind, how can sweetness and bitterness, that is, pleasure and pain, agree to them?

Hyl. Hold, Philonous, I now see what it was deluded me all this time. You asked whether heat and cold, sweetness and bitterness, were not particular sorts of pleasure and pain; to which I answered simply, that they were. Whereas I should have thus distinguished: — those qualities, as perceived by us, are pleasures or pains; but not as existing in the external objects. We must not therefore conclude absolutely, that there is no heat in the fire, or sweetness in the sugar, but only that heat or sweetness, as perceived by us, are not in the fire or sugar. What say you to this?

Phil. I say it is nothing to the purpose. Our discourse proceeded altogether concerning sensible things, which you defined to be, the things we immediately perceive by our senses  . Whatever other qualities, therefore, you speak of, as distinct from these, I know nothing of them, neither do they at all belong to the point in dispute. You may, indeed, pretend to have discovered certain qualities which you do not perceive, and assert those insensible qualities exist in fire and sugar. But what use can be made of this to your present purpose, I am at a loss to conceive. Tell me then once more, do you acknowledge that heat and  cold, sweetness and bitterness (meaning those qualities which are perceived by the senses), do not exist without the mind?

Hyl. I see it is to no purpose to hold out, so I give up the cause as to those mentioned qualities. Though I profess it sounds oddly, to say that sugar is not sweet.

Phil. But, for your farther satisfaction, take this along with you: that which at other times seems sweet, shall, to a distempered palate, appear bitter. And, nothing can be plainer than that divers persons perceive different tastes in the same food; since that which one man delights in, another abhors. And how could this be, if the taste was something really inherent in the food?

Hyl. I acknowledge I know not how.

Phil. In the next place, odours are to be considered. And, with regard to these, I would fain know whether what hath been said of tastes doth not exactly agree to them? Are they not so many pleasing or displeasing sensations?

Hyl. They are.

Phil. Can you then conceive it possible that they should exist in an unperceiving thing?

Hyl. I cannot.

Phil. Or, can you imagine that filth and ordure affect those brute animals that feed on them out of choice, with the same smells which we perceive in them?

Hyl. By no means.

Phil. May we not therefore conclude of smells, as of the other forementioned qualities, that they cannot exist in any but a perceiving substance or mind?

Hyl. I think so.

Phil. Then as to sounds , what must we think of them: are they accidents really inherent in external bodies, or not?

Hyl. That they inhere not in the sonorous bodies is plain from hence: because a bell struck in the exhausted receiver of an air-pump sends forth no sound. The air, therefore, must be thought the subject of sound.

Phil. What reason is there for that, Hylas?

Hyl. Because, when any motion is raised in the air, we perceive a sound greater or lesser, according to the air’s motion; but without some motion in the air, we never hear any sound at all.

Phil.  And granting that we never hear a sound but when  some motion is produced in the air, yet I do not see how you can infer from thence, that the sound itself is in the air.

Hyl. It is this very motion in the external air that produces in the mind the sensation of sound . For, striking on the drum of the ear, it causeth a vibration, which by the auditory nerves being communicated to the brain, the soul is thereupon affected with the sensation called sound .

Phil. What! is sound then a sensation?

Hyl. I tell you, as perceived by us, it is a particular sensation in the mind.

Phil. And can any sensation exist without the mind?

Hyl. No, certainly.

Phil. How then can sound, being a sensation, exist in the air, if by the air you mean a senseless substance existing without the mind?

Hyl. You must distinguish, Philonous, between sound as it is perceived by us, and as it is in itself; or (which is the same thing) between the sound we immediately perceive, and that which exists without us. The former, indeed, is a particular kind of sensation, but the latter is merely a vibrative or undulatory motion in the air.

Phil. I thought I had already obviated that distinction, by the answer I gave when you were applying it in a like case before. But, to say no more of that, are you sure then that sound is really nothing but motion?

Hyl. I am.

Phil. Whatever therefore agrees to real sound, may with truth be attributed to motion?

Hyl. It may.

Phil. It is then good sense to speak of motion as of a thing that is loud, sweet, acute, or grave .

Hyl. I see you are resolved not to understand me. Is it not evident those accidents or modes belong only to sensible sound, or sound in the common acceptation of the word, but not to sound in the real and philosophic sense; which, as I just now told you, is nothing but a certain motion of the air?

Phil. It seems then there are two sorts of sound — the one vulgar, or that which is heard, the other philosophical and real?

Hyl. Even so.

Phil. And the latter consists in motion?

Hyl. I told you so before.

Phil. Tell me, Hylas, to which of the senses, think you, the idea of motion belongs? to the hearing?

Hyl. No, certainly; but to the sight and touch.

Phil. It should follow then, that, according to you, real sounds may possibly be seen or felt , but never heard .

Hyl. Look you, Philonous, you may, if you please, make a jest of my opinion, but that will not alter the truth of things. I own, indeed, the inferences you draw me into sound something oddly; but common language, you know, is framed by, and for the use of the vulgar: we must not therefore wonder if expressions adapted to exact philosophic notions seem uncouth and out of the way.

Phil. Is it come to that? I assure you, I imagine myself to have gained no small point, since you make so light of departing from common phrases and opinions; it being a main part of our inquiry, to examine whose notions are widest of the common road, and most repugnant to the general sense of the world. But, can you think it no more than a philosophical paradox, to say that real sounds are never heard , and that the idea of them is obtained by some other sense? And is there nothing in this contrary to nature and the truth of things?

Hyl. To deal ingenuously, I do not like it. And, after the concessions already made, I had as well grant that sounds too have no real being without the mind.

Phil. And I hope you will make no difficulty to acknowledge the same of colours .

Hyl. Pardon me: the case of colours is very different. Can anything be plainer than that we see them on the objects?

Phil. The objects you speak of are, I suppose, corporeal Substances existing without the mind?

Hyl. They are.

Phil. And have true and real colours inhering in them?

Hyl. Each visible object hath that colour which we see in it.

Phil. How! is there anything visible but what we perceive by sight?

Hyl. There is not.

Phil. And, do we perceive anything by sense which we do not perceive immediately?

Hyl. How often must I be obliged to repeat the same thing? I tell you, we do not.

Phil. Have patience, good Hylas; and tell me once more, whether there is anything immediately perceived by the senses, except sensible qualities. I know you asserted there was not; but I would now be informed, whether you still persist in the same opinion.

Hyl. I do.

Phil. Pray, is your corporeal substance either a sensible quality, or made up of sensible qualities?

Hyl. What a question that is! who ever thought it was?

Phil. My reason for asking was, because in saying, each visible object hath that colour which we see in it , you make visible objects to be corporeal substances; which implies either that corporeal substances are sensible qualities, or else that there is something beside sensible qualities perceived by sight: but, as this point was formerly agreed between us, and is still maintained by you, it is a clear consequence, that your corporeal substance is nothing distinct from sensible qualities .

Hyl. You may draw as many absurd consequences as you please, and endeavour to perplex the plainest things; but you shall never persuade me out of my senses. I clearly understand my own meaning.

Phil. I wish you would make me understand it too. But, since you are unwilling to have your notion of corporeal substance examined, I shall urge that point no farther. Only be pleased to let me know, whether the same colours which we see exist in external bodies, or some other.

Hyl. The very same.

Phil. What! are then the beautiful red and purple we see on yonder clouds really in them? Or do you imagine they have in themselves any other form than that of a dark mist or vapour?

Hyl. I must own, Philonous, those colours are not really in the clouds as they seem to be at this distance. They are only apparent colours.

Phil. Apparent call you them? how shall we distinguish these apparent colours from real?

Hyl. Very easily. Those are to be thought apparent which, appearing only at a distance, vanish upon a nearer approach.

Phil. And those, I suppose, are to be thought real which are discovered by the most near and exact survey.

Hyl. Right.

Phil. Is the nearest and exactest survey made by the help of a microscope, or by the naked eye?

Hyl. By a microscope, doubtless.

Phil. But a microscope often discovers colours in an object different from those perceived by the unassisted sight. And, in case we had microscopes magnifying to any assigned degree, it is certain that no object whatsoever, viewed through them, would appear in the same colour which it exhibits to the naked eye.

Hyl. And what will you conclude from all this? You cannot argue that there are really and naturally no colours on objects: because by artificial managements they may be altered, or made to vanish.

Phil. I think it may evidently be concluded from your own concessions, that all the colours we see with our naked eyes are only apparent as those on the clouds, since they vanish upon a more close and accurate inspection which is afforded us by a microscope. Then, as to what you say by way of prevention: I ask you whether the real and natural state of an object is better discovered by a very sharp and piercing sight, or by one which is less sharp?

Hyl. By the former without doubt.

Phil. Is it not plain from Dioptrics that microscopes make the sight more penetrating, and represent objects as they would appear to the eye in case it were naturally endowed with a most exquisite sharpness?

Hyl. It is.

Phil. Consequently the microscopical representation is to be thought that which best sets forth the real nature of the thing, or what it is in itself. The colours, therefore, by it perceived are more genuine and real than those perceived otherwise.

Hyl. I confess there is something in what you say.

Phil.  Besides, it is not only possible but manifest, that there actually are animals whose eyes are by nature framed  to perceive those things which by reason of their minuteness escape our sight. What think you of those inconceivably small animals perceived by glasses? Must we suppose they are all stark blind? Or, in case they see, can it be imagined their sight hath not the same use in preserving their bodies from injuries, which appears in that of all other animals? And if it hath, is it not evident they must see particles less than their own bodies; which will present them with a far different view in each object from that which strikes our senses? Even our own eyes do not always represent objects to us after the same manner. In the jaundice every one knows that all things seem yellow. Is it not therefore highly probable those animals in whose eyes we discern a very different texture from that of ours, and whose bodies abound with different humours, do not see the same colours in every object that we do? From all which, should it not seem to follow that all colours are equally apparent, and that none of those which we perceive are really inherent in any outward object?

Hyl. It should.

Phil.  The point will be past all doubt, if you consider that, in case colours were real properties or affections inherent in external bodies, they could admit of no alteration without some change wrought in the very bodies themselves: but, is it not evident from what hath been said that, upon the use of microscopes, upon a change happening in the humours of the eye, or a variation of distance, without any manner of real alteration in the thing itself, the colours of any object are either changed, or totally disappear? Nay, all other circumstances remaining the same, change but the situation of some objects, and they shall present different colours to the eye. The same thing happens upon viewing an object in various degrees of light. And what is more known than that the same bodies appear differently coloured by candle-light from what they do in the open day? Add to these the experiment of a prism which, separating the heterogeneous rays of light, alters the colour of any object, and will cause the whitest to appear of a deep blue or red to the naked eye. And now tell me whether you are still of opinion  that every body hath its true real colour inhering in it; and, if you think it hath, I would fain know farther from you, what certain distance and position of the object, what peculiar texture and formation of the eye, what degree or kind of light is necessary for ascertaining that true colour, and distinguishing it from apparent ones.

Hyl. I own myself entirely satisfied, that they are all equally apparent, and that there is no such thing as colour really inhering in external bodies, but that it is altogether in the light. And what confirms me in this opinion is, that in proportion to the light colours are still more or less vivid; and if there be no light, then are there no colours perceived. Besides, allowing there are colours on external objects, yet, how is it possible for us to perceive them? For no external body affects the mind, unless it acts first on our organs of sense. But the only action of bodies is motion; and motion cannot be communicated otherwise than by impulse. A distant object therefore cannot act on the eye; nor consequently make itself or its properties perceivable to the soul. Whence it plainly follows that it is immediately some contiguous substance, which, operating on the eye, occasions a perception of colours: and such is light.

Phil. How! is light then a substance?

Hyl. I tell you, Philonous, external light is nothing but a thin fluid substance, whose minute particles being agitated with a brisk motion, and in various manners reflected from the different surfaces of outward objects to the eyes, communicate different motions to the optic nerves; which, being propagated to the brain, cause therein various impressions; and these are attended with the sensations of red, blue, yellow, &c.

Phil. It seems then the light doth no more than shake the optic nerves.

Hyl. Nothing else.

Phil. And consequent to each particular motion of the nerves, the mind is affected with a sensation, which is some particular colour.

Hyl. Right.

Phil. And these sensations have no existence without the mind.

Hyl. They have not.

Phil. How then do you affirm that colours are in the light; since by light you understand a corporeal substance external to the mind?

Hyl. Light and colours, as immediately perceived by us, I grant cannot exist without the mind. But in themselves they are only the motions and configurations of certain insensible particles of matter.

Phil. Colours then, in the vulgar sense, or taken for the immediate objects of sight, cannot agree to any but a perceiving substance.

Hyl. That is what I say.

Phil. Well then, since you give up the point as to those sensible qualities which are alone thought colours by all mankind beside, you may hold what you please with regard to those invisible ones of the philosophers. It is not my business to dispute about them ; only I would advise you to bethink yourself, whether, considering the inquiry we are upon, it be prudent for you to affirm — the red and blue which we see are not real colours, but certain unknown motions and figures which no man ever did or can see are truly so . Are not these shocking notions, and are not they subject to as many ridiculous inferences, as those you were obliged to renounce before in the case of sounds?

Hyl. I frankly own, Philonous, that it is in vain to stand out any longer. Colours, sounds, tastes, in a word all those termed secondary qualities , have certainly no existence without the mind. But by this acknowledgment I must not be supposed to derogate anything from the reality of Matter, or external objects; seeing it is no more than several philosophers maintain, who nevertheless are the farthest imaginable from denying Matter. For the clearer understanding of this, you must know sensible qualities are by philosophers divided into Primary and Secondary  . The former are Extension, Figure, Solidity, Gravity, Motion, and Rest; and these they hold exist really in Bodies. The latter are those above enumerated; or,  briefly, all sensible qualities beside the Primary ; which they assert are only so many sensations or ideas existing nowhere but in the mind. But all this, I doubt not, you are apprised of. For my part, I have been a long time sensible there was such an opinion current among philosophers, but was never thoroughly convinced of its truth until now.

Phil. You are still then of opinion that extension and figures are inherent in external unthinking substances?

Hyl. I am.

Phil. But what if the same arguments which are brought against Secondary Qualities will hold good against these also?

Hyl. Why then I shall be obliged to think, they too exist only in the mind.

Phil. Is it your opinion the very figure and extension which you perceive by sense exist in the outward object or material substance?

Hyl. It is.

Phil. Have all other animals as good grounds to think the same of the figure and extension which they see and feel?

Hyl. Without doubt, if they have any thought at all.

Phil. Answer me, Hylas. Think you the senses were bestowed upon all animals for their preservation and well-being in life? or were they given to men alone for this end?

Hyl. I make no question but they have the same use in all other animals.

Phil. If so, is it not necessary they should be enabled by them to perceive their own limbs, and those bodies which are capable of harming them?

Hyl. Certainly.

Phil. A mite therefore must be supposed to see his own foot, and things equal or even less than it, as bodies of some considerable dimension; though at the same time they appear to you scarce discernible, or at best as so many visible points?

Hyl. I cannot deny it.

Phil. And to creatures less than the mite they will seem yet larger?

Hyl. They will.

Phil. Insomuch that what you can hardly discern will to another extremely minute animal appear as some huge mountain?

Hyl. All this I grant.

Phil. Can one and the same thing be at the same time in itself of different dimensions?

Hyl. That were absurd to imagine.

Phil. But, from what you have laid down it follows that both the extension by you perceived, and that perceived by the mite itself, as likewise all those perceived by lesser animals, are each of them the true extension of the mite’s foot; that is to say, by your own principles you are led into an absurdity.

Hyl. There seems to be some difficulty in the point.

Phil. Again, have you not acknowledged that no real inherent property of any object can be changed without some change in the thing itself?

Hyl. I have.

Phil. But, as we approach to or recede from an object, the visible extension varies, being at one distance ten or a hundred times greater than at another. Doth it not therefore follow from hence likewise that it is not really inherent in the object?

Hyl. I own I am at a loss what to think.

Phil. Your judgment will soon be determined, if you will venture to think as freely concerning this quality as you have done concerning the rest. Was it not admitted as a good argument, that neither heat nor cold was in the water, because it seemed warm to one hand and cold to the other?

Hyl. It was.

Phil. Is it not the very same reasoning to conclude, there is no extension or figure in an object, because to one eye it shall seem little, smooth, and round, when at the same time it appears to the other, great, uneven, and angular?

Hyl. The very same. But does this latter fact ever happen?

Phil.  You may at any time make the experiment, by  looking with one eye bare, and with the other through a microscope.

Hyl. I know not how to maintain it; and yet I am loath to give up extension , I see so many odd consequences following upon such a concession.

Phil. Odd, say you? After the concessions already made, I hope you will stick at nothing for its oddness. [ But, on the other hand, should it not seem very odd, if the general reasoning which includes all other sensible qualities did not also include extension? If it be allowed that no idea, nor anything like an idea, can exist in an unperceiving substance, then surely it follows that no figure, or mode of extension, which we can either perceive, or imagine, or have any idea of, can be really inherent in Matter; not to mention the peculiar difficulty there must be in conceiving a material substance, prior to and distinct from extension, to be the substratum of extension. Be the sensible quality what it will — figure, or sound, or colour, it seems alike impossible it should subsist in that which doth not perceive it.]

Hyl. I give up the point for the present, reserving still a right to retract my opinion, in case I shall hereafter discover any false step in my progress to it.

Phil. That is a right you cannot be denied. Figures and extension being despatched, we proceed next to motion . Can a real motion in any external body be at the same time both very swift and very slow?

Hyl. It cannot.

Phil. Is not the motion of a body swift in a reciprocal proportion to the time it takes up in describing any given space? Thus a body that describes a mile in an hour moves three times faster than it would in case it described only a mile in three hours.

Hyl. I agree with you.

Phil. And is not time measured by the succession of ideas in our minds?

Hyl. It is.

Phil. And is it not possible ideas should succeed one another twice as fast in your mind as they do in mine, or in that of some spirit of another kind?

Hyl. I own it.

Phil. Consequently the same body may to another seem to perform its motion over any space in half the time that it doth to you. And the same reasoning will hold as to any other proportion: that is to say, according to your principles (since the motions perceived are both really in the object) it is possible one and the same body shall be really moved the same way at once, both very swift and very slow. How is this consistent either with common sense, or with what you just now granted?

Hyl. I have nothing to say to it.

Phil. Then as for solidity ; either you do not mean any sensible quality by that word, and so it is beside our inquiry: or if you do, it must be either hardness or resistance. But both the one and the other are plainly relative to our senses: it being evident that what seems hard to one animal may appear soft to another, who hath greater force and firmness of limbs. Nor is it less plain that the resistance I feel is not in the body.

Hyl. I own the very sensation of resistance, which is all you immediately perceive, is not in the body; but the cause of that sensation is.

Phil. But the causes of our sensations are not things immediately perceived, and therefore are not sensible. This point I thought had been already determined.

Hyl. I own it was; but you will pardon me if I seem a little embarrassed: I know not how to quit my old notions.

Phil. To help you out, do but consider that if extension be once acknowledged to have no existence without the mind, the same must necessarily be granted of motion, solidity, and gravity; since they all evidently suppose extension. It is therefore superfluous to inquire particularly concerning each of them. In denying extension, you have denied them all to have any real existence.

Hyl. I wonder, Philonous, if what you say be true, why those philosophers who deny the Secondary Qualities any real existence should yet attribute it to the Primary. If there is no difference between them, how can this be accounted for?

Phil. It is not my business to account for every opinion of the philosophers. But, among other reasons which may be assigned for this, it seems probable that pleasure and pain being rather annexed to the former than the latter may be one. Heat and cold, tastes and smells, have something more vividly pleasing or disagreeable than the ideas of extension, figure, and motion affect us with. And, it being too visibly absurd to hold that pain or pleasure can be in an unperceiving Substance, men are more easily weaned from believing the external existence of the Secondary than the Primary Qualities. You will be satisfied there is something in this, if you recollect the difference you made between an intense and more moderate degree of heat; allowing the one a real existence, while you denied it to the other. But, after all, there is no rational ground for that distinction; for, surely an indifferent sensation is as truly a sensation as one more pleasing or painful; and consequently should not any more than they be supposed to exist in an unthinking subject.

Hyl. It is just come into my head, Philonous, that I have somewhere heard of a distinction between absolute and sensible extension. Now, though it be acknowledged that great and small , consisting merely in the relation which other extended beings have to the parts of our own bodies, do not really inhere in the substances themselves; yet nothing obliges us to hold the same with regard to absolute extension , which is something abstracted from great and small , from this or that particular magnitude or figure. So likewise as to motion; swift and slow are altogether relative to the succession of ideas in our own minds. But, it doth not follow, because those modifications of motion exist not without the mind, that therefore absolute motion abstracted from them doth not.

Phil. Pray what is it that distinguishes one motion, or one part of extension, from another? Is it not something sensible, as some degree of swiftness or slowness, some certain magnitude or figure peculiar to each?

Hyl. I think so.

Phil. These qualities, therefore, stripped of all sensible properties, are without all specific and numerical differences, as the schools call them.

Hyl. They are.

Phil. That is to say, they are extension in general, and motion in general.

Hyl. Let it be so.

Phil. But it is a universally received maxim that Everything which exists is particular . How then can motion in general, or extension in general, exist in any corporeal substance?

Hyl. I will take time to solve your difficulty.

Phil. But I think the point may be speedily decided. Without doubt you can tell whether you are able to frame this or that idea. Now I am content to put our dispute on this issue. If you can frame in your thoughts a distinct abstract idea of motion or extension, divested of all those sensible modes, as swift and slow, great and small, round and square, and the like, which are acknowledged to exist only in the mind, I will then yield the point you contend for. But if you cannot, it will be unreasonable on your side to insist any longer upon what you have no notion of.

Hyl. To confess ingenuously, I cannot.

Phil. Can you even separate the ideas of extension and motion from the ideas of all those qualities which they who make the distinction term secondary ?

Hyl. What! is it not an easy matter to consider extension and motion by themselves, abstracted from all other sensible qualities? Pray how do the mathematicians treat of them?

Phil. I acknowledge, Hylas, it is not difficult to form general propositions and reasonings about those qualities, without mentioning any other; and, in this sense, to consider or treat of them abstractedly. But, how doth it follow that, because I can pronounce the word motion  by itself, I can form the idea of it in my mind exclusive  of body? or, because theorems may be made of extension and figures, without any mention of great or small , or any other sensible mode or quality, that therefore it is possible such an abstract idea of extension, without any particular size or figure, or sensible quality, should be distinctly formed, and apprehended by the mind? Mathematicians treat of quantity, without regarding what other sensible qualities it is attended with, as being altogether indifferent to their demonstrations. But, when laying aside the words, they contemplate the bare ideas, I believe you will find, they are not the pure abstracted ideas of extension.

Hyl. But what say you to pure intellect ? May not abstracted ideas be framed by that faculty?

Phil. Since I cannot frame abstract ideas at all, it is plain I cannot frame them by the help of pure intellect ; whatsoever faculty you understand by those words. Besides, not to inquire into the nature of pure intellect and its spiritual objects, as virtue , reason , God , or the like, thus much seems manifest — that sensible things are only to be perceived by sense, or represented by the imagination. Figures, therefore, and extension, being originally perceived by sense, do not belong to pure intellect: but, for your farther satisfaction, try if you can frame the idea of any figure, abstracted from all particularities of size, or even from other sensible qualities.

Hyl. Let me think a little —— I do not find that I can.

Phil. And can you think it possible that should really exist in nature which implies a repugnancy in its conception?

Hyl. By no means.

Phil. Since therefore it is impossible even for the mind to disunite the ideas of extension and motion from all other sensible qualities, doth it not follow, that where the one exist there necessarily the other exist likewise?

Hyl. It should seem so.

Phil. Consequently, the very same arguments which you admitted as conclusive against the Secondary Qualities are, without any farther application of force, against the Primary too. Besides, if you will trust your senses, is it not plain all sensible qualities coexist, or to them appear as being in the same place? Do they ever represent a motion, or figure, as being divested of all other visible and tangible qualities?

Hyl. You need say no more on this head. I am free to own, if there be no secret error or oversight in our proceedings hitherto, that all sensible qualities are alike to be denied existence without the mind. But, my fear is that I have been too liberal in my former concessions, or overlooked some fallacy or other. In short, I did not take time to think.

Phil. For that matter, Hylas, you may take what time you please in reviewing the progress of our inquiry. You are at liberty to recover any slips you might have made, or offer whatever you have omitted which makes for your first opinion.

Hyl. One great oversight I take to be this — that I did not sufficiently distinguish the object from the sensation . Now, though this latter may not exist without the mind, yet it will not thence follow that the former cannot.

Phil. What object do you mean? the object of the senses?

Hyl. The same.

Phil. It is then immediately perceived?

Hyl. Right.

Phil. Make me to understand the difference between what is immediately perceived and a sensation.

Hyl. The sensation I take to be an act of the mind perceiving; besides which, there is something perceived; and this I call the object . For example, there is red and yellow on that tulip. But then the act of perceiving those colours is in me only, and not in the tulip.

Phil. What tulip do you speak of? Is it that which you see?

Hyl. The same.

Phil. And what do you see beside colour, figure, and extension?

Hyl. Nothing.

Phil. What you would say then is that the red and yellow are coexistent with the extension; is it not?

Hyl. That is not all; I would say they have a real existence without the mind, in some unthinking substance.

Phil. That the colours are really in the tulip which I see is manifest. Neither can it be denied that this tulip may exist independent of your mind or mine; but, that any immediate object of the senses — that is, any idea, or combination of ideas — should exist in an unthinking substance, or exterior to all minds, is in itself an evident contradiction. Nor can I imagine how this follows from what you said just now, to wit, that the red and yellow were on the tulip you saw , since you do not pretend to see that unthinking substance.

Hyl. You have an artful way, Philonous, of diverting our inquiry from the subject.

Phil. I see you have no mind to be pressed that way. To return then to your distinction between sensation and object ; if I take you right, you distinguish in every perception two things, the one an action of the mind, the other not.

Hyl. True.

Phil. And this action cannot exist in, or belong to, any unthinking thing; but, whatever beside is implied in a perception may?

Hyl. That is my meaning.

Phil. So that if there was a perception without any act of the mind, it were possible such a perception should exist in an unthinking substance?

Hyl. I grant it. But it is impossible there should be such a perception.

Phil. When is the mind said to be active?

Hyl. When it produces, puts an end to, or changes, anything.

Phil. Can the mind produce, discontinue, or change anything, but by an act of the will?

Hyl. It cannot.

Phil. The mind therefore is to be accounted active in its perceptions so far forth as volition is included in them?

Hyl. It is.

Phil. In plucking this flower I am active; because I do it by the motion of my hand, which was consequent upon my volition; so likewise in applying it to my nose. But is either of these smelling?

Hyl. No.

Phil. I act too in drawing the air through my nose; because my breathing so rather than otherwise is the effect of my volition. But neither can this be called smelling : for, if it were, I should smell every time I breathed in that manner?

Hyl. True.

Phil. Smelling then is somewhat consequent to all this?

Hyl. It is.

Phil. But I do not find my will concerned any farther. Whatever more there is — as that I perceive such a particular smell, or any smell at all — this is independent of my will, and therein I am altogether passive. Do you find it otherwise with you, Hylas?

Hyl. No, the very same.

Phil. Then, as to seeing, is it not in your power to open your eyes, or keep them shut; to turn them this or that way?

Hyl. Without doubt.

Phil. But, doth it in like manner depend on your will that in looking on this flower you perceive white rather than any other colour? Or, directing your open eyes towards yonder part of the heaven, can you avoid seeing the sun? Or is light or darkness the effect of your volition?

Hyl. No, certainly.

Phil. You are then in these respects altogether passive?

Hyl. I am.

Phil. Tell me now, whether seeing consists in perceiving light and colours, or in opening and turning the eyes?

Hyl. Without doubt, in the former.

Phil. Since therefore you are in the very perception of light and colours altogether passive, what is become of that action you were speaking of as an ingredient in every sensation? And, doth it not follow from your own concessions, that the perception of light and colours, including no action in it, may exist in an unperceiving substance? And is not this a plain contradiction?

Hyl. I know not what to think of it.

Phil. Besides, since you distinguish the active and passive in every perception, you must do it in that of pain. But how is it possible that pain, be it as little active as you please, should exist in an unperceiving substance? In short, do but consider the point, and then confess ingenuously, whether light and colours, tastes, sounds, &c. are not all equally passions or sensations in the soul. You may indeed call them external objects , and give them in words what subsistence you please. But, examine your own thoughts, and then tell me whether it be not as I say?

Hyl. I acknowledge, Philonous, that, upon a fair observation of what passes in my mind, I can discover nothing else but that I am a thinking being, affected with variety of sensations; neither is it possible to conceive how a sensation should exist in an unperceiving substance. — But then, on the other hand, when I look on sensible things in a different view, considering them as so many modes and qualities, I find it necessary to suppose a material substratum , without which they cannot be conceived to exist.

Phil. Material substratum call you it? Pray, by which of your senses came you acquainted with that being?

Hyl. It is not itself sensible; its modes and qualities only being perceived by the senses.

Phil. I presume then it was by reflexion and reason you obtained the idea of it?

Hyl. I do not pretend to any proper positive idea of it. However, I conclude it exists, because qualities cannot be conceived to exist without a support.

Phil. It seems then you have only a relative notion of it, or that you conceive it not otherwise than by conceiving the relation it bears to sensible qualities?

Hyl. Right.

Phil. Be pleased therefore to let me know wherein that relation consists.

Hyl. Is it not sufficiently expressed in the term substratum , or substance ?

Phil. If so, the word substratum should import that it is spread under the sensible qualities or accidents?

Hyl. True.

Phil. And consequently under extension?

Hyl. I own it.

Phil. It is therefore somewhat in its own nature entirely distinct from extension?

Hyl. I tell you, extension is only a mode, and Matter is something that supports modes. And is it not evident the thing supported is different from the thing supporting?

Phil. So that something distinct from, and exclusive of, extension is supposed to be the substratum of extension?

Hyl. Just so.

Phil. Answer me, Hylas. Can a thing be spread without extension? or is not the idea of extension necessarily included in spreading ?

Hyl. It is.

Phil. Whatsoever therefore you suppose spread under anything must have in itself an extension distinct from the extension of that thing under which it is spread?

Hyl. It must.

Phil. Consequently, every corporeal substance, being the substratum of extension, must have in itself another extension, by which it is qualified to be a substratum : and so on to infinity? And I ask whether this be not absurd in itself, and repugnant to what you granted just now, to wit, that the substratum was something distinct from and exclusive of extension?

Hyl. Aye but, Philonous, you take me wrong. I do not mean that Matter is spread in a gross literal sense under extension. The word substratum is used only to express in general the same thing with substance .

Phil. Well then, let us examine the relation implied in the term substance . Is it not that it stands under accidents?

Hyl. The very same.

Phil. But, that one thing may stand under or support another, must it not be extended?

Hyl. It must.

Phil. Is not therefore this supposition liable to the same absurdity with the former?

Hyl. You still take things in a strict literal sense. That is not fair, Philonous.

Phil. I am not for imposing any sense on your words: you are at liberty to explain them as you please. Only, I beseech you, make me understand something by them. You tell me Matter supports or stands under accidents. How! is it as your legs support your body?

Hyl. No; that is the literal sense.

Phil. Pray let me know any sense, literal or not literal, that you understand it in. — How long must I wait for an answer, Hylas?

Hyl. I declare I know not what to say. I once thought I understood well enough what was meant by Matter’s supporting accidents. But now, the more I think on it the less can I comprehend it: in short I find that I know nothing of it.

Phil. It seems then you have no idea at all, neither relative nor positive, of Matter; you know neither what it is in itself, nor what relation it bears to accidents?

Hyl. I acknowledge it.

Phil. And yet you asserted that you could not conceive how qualities or accidents should really exist, without conceiving at the same time a material support of them?

Hyl. I did.

Phil. That is to say, when you conceive the real existence of qualities, you do withal conceive Something which you cannot conceive?

Hyl. It was wrong, I own. But still I fear there is some fallacy or other. Pray what think you of this? It is just come into my head that the ground of all our mistake lies in your treating of each quality by itself. Now, I grant that each quality cannot singly subsist without the mind. Colour cannot without extension, neither can figure without some other sensible quality. But, as the several qualities united or blended together form entire sensible things, nothing hinders why such things may not be supposed to exist without the mind.

Phil.  Either, Hylas, you are jesting, or have a very bad memory. Though indeed we went through all the qualities by name one after another, yet my arguments, or rather your concessions, nowhere tended to prove that the Secondary Qualities did not subsist each alone by  itself; but, that they were not at all without the mind. Indeed, in treating of figure and motion we concluded they could not exist without the mind, because it was impossible even in thought to separate them from all secondary qualities, so as to conceive them existing by themselves. But then this was not the only argument made use of upon that occasion. But (to pass by all that hath been hitherto said, and reckon it for nothing, if you will have it so) I am content to put the whole upon this issue. If you can conceive it possible for any mixture or combination of qualities, or any sensible object whatever, to exist without the mind, then I will grant it actually to be so.

Hyl. If it comes to that the point will soon be decided. What more easy than to conceive a tree or house existing by itself, independent of, and unperceived by, any mind whatsoever? I do at this present time conceive them existing after that manner.

Phil. How say you, Hylas, can you see a thing which is at the same time unseen?

Hyl. No, that were a contradiction.

Phil. Is it not as great a contradiction to talk of conceiving a thing which is unconceived ?

Hyl. It is.

Phil. The tree or house therefore which you think of is conceived by you?

Hyl. How should it be otherwise?

Phil. And what is conceived is surely in the mind?

Hyl. Without question, that which is conceived is in the mind.

Phil. How then came you to say, you conceived a house or tree existing independent and out of all minds whatsoever?

Hyl.  That was I own an oversight; but stay, let me consider what led me into it. — It is a pleasant mistake enough. As I was thinking of a tree in a solitary place, where no one was present to see it, methought that was to conceive a tree as existing unperceived or unthought of; not considering that I myself conceived it all the while. But now I plainly see that all I can do is to frame ideas in my own mind. I may indeed conceive in my own thoughts the idea of a tree, or a house, or a mountain, but  that is all. And this is far from proving that I can conceive them existing out of the minds of all Spirits .

Phil. You acknowledge then that you cannot possibly conceive how any one corporeal sensible thing should exist otherwise than in a mind?

Hyl. I do.

Phil. And yet you will earnestly contend for the truth of that which you cannot so much as conceive?

Hyl. I profess I know not what to think; but still there are some scruples remain with me. Is it not certain I see things at a distance ? Do we not perceive the stars and moon, for example, to be a great way off? Is not this, I say, manifest to the senses?

Phil. Do you not in a dream too perceive those or the like objects?

Hyl. I do.

Phil. And have they not then the same appearance of being distant?

Hyl. They have.

Phil. But you do not thence conclude the apparitions in a dream to be without the mind?

Hyl. By no means.

Phil. You ought not therefore to conclude that sensible objects are without the mind, from their appearance, or manner wherein they are perceived.

Hyl. I acknowledge it. But doth not my sense deceive me in those cases?

Phil. By no means. The idea or thing which you immediately perceive, neither sense nor reason informs you that it actually exists without the mind. By sense you only know that you are affected with such certain sensations of light and colours, &c. And these you will not say are without the mind.

Hyl. True: but, beside all that, do you not think the sight suggests something of outness or distance ?

Phil. Upon approaching a distant object, do the visible size and figure change perpetually, or do they appear the same at all distances?

Hyl. They are in a continual change.

Phil.  Sight therefore doth not suggest, or any way inform you, that the visible object you immediately perceive  exists at a distance, or will be perceived when you advance farther onward; there being a continued series of visible objects succeeding each other during the whole time of your approach.

Hyl. It doth not; but still I know, upon seeing an object, what object I shall perceive after having passed over a certain distance: no matter whether it be exactly the same or no: there is still something of distance suggested in the case.

Phil. Good Hylas, do but reflect a little on the point, and then tell me whether there be any more in it than this: From the ideas you actually perceive by sight, you have by experience learned to collect what other ideas you will (according to the standing order of nature) be affected with, after such a certain succession of time and motion.

Hyl. Upon the whole, I take it to be nothing else.

Phil. Now, is it not plain that if we suppose a man born blind was on a sudden made to see, he could at first have no experience of what may be suggested by sight?

Hyl. It is.

Phil. He would not then, according to you, have any notion of distance annexed to the things he saw; but would take them for a new set of sensations, existing only in his mind?

Hyl. It is undeniable.

Phil. But, to make it still more plain: is not distance a line turned endwise to the eye?

Hyl. It is.

Phil. And can a line so situated be perceived by sight?

Hyl. It cannot.

Phil. Doth it not therefore follow that distance is not properly and immediately perceived by sight?

Hyl. It should seem so.

Phil. Again, is it your opinion that colours are at a distance?

Hyl. It must be acknowledged they are only in the mind.

Phil. But do not colours appear to the eye as coexisting in the same place with extension and figures?

Hyl. They do.

Phil. How can you then conclude from sight that figures exist without, when you acknowledge colours do not; the sensible appearance being the very same with regard to both?

Hyl. I know not what to answer.

Phil. But, allowing that distance was truly and immediately perceived by the mind, yet it would not thence follow it existed out of the mind. For, whatever is immediately perceived is an idea: and can any idea exist out of the mind?

Hyl. To suppose that were absurd: but, inform me, Philonous, can we perceive or know nothing beside our ideas?

Phil. As for the rational deducing of causes from effects, that is beside our inquiry. And, by the senses you can best tell whether you perceive anything which is not immediately perceived. And I ask you, whether the things immediately perceived are other than your own sensations or ideas? You have indeed more than once, in the course of this conversation, declared yourself on those points; but you seem, by this last question, to have departed from what you then thought.

Hyl. To speak the truth, Philonous, I think there are two kinds of objects: — the one perceived immediately, which are likewise called ideas ; the other are real things or external objects, perceived by the mediation of ideas, which are their images and representations. Now, I own ideas do not exist without the mind; but the latter sort of objects do. I am sorry I did not think of this distinction sooner; it would probably have cut short your discourse.

Phil. Are those external objects perceived by sense, or by some other faculty?

Hyl. They are perceived by sense.

Phil. How! Is there anything perceived by sense which is not immediately perceived?

Hyl.  Yes, Philonous, in some sort there is. For example, when I look on a picture or statue of Julius Cæsar, I may  be said after a manner to perceive him (though not immediately) by my senses.

Phil. It seems then you will have our ideas, which alone are immediately perceived, to be pictures of external things: and that these also are perceived by sense, inasmuch as they have a conformity or resemblance to our ideas?

Hyl. That is my meaning.

Phil. And, in the same way that Julius Cæsar, in himself invisible, is nevertheless perceived by sight; real things, in themselves imperceptible, are perceived by sense.

Hyl. In the very same.

Phil. Tell me, Hylas, when you behold the picture of Julius Cæsar, do you see with your eyes any more than some colours and figures, with a certain symmetry and composition of the whole?

Hyl. Nothing else.

Phil. And would not a man who had never known anything of Julius Cæsar see as much?

Hyl. He would.

Phil. Consequently he hath his sight, and the use of it, in as perfect a degree as you?

Hyl. I agree with you.

Phil. Whence comes it then that your thoughts are directed to the Roman emperor, and his are not? This cannot proceed from the sensations or ideas of sense by you then perceived; since you acknowledge you have no advantage over him in that respect. It should seem therefore to proceed from reason and memory: should it not?

Hyl. It should.

Phil. Consequently, it will not follow from that instance that anything is perceived by sense which is not immediately perceived. Though I grant we may, in one acceptation, be said to perceive sensible things mediately by sense: that is, when, from a frequently perceived connexion, the immediate perception of ideas by one sense suggests  to the mind others, perhaps belonging to another sense, which are wont to be connected with them. For instance, when I hear a coach drive along the streets, immediately I perceive only the sound; but, from the experience I have had  that such a sound is connected with a coach, I am said to hear the coach. It is nevertheless evident that, in truth and strictness, nothing can be heard but sound ; and the coach is not properly perceived by sense, but suggested from experience. So likewise when we are said to see a red-hot bar of iron; the solidity and heat of the iron are not the objects of sight, but suggested to the imagination by the colour and figure which are properly perceived by that sense. In short, those things alone are actually and strictly perceived by any sense, which would have been perceived in case that same sense had then been first conferred on us. As for other things, it is plain they are only suggested to the mind by experience, grounded on former perceptions. But, to return to your comparison of Cæsar’s picture, it is plain, if you keep to that, you must hold the real things, or archetypes of our ideas, are not perceived by sense, but by some internal faculty of the soul, as reason or memory. I would therefore fain know what arguments you can draw from reason for the existence of what you call real things or material objects . Or, whether you remember to have seen them formerly as they are in themselves; or, if you have heard or read of any one that did.

Hyl. I see, Philonous, you are disposed to raillery; but that will never convince me.

Phil. My aim is only to learn from you the way to come at the knowledge of material beings . Whatever we perceive is perceived immediately or mediately: by sense, or by reason and reflexion. But, as you have excluded sense, pray shew me what reason you have to believe their existence; or what medium you can possibly make use of to prove it, either to mine or your own understanding.

Hyl. To deal ingenuously, Philonous, now I consider the point, I do not find I can give you any good reason for it. But, thus much seem pretty plain, that it is at least possible such things may really exist. And, as long as there is no absurdity in supposing them, I am resolved to believe as I did, till you bring good reasons to the contrary.

Phil. What! Is it come to this, that you only believe  the existence of material objects, and that your belief is  founded barely on the possibility of its being true? Then you will have me bring reasons against it: though another would think it reasonable the proof should lie on him who holds the affirmative. And, after all, this very point which you are now resolved to maintain, without any reason, is in effect what you have more than once during this discourse seen good reason to give up. But, to pass over all this; if I understand you rightly, you say our ideas do not exist without the mind, but that they are copies, images, or representations, of certain originals that do?

Hyl. You take me right.

Phil. They are then like external things?

Hyl. They are.

Phil. Have those things a stable and permanent nature, independent of our senses; or are they in a perpetual change, upon our producing any motions in our bodies — suspending, exerting, or altering, our faculties or organs of sense?

Hyl. Real things, it is plain, have a fixed and real nature, which remains the same notwithstanding any change in our senses, or in the posture and motion of our bodies; which indeed may affect the ideas in our minds, but it were absurd to think they had the same effect on things existing without the mind.

Phil. How then is it possible that things perpetually fleeting and variable as our ideas should be copies or images of anything fixed and constant? Or, in other words, since all sensible qualities, as size, figure, colour, &c., that is, our ideas, are continually changing, upon every alteration in the distance, medium, or instruments of sensation; how can any determinate material objects be properly represented or painted forth by several distinct things, each of which is so different from and unlike the rest? Or, if you say it resembles some one only of our ideas, how shall we be able to distinguish the true copy from all the false ones?

Hyl. I profess, Philonous, I am at a loss. I know not what to say to this.

Phil. But neither is this all. Which are material objects in themselves — perceptible or imperceptible?

Hyl. Properly and immediately nothing can be perceived but ideas. All material things, therefore, are in themselves insensible, and to be perceived only by our ideas.

Phil. Ideas then are sensible, and their archetypes or originals insensible?

Hyl. Right.

Phil. But how can that which is sensible be like that which is insensible? Can a real thing, in itself invisible , be like a colour ; or a real thing, which is not audible , be like a sound ? In a word, can anything be like a sensation or idea, but another sensation or idea?

Hyl. I must own, I think not.

Phil. Is it possible there should be any doubt on the point? Do you not perfectly know your own ideas?

Hyl. I know them perfectly; since what I do not perceive or know can be no part of my idea.

Phil. Consider, therefore, and examine them, and then tell me if there be anything in them which can exist without the mind: or if you can conceive anything like them existing without the mind.

Hyl. Upon inquiry, I find it is impossible for me to conceive or understand how anything but an idea can be like an idea. And it is most evident that no idea can exist without the mind .

Phil. You are therefore, by your principles, forced to deny the reality of sensible things; since you made it to consist in an absolute existence exterior to the mind. That is to say, you are a downright sceptic. So I have gained my point, which was to shew your principles led to Scepticism.

Hyl. For the present I am, if not entirely convinced, at least silenced.

Phil.  I would fain know what more you would require in order to a perfect conviction. Have you not had the liberty of explaining yourself all manner of ways? Were any little slips in discourse laid hold and insisted on? Or were you not allowed to retract or reinforce anything you had offered, as best served your purpose? Hath not everything you could say been heard and examined with  all the fairness imaginable? In a word, have you not in every point been convinced out of your own mouth? And, if you can at present discover any flaw in any of your former concessions, or think of any remaining subterfuge, any new distinction, colour, or comment whatsoever, why do you not produce it?

Hyl. A little patience, Philonous. I am at present so amazed to see myself ensnared, and as it were imprisoned in the labyrinths you have drawn me into, that on the sudden it cannot be expected I should find my way out. You must give me time to look about me and recollect myself.

Phil. Hark; is not this the college bell?

Hyl. It rings for prayers.

Phil. We will go in then, if you please, and meet here again to-morrow morning. In the meantime, you may employ your thoughts on this morning’s discourse, and try if you can find any fallacy in it, or invent any new means to extricate yourself.

Hyl.   Agreed.

 The Second Dialogue [image "img71.jpg" file=Image00070.jpg] 

H YLAS . I BEG your pardon, Philonous, for not meeting you sooner. All this morning my head was so filled with our late conversation that I had not leisure to think of the time of the day, or indeed of anything else.

Philonous. I am glad you were so intent upon it, in hopes if there were any mistakes in your concessions, or fallacies in my reasonings from them, you will now discover them to me.

Hyl. I assure you I have done nothing ever since I saw you but search after mistakes and fallacies, and, with that view, have minutely examined the whole series of yesterday’s discourse: but all in vain, for the notions it led me into, upon review, appear still more clear and evident; and, the more I consider them, the more irresistibly do they force my assent.

Phil. And is not this, think you, a sign that they are genuine, that they proceed from nature, and are conformable to right reason? Truth and beauty are in this alike, that the strictest survey sets them both off to advantage; while the false lustre of error and disguise cannot endure being reviewed, or too nearly inspected.

Hyl. I own there is a great deal in what you say. Nor can any one be more entirely satisfied of the truth of those odd consequences, so long as I have in view the reasonings that lead to them. But, when these are out of my thoughts, there seems, on the other hand, something so satisfactory, so natural and intelligible, in the modern way of explaining things that, I profess, I know not how to reject it.

Phil. I know not what way you mean.

Hyl. I mean the way of accounting for our sensations or ideas.

Phil. How is that?

Hyl. It is supposed the soul makes her residence in some part of the brain, from which the nerves take their rise, and are thence extended to all parts of the body; and that outward objects, by the different impressions they make on the organs of sense, communicate certain vibrative motions to the nerves; and these being filled with spirits propagate them to the brain or seat of the soul, which, according to the various impressions or traces thereby made in the brain, is variously affected with ideas.

Phil. And call you this an explication of the manner whereby we are affected with ideas?

Hyl. Why not, Philonous? Have you anything to object against it?

Phil. I would first know whether I rightly understand your hypothesis. You make certain traces in the brain to be the causes or occasions of our ideas. Pray tell me whether by the brain you mean any sensible thing.

Hyl. What else think you I could mean?

Phil. Sensible things are all immediately perceivable; and those things which are immediately perceivable are ideas; and these exist only in the mind. Thus much you have, if I mistake not, long since agreed to.

Hyl. I do not deny it.

Phil. The brain therefore you speak of, being a sensible thing, exists only in the mind. Now, I would fain know whether you think it reasonable to suppose that one idea or thing existing in the mind occasions all other ideas. And, if you think so, pray how do you account for the origin of that primary idea or brain itself?

Hyl. I do not explain the origin of our ideas by that brain which is perceivable to sense — this being itself only a combination of sensible ideas — but by another which I imagine.

Phil. But are not things imagined as truly in the mind as things perceived?

Hyl. I must confess they are.

Phil. It comes, therefore, to the same thing; and you have been all this while accounting for ideas by certain motions or impressions of the brain; that is, by some alterations in an idea, whether sensible or imaginable it matters not.

Hyl. I begin to suspect my hypothesis.

Phil. Besides spirits, all that we know or conceive are our own ideas. When, therefore, you say all ideas are occasioned by impressions in the brain, do you conceive this brain or no? If you do, then you talk of ideas imprinted in an idea causing that same idea, which is absurd. If you do not conceive it, you talk unintelligibly, instead of forming a reasonable hypothesis.

Hyl. I now clearly see it was a mere dream. There is nothing in it.

Phil. You need not be much concerned at it; for after all, this way of explaining things, as you called it, could never have satisfied any reasonable man. What connexion is there between a motion in the nerves, and the sensations of sound or colour in the mind? Or how is it possible these should be the effect of that?

Hyl. But I could never think it had so little in it as now it seems to have.

Phil. Well then, are you at length satisfied that no sensible things have a real existence; and that you are in truth an arrant sceptic?

Hyl. It is too plain to be denied.

Phil.  Look! are not the fields covered with a delightful verdure? Is there not something in the woods and groves, in the rivers and clear springs, that soothes, that delights, that transports the soul? At the prospect of the wide and deep ocean, or some huge mountain whose top is lost in the clouds, or of an old gloomy forest, are not our minds filled with a pleasing horror? Even in rocks and deserts is there not an agreeable wildness? How sincere a pleasure is it to behold the natural beauties of the earth! To preserve and renew our relish for them, is not the veil of night  alternately drawn over her face, and doth she not change her dress with the seasons? How aptly are the elements disposed! What variety and use [in the meanest productions of nature!] What delicacy, what beauty, what contrivance, in animal and vegetable bodies! How exquisitely are all things suited, as well to their particular ends, as to constitute opposite parts of the whole! And, while they mutually aid and support, do they not also set off and illustrate each other? Raise now your thoughts from this ball of earth to all those glorious luminaries that adorn the high arch of heaven. The motion and situation of the planets, are they not admirable for use and order? Were those (miscalled erratic  ) globes once known to stray, in their repeated journeys through the pathless void? Do they not measure areas round the sun ever proportioned to the times? So fixed, so immutable are the laws by which the unseen Author of nature actuates the universe. How vivid and radiant is the lustre of the fixed stars! How magnificent and rich that negligent profusion with which they appear to be scattered throughout the whole azure vault! Yet, if you take the telescope, it brings into your sight a new host of stars that escape the naked eye. Here they seem contiguous and minute, but to a nearer view immense orbs of light at various distances, far sunk in the abyss of space. Now you must call imagination to your aid. The feeble narrow sense cannot descry innumerable worlds revolving round the central fires; and in those worlds the energy of an all-perfect Mind displayed in endless forms. But, neither sense nor imagination are big enough to comprehend the boundless extent, with all its glittering furniture. Though the labouring mind exert and strain each power to its utmost reach, there still stands out ungrasped a surplusage immeasurable. Yet all the vast bodies that compose this mighty frame, how distant and remote soever, are by some secret mechanism, some Divine art and force, linked in a mutual dependence and intercourse with each other; even with this earth, which was almost slipt from my thoughts and lost in the crowd of worlds. Is not the whole system immense, beautiful, glorious beyond expression and beyond thought! What treatment, then, do those philosophers deserve, who would,  deprive these noble and delightful scenes of all reality ? How should those Principles be entertained that lead us to think all the visible beauty of the creation a false imaginary glare? To be plain, can you expect this Scepticism of yours will not be thought extravagantly absurd by all men of sense?

Hyl. Other men may think as they please; but for your part you have nothing to reproach me with. My comfort is, you are as much a sceptic as I am.

Phil. There, Hylas, I must beg leave to differ from you.

Hyl. What! Have you all along agreed to the premises, and do you now deny the conclusion, and leave me to maintain those paradoxes by myself which you led me into? This surely is not fair.

Phil. I deny that I agreed with you in those notions that led to Scepticism. You indeed said the reality of sensible things consisted in an absolute existence out of the minds of spirits , or distinct from their being perceived. And pursuant to this notion of reality, you are obliged to deny sensible things any real existence: that is, according to your own definition, you profess yourself a sceptic. But I neither said nor thought the reality of sensible things was to be defined after that manner. To me it is evident, for the reasons you allow of, that sensible things cannot exist otherwise than in a mind or spirit. Whence I conclude, not that they have no real existence, but that, seeing they depend not on my thought, and have an existence distinct from being perceived by me, there must be some other Mind wherein they exist . As sure, therefore, as the sensible world really exists, so sure is there an infinite omnipresent Spirit who contains and supports it.

Hyl. What! This is no more than I and all Christians hold; nay, and all others too who believe there is a God, and that He knows and comprehends all things.

Phil.  Aye, but here lies the difference. Men commonly believe that all things are known or perceived by God, because they believe the being of a God; whereas I, on the other side, immediately and necessarily conclude the  being of a God, because all sensible things must be perceived by Him.

Hyl. But, so long as we all believe the same thing, what matter is it how we come by that belief?

Phil. But neither do we agree in the same opinion. For philosophers, though they acknowledge all corporeal beings to be perceived by God, yet they attribute to them an absolute subsistence distinct from their being perceived by any mind whatever; which I do not. Besides, is there no difference between saying, There is a God, therefore He perceives all things ; and saying, Sensible things do really exist; and, if they really exist, they are necessarily perceived by an infinite Mind: therefore there is an infinite Mind, or God? This furnishes you with a direct and immediate demonstration, from a most evident principle, of the being of a God . Divines and philosophers had proved beyond all controversy, from the beauty and usefulness of the several parts of the creation, that it was the workmanship of God. But that — setting aside all help of astronomy and natural philosophy, all contemplation of the contrivance, order, and adjustment of things — an infinite Mind should be necessarily inferred from the bare existence of the sensible world  , is an advantage to them only who have made this easy reflexion: That the sensible world is that which we perceive by our several senses; and that nothing is perceived by the senses beside ideas; and that no idea or archetype of an idea can exist otherwise than in a mind. You may now, without any laborious search into the sciences, without any subtlety of reason, or tedious length of discourse, oppose and baffle the most strenuous advocate for Atheism. Those miserable refuges, whether in an eternal succession of unthinking causes and effects, or in a fortuitous concourse of atoms; those wild imaginations of Vanini, Hobbes, and Spinoza: in a word, the whole system of Atheism, is it not entirely overthrown, by this  single reflexion on the repugnancy included in supposing the whole, or any part, even the most rude and shapeless, of the visible world, to exist without a Mind? Let any one of those abettors of impiety but look into his own thoughts, and there try if he can conceive how so much as a rock, a desert, a chaos, or confused jumble of atoms; how anything at all, either sensible or imaginable, can exist independent of a Mind, and he need go no farther to be convinced of his folly. Can anything be fairer than to put a dispute on such an issue, and leave it to a man himself to see if he can conceive, even in thought, what he holds to be true in fact, and from a notional to allow it a real existence?

Hyl. It cannot be denied there is something highly serviceable to religion in what you advance. But do you not think it looks very like a notion entertained by some eminent moderns, of seeing all things in God ?

Phil. I would gladly know that opinion: pray explain it to me.

Hyl. They conceive that the soul, being immaterial, is incapable of being united with material things, so as to perceive them in themselves; but that she perceives them by her union with the substance of God, which, being spiritual, is therefore purely intelligible, or capable of being the immediate object of a spirit’s thought. Besides, the Divine essence contains in it perfections correspondent to each created being; and which are, for that reason, proper to exhibit or represent them to the mind.

Phil.  I do not understand how our ideas, which are things altogether passive and inert, can be the essence, or any part (or like any part) of the essence or substance of God, who is an impassive, indivisible, pure, active being. Many more difficulties and objections there are which occur at first view against this hypothesis; but I shall only  add, that it is liable to all the absurdities of the common hypothesis, in making a created world exist otherwise than in the mind of a Spirit. Beside all which it hath this peculiar to itself; that it makes that material world serve to no purpose. And, if it pass for a good argument against other hypotheses in the sciences, that they suppose Nature, or the Divine wisdom, to make something in vain, or do that by tedious roundabout methods which might have been performed in a much more easy and compendious way, what shall we think of that hypothesis which supposes the whole world made in vain?

Hyl. But what say you? Are not you too of opinion that we see all things in God? If I mistake not, what you advance comes near it.

Phil. [Few men think; yet all have opinions. Hence men’s opinions are superficial and confused. It is nothing strange that tenets which in themselves are ever so different, should nevertheless be confounded with each other, by those who do not consider them attentively. I shall not therefore be surprised if some men imagine that I run into the enthusiasm of Malebranche; though in truth I am very remote from it. He builds on the most abstract general ideas, which I entirely disclaim. He asserts an absolute external world, which I deny. He maintains that we are deceived by our senses, and know not the real natures or the true forms and figures of extended beings; of all which I hold the direct contrary. So that upon the whole there are no Principles more fundamentally opposite than his and mine. It must be owned that] I entirely agree with what the holy Scripture saith, ‘That in God we live and move and have our being.’ But that we see things in His essence, after the manner above set forth, I am far from believing. Take here in brief my meaning: — It is evident that the things I perceive are my own ideas, and that no idea can exist unless it be in a mind: nor is it less plain that these ideas or things by me perceived, either themselves or their archetypes, exist independently of my  mind, since I know myself not to be their author, it being out of my power to determine at pleasure what particular ideas I shall be affected with  upon opening my eyes or ears: they must therefore exist in some other Mind, whose Will it is they should be exhibited to me. The things, I say, immediately perceived are ideas or sensations, call them which you will. But how can any idea or sensation exist in, or be produced by, anything but a mind or spirit? This indeed is inconceivable. And to assert that which is inconceivable is to talk nonsense: is it not?

Hyl. Without doubt.

Phil. But, on the other hand, it is very conceivable that they should exist in and be produced by a Spirit; since this is no more than I daily experience in myself, inasmuch as I perceive numberless ideas; and, by an act of my will, can form a great variety of them, and raise them up in my imagination: though, it must be confessed, these creatures of the fancy are not altogether so distinct, so strong, vivid, and permanent, as those perceived by my senses — which latter are called real things . From all which I conclude, there is a Mind which affects me every moment with all the sensible impressions I perceive . And, from the variety, order, and manner of these, I conclude the Author of them to be wise, powerful, and good, beyond comprehension . Mark it well; I do not say I see things by perceiving that which represents them in the intelligible Substance of God. This I do not understand; but I say, the things by me perceived are known by the understanding, and produced by the will of an infinite Spirit. And is not all this most plain and evident? Is there any more in it than what a little observation in our own minds, and that which passeth in them, not only enables us to conceive, but also obliges us to acknowledge?

Hyl.  I think I understand you very clearly; and own proof you give of a Deity seems no less evident than it is surprising. But, allowing that God is the supreme and universal Cause of all things, yet, may there not be still a Third Nature besides Spirits and Ideas? May we  not admit a subordinate and limited cause of our ideas? In a word, may there not for all that be Matter ?

Phil. How often must I inculcate the same thing? You allow the things immediately perceived by sense to exist nowhere without the mind; but there is nothing perceived by sense which is not perceived immediately; therefore there is nothing sensible that exists without the mind. The Matter, therefore, which you still insist on is something intelligible, I suppose; something that may be discovered by reason, and not by sense.

Hyl. You are in the right.

Phil. Pray let me know what reasoning your belief of Matter is grounded on; and what this Matter is, in your present sense of it.

Hyl. I find myself affected with various ideas whereof I know I am not the cause; neither are they the cause of themselves, or of one another, or capable of subsisting by themselves, as being altogether inactive, fleeting, dependent beings. They have therefore some cause distinct from me and them: of which I pretend to know no more than that it is the cause of my ideas . And this thing whatever it be, I call Matter.

Phil. Tell me, Hylas, hath every one a liberty to change the current proper signification attached to a common name in any language? For example, suppose a traveller should tell you that in a certain country men pass unhurt through the fire; and, upon explaining himself, you found he meant by the word fire that which others call water . Or, if he should assert that there are trees that walk upon two legs, meaning men by the term trees . Would you think this reasonable?

Hyl. No; I should think it very absurd. Common custom is the standard of propriety in language. And for any man to affect speaking improperly is to pervert the use of speech, and can never serve to a better purpose than to protract and multiply disputes where there is no difference in opinion.

Phil. And doth not Matter , in the common current acceptation of the word, signify an extended solid moveable, unthinking, inactive Substance?

Hyl. It doth.

Phil. And, hath it not been made evident that no such substance can possibly exist? And, though it should be allowed to exist, yet how can that which is inactive be a cause ; or that which is unthinking be a cause of thought ? You may, indeed, if you please, annex to the word Matter a contrary meaning to what is vulgarly received; and tell me you understand by it, an unextended, thinking, active being, which is the cause of our ideas. But what else is this than to play with words, and run into that very fault you just now condemned with so much reason? I do by no means find fault with your reasoning, in that you collect a cause from the phenomena : but I deny that the cause deducible by reason can properly be termed Matter.

Hyl. There is indeed something in what you say. But I am afraid you do not thoroughly comprehend my meaning. I would by no means be thought to deny that God, or an infinite Spirit, is the Supreme Cause of all things. All I contend for is, that, subordinate to the Supreme Agent, there is a cause of a limited and inferior nature, which concurs in the production of our ideas, not by any act of will, or spiritual efficiency, but by that kind of action which belongs to Matter, viz. motion .

Phil. I find you are at every turn relapsing into your old exploded conceit, of a moveable, and consequently an extended, substance, existing without the mind. What! Have you already forgotten you were convinced; or are you willing I should repeat what has been said on that head? In truth this is not fair dealing in you, still to suppose the being of that which you have so often acknowledged to have no being. But, not to insist farther on what has been so largely handled, I ask whether all your ideas are not perfectly passive and inert, including nothing of action in them.

Hyl. They are.

Phil. And are sensible qualities anything else but ideas?

Hyl. How often have I acknowledged that they are not.

Phil. But is not motion a sensible quality?

Hyl. It is.

Phil. Consequently it is no action?

Hyl. I agree with you. And indeed it is very plain that when I stir my finger, it remains passive; but my will which produced the motion is active.

Phil. Now, I desire to know, in the first place, whether, motion being allowed to be no action, you can conceive any action besides volition: and, in the second place, whether to say something and conceive nothing be not to talk nonsense: and, lastly, whether, having considered the premises, you do not perceive that to suppose any efficient or active Cause of our ideas, other than Spirit , is highly absurd and unreasonable?

Hyl. I give up the point entirely. But, though Matter may not be a cause, yet what hinders its being an instrument , subservient to the supreme Agent in the production of our ideas?

Phil. An instrument say you; pray what may be the figure, springs, wheels, and motions, of that instrument?

Hyl. Those I pretend to determine nothing of, both the substance and its qualities being entirely unknown to me.

Phil. What? You are then of opinion it is made up of unknown parts, that it hath unknown motions, and an unknown shape?

Hyl. I do not believe that it hath any figure or motion at all, being already convinced, that no sensible qualities can exist in an unperceiving substance.

Phil. But what notion is it possible to frame of an instrument void of all sensible qualities, even extension itself?

Hyl. I do not pretend to have any notion of it.

Phil. And what reason have you to think this unknown, this inconceivable Somewhat doth exist? Is it that you imagine God cannot act as well without it; or that you find by experience the use of some such thing, when you form ideas in your own mind?

Hyl. You are always teasing me for reasons of my belief. Pray what reasons have you not to believe it?

Phil. It is to me a sufficient reason not to believe the existence of anything, if I see no reason for believing it. But, not to insist on reasons for believing, you will not so much as let me know what it is you would have me believe; since you say you have no manner of notion of it. After all, let me entreat you to consider whether it be like a philosopher, or even like a man of common sense, to pretend to believe you know not what, and you know not why.

Hyl. Hold, Philonous. When I tell you Matter is an instrument , I do not mean altogether nothing. It is true I know not the particular kind of instrument; but, however, I have some notion of instrument in general , which I apply to it.

Phil. But what if it should prove that there is something, even in the most general notion of instrument , as taken in a distinct sense from cause , which makes the use of it inconsistent with the Divine attributes?

Hyl. Make that appear and I shall give up the point.

Phil. What mean you by the general nature or notion of instrument ?

Hyl. That which is common to all particular instruments composeth the general notion.

Phil. Is it not common to all instruments, that they are applied to the doing those things only which cannot be performed by the mere act of our wills? Thus, for instance, I never use an instrument to move my finger, because it is done by a volition. But I should use one if I were to remove part of a rock, or tear up a tree by the roots. Are you of the same mind? Or, can you shew any example where an instrument is made use of in producing an effect immediately depending on the will of the agent?

Hyl. I own I cannot.

Phil.  How therefore can you suppose that an All-perfect Spirit, on whose Will all things have an absolute and immediate dependence, should need an instrument in his operations, or, not needing it, make use of it? Thus it seems to me that you are obliged to own the use of a lifeless inactive instrument to be incompatible with the infinite  perfection of God; that is, by your own confession, to give up the point.

Hyl. It doth not readily occur what I can answer you.

Phil. But, methinks you should be ready to own the truth, when it has been fairly proved to you. We indeed, who are beings of finite powers, are forced to make use of instruments. And the use of an instrument sheweth the agent to be limited by rules of another’s prescription, and that he cannot obtain his end but in such a way, and by such conditions. Whence it seems a clear consequence, that the supreme unlimited Agent useth no tool or instrument at all. The will of an Omnipotent Spirit is no sooner exerted than executed, without the application of means; which, if they are employed by inferior agents, it is not upon account of any real efficacy that is in them, or necessary aptitude to produce any effect, but merely in compliance with the laws of nature, or those conditions prescribed to them by the First Cause, who is Himself above all limitation or prescription whatsoever.

Hyl. I will no longer maintain that Matter is an instrument. However, I would not be understood to give up its existence neither; since, notwithstanding what hath been said, it may still be an occasion .

Phil. How many shapes is your Matter to take? Or, how often must it be proved not to exist, before you are content to part with it? But, to say no more of this (though by all the laws of disputation I may justly blame you for so frequently changing the signification of the principal term) — I would fain know what you mean by affirming that matter is an occasion, having already denied it to be a cause. And, when you have shewn in what sense you understand occasion , pray, in the next place, be pleased to shew me what reason induceth you to believe there is such an occasion of our ideas?

Hyl. As to the first point: by occasion  I mean an inactive  unthinking being, at the presence whereof God excites ideas in our minds.

Phil. And what may be the nature of that inactive unthinking being?

Hyl. I know nothing of its nature.

Phil. Proceed then to the second point, and assign some reason why we should allow an existence to this inactive, unthinking, unknown thing.

Hyl. When we see ideas produced in our minds, after an orderly and constant manner, it is natural to think they have some fixed and regular occasions, at the presence of which they are excited.

Phil. You acknowledge then God alone to be the cause of our ideas, and that He causes them at the presence of those occasions.

Hyl. That is my opinion.

Phil. Those things which you say are present to God, without doubt He perceives.

Hyl. Certainly; otherwise they could not be to Him an occasion of acting.

Phil. Not to insist now on your making sense of this hypothesis, or answering all the puzzling questions and difficulties it is liable to: I only ask whether the order and regularity observable in the series of our ideas, or the course of nature, be not sufficiently accounted for by the wisdom and power of God; and whether it doth not derogate from those attributes, to suppose He is influenced, directed, or put in mind, when and what He is to act, by an unthinking substance? And, lastly, whether, in case I granted all you contend for, it would make anything to your purpose; it not being easy to conceive how the external or absolute existence of an unthinking substance, distinct from its being perceived, can be inferred from my allowing that there are certain things perceived by the mind of God, which are to Him the occasion of producing ideas in us?

Hyl. I am perfectly at a loss what to think, this notion of occasion seeming now altogether as groundless as the rest.

Phil. Do you not at length perceive that in all these different acceptations of Matter , you have been only supposing you know not what, for no manner of reason, and to no kind of use?

Hyl. I freely own myself less fond of my notions since they have been so accurately examined. But still, methinks, I have some confused perception that there is such a thing as Matter .

Phil. Either you perceive the being of Matter immediately or mediately. If immediately, pray inform me by which of the senses you perceive it. If mediately, let me know by what reasoning it is inferred from those things which you perceive immediately. So much for the perception. Then for the Matter itself, I ask whether it is object, substratum , cause, instrument, or occasion? You have already pleaded for each of these, shifting your notions, and making Matter to appear sometimes in one shape, then in another. And what you have offered hath been disapproved and rejected by yourself. If you have anything new to advance I would gladly hear it.

Hyl. I think I have already offered all I had to say on those heads. I am at a loss what more to urge.

Phil. And yet you are loath to part with your old prejudice. But, to make you quit it more easily, I desire that, beside what has been hitherto suggested, you will farther consider whether, upon supposition that Matter exists, you can possibly conceive how you should be affected by it. Or, supposing it did not exist, whether it be not evident you might for all that be affected with the same ideas you now are, and consequently have the very same reasons to believe its existence that you now can have.

Hyl. I acknowledge it is possible we might perceive all things just as we do now, though there was no Matter in the world; neither can I conceive, if there be Matter, how it should produce any idea in our minds. And, I do farther grant you have entirely satisfied me that it is impossible there should be such a thing as Matter in any of the foregoing acceptations. But still I cannot help supposing that there is Matter in some sense or other. What that is I do not indeed pretend to determine.

Phil.  I do not expect you should define exactly the nature of that unknown being. Only be pleased to tell me whether it is a Substance; and if so, whether you can  suppose a Substance without accidents; or, in case you suppose it to have accidents or qualities, I desire you will let me know what those qualities are, at least what is meant by Matter’s supporting them?

Hyl. We have already argued on those points. I have no more to say to them. But, to prevent any farther questions, let me tell you I at present understand by Matter neither substance nor accident, thinking nor extended being, neither cause, instrument, nor occasion, but Something entirely unknown, distinct from all these.

Phil. It seems then you include in your present notion of Matter nothing but the general abstract idea of entity .

Hyl. Nothing else; save only that I superadd to this general idea the negation of all those particular things, qualities, or ideas, that I perceive, imagine, or in anywise apprehend.

Phil. Pray where do you suppose this unknown Matter to exist?

Hyl. Oh Philonous! now you think you have entangled me; for, if I say it exists in place, then you will infer that it exists in the mind, since it is agreed that place or extension exists only in the mind. But I am not ashamed to own my ignorance. I know not where it exists; only I am sure it exists not in place. There is a negative answer for you. And you must expect no other to all the questions you put for the future about Matter.

Phil. Since you will not tell me where it exists, be pleased to inform me after what manner you suppose it to exist, or what you mean by its existence ?

Hyl. It neither thinks nor acts, neither perceives nor is perceived.

Phil. But what is there positive in your abstracted notion of its existence?

Hyl. Upon a nice observation, I do not find I have any positive notion or meaning at all. I tell you again, I am not ashamed to own my ignorance. I know not what is meant by its existence , or how it exists.

Phil.  Continue, good Hylas, to act the same ingenuous part, and tell me sincerely whether you can frame a distinct idea of Entity in general, prescinded from and exclusive of  all thinking and corporeal beings, all particular things whatsoever.

Hyl. Hold, let me think a little —— I profess, Philonous, I do not find that I can. At first glance, methought I had some dilute and airy notion of Pure Entity in abstract; but, upon closer attention, it hath quite vanished out of sight. The more I think on it, the more am I confirmed in my prudent resolution of giving none but negative answers, and not pretending to the least degree of any positive knowledge or conception of Matter, its where , its how , its entity , or anything belonging to it.

Phil. When, therefore, you speak of the existence of Matter, you have not any notion in your mind?

Hyl. None at all.

Phil. Pray tell me if the case stands not thus: — At first, from a belief of material substance, you would have it that the immediate objects existed without the mind; then that they are archetypes; then causes; next instruments; then occasions: lastly, something in general , which being interpreted proves nothing . So Matter comes to nothing. What think you, Hylas, is not this a fair summary of your whole proceeding?

Hyl. Be that as it will, yet I still insist upon it, that our not being able to conceive a thing is no argument against its existence.

Phil.  That from a cause, effect, operation, sign, or other circumstance, there may reasonably be inferred the existence of a thing not immediately perceived; and that it were absurd for any man to argue against the existence of that thing, from his having no direct and positive notion of it, I freely own. But, where there is nothing of all this; where neither reason nor revelation induces us to believe the existence of a thing; where we have not even a relative notion of it; where an abstraction is made from perceiving and being perceived, from Spirit and idea: lastly, where there is not so much as the most inadequate or faint idea pretended to — I will not indeed thence conclude against the reality of any notion, or existence of anything; but my inference shall be, that you mean nothing at all; that you employ words to no manner of purpose, without  any design or signification whatsoever. And I leave it to you to consider how mere jargon should be treated.

Hyl. To deal frankly with you, Philonous, your arguments seem in themselves unanswerable; but they have not so great an effect on me as to produce that entire conviction, that hearty acquiescence, which attends demonstration. I find myself still relapsing into an obscure surmise of I know not what, matter .

Phil. But, are you not sensible, Hylas, that two things must concur to take away all scruple, and work a plenary assent in the mind? Let a visible object be set in never so clear a light, yet, if there is any imperfection in the sight, or if the eye is not directed towards it, it will not be distinctly seen. And though a demonstration be never so well grounded and fairly proposed, yet, if there is withal a stain of prejudice, or a wrong bias on the understanding, can it be expected on a sudden to perceive clearly, and adhere firmly to the truth? No; there is need of time and pains: the attention must be awakened and detained by a frequent repetition of the same thing placed oft in the same, oft in different lights. I have said it already, and find I must still repeat and inculcate, that it is an unaccountable licence you take, in pretending to maintain you know not what, for you know not what reason, to you know not what purpose. Can this be paralleled in any art or science, any sect or profession of men? Or is there anything so barefacedly groundless and unreasonable to be met with even in the lowest of common conversation? But, perhaps you will still say, Matter may exist; though at the same time you neither know what is meant by Matter , or by its existence  . This indeed is surprising, and the more so because it is altogether voluntary [ and of your own  head], you not being led to it by any one reason; for I challenge you to shew me that thing in nature which needs Matter to explain or account for it.

Hyl. The reality of things cannot be maintained without supposing the existence of Matter. And is not this, think you, a good reason why I should be earnest in its defence?

Phil. The reality of things! What things? sensible or intelligible?

Hyl. Sensible things.

Phil. My glove for example?

Hyl. That, or any other thing perceived by the senses.

Phil. But to fix on some particular thing. Is it not a sufficient evidence to me of the existence of this glove , that I see it, and feel it, and wear it? Or, if this will not do, how is it possible I should be assured of the reality of this thing, which I actually see in this place, by supposing that some unknown thing, which I never did or can see, exists after an unknown manner, in an unknown place, or in no place at all? How can the supposed reality of that which is intangible be a proof that anything tangible really exists? Or, of that which is invisible, that any visible thing, or, in general of anything which is imperceptible, that a perceptible exists? Do but explain this and I shall think nothing too hard for you.

Hyl. Upon the whole, I am content to own the existence of Matter is highly improbable; but the direct and absolute impossibility of it does not appear to me.

Phil. But granting Matter to be possible, yet, upon that account merely, it can have no more claim to existence than a golden mountain, or a centaur.

Hyl. I acknowledge it; but still you do not deny it is possible; and that which is possible, for aught you know, may actually exist.

Phil. I deny it to be possible; and have, if I mistake not, evidently proved, from your own concessions, that it is not. In the common sense of the word Matter , is there any more implied than an extended, solid, figured, moveable substance, existing without the mind? And have not you acknowledged, over and over, that you have seen evident reason for denying the possibility of such a substance?

Hyl. True, but that is only one sense of the term Matter .

Phil. But is it not the only proper genuine received sense? And, if Matter, in such a sense, be proved impossible, may it not be thought with good grounds absolutely impossible? Else how could anything be proved impossible? Or, indeed, how could there be any proof at all one way or other, to a man who takes the liberty to unsettle and change the common signification of words?

Hyl. I thought philosophers might be allowed to speak more accurately than the vulgar, and were not always confined to the common acceptation of a term.

Phil. But this now mentioned is the common received sense among philosophers themselves. But, not to insist on that, have you not been allowed to take Matter in what sense you pleased? And have you not used this privilege in the utmost extent; sometimes entirely changing, at others leaving out, or putting into the definition of it whatever, for the present, best served your design, contrary to all the known rules of reason and logic? And hath not this shifting, unfair method of yours spun out our dispute to an unnecessary length; Matter having been particularly examined, and by your own confession refuted in each of those senses? And can any more be required to prove the absolute impossibility of a thing, than the proving it impossible in every particular sense that either you or any one else understands it in?

Hyl. But I am not so thoroughly satisfied that you have proved the impossibility of Matter, in the last most obscure abstracted and indefinite sense.

Phil. When is a thing shewn to be impossible?

Hyl. When a repugnancy is demonstrated between the ideas comprehended in its definition.

Phil. But where there are no ideas, there no repugnancy can be demonstrated between ideas?

Hyl. I agree with you.

Phil. Now, in that which you call the obscure indefinite sense of the word Matter , it is plain, by your own confession, there was included no idea at all, no sense except an unknown sense; which is the same thing as none. You are not, therefore, to expect I should prove a repugnancy between ideas, where there are no ideas; or the impossibility of Matter taken in an unknown  sense, that is, no sense at all. My business was only to shew you meant  nothing ; and this you were brought to own. So that, in all your various senses, you have been shewed either to mean nothing at all, or, if anything, an absurdity. And if this be not sufficient to prove the impossibility of a thing, I desire you will let me know what is.

Hyl. I acknowledge you have proved that Matter is impossible; nor do I see what more can be said in defence of it. But, at the same time that I give up this, I suspect all my other notions. For surely none could be more seemingly evident than this once was: and yet it now seems as false and absurd as ever it did true before. But I think we have discussed the point sufficiently for the present. The remaining part of the day I would willingly spend in running over in my thoughts the several heads of this morning’s conversation, and to-morrow shall be glad to meet you here again about the same time.

Phil.   I will not fail to attend you.

  The Third Dialogue [image "img71.jpg" file=Image00070.jpg] 

P HILONOUS . T ELL ME , Hylas, what are the fruits of yesterday’s meditation? Has it confirmed you in the same mind you were in at parting? or have you since seen cause to change your opinion?

Hylas. Truly my opinion is that all our opinions are alike vain and uncertain. What we approve to-day, we condemn to-morrow. We keep a stir about knowledge, and spend our lives in the pursuit of it, when, alas! we know nothing all the while: nor do I think it possible for us ever to know anything in this life. Our faculties are too narrow and too few. Nature certainly never intended us for speculation.

Phil. What! Say you we can know nothing, Hylas?

Hyl. There is not that single thing in the world whereof we can know the real nature, or what it is in itself.

Phil. Will you tell me I do not really know what fire or water is?

Hyl. You may indeed know that fire appears hot, and water fluid; but this is no more than knowing what sensations are produced in your own mind, upon the application of fire and water to your organs of sense. Their internal constitution, their true and real nature, you are utterly in the dark as to that .

Phil. Do I not know this to be a real stone that I stand on, and that which I see before my eyes to be a real tree?

Hyl. Know?  No, it is impossible you or any man alive should know it. All you know is, that you have such a certain idea or appearance in your own mind. But what is this to the real tree or stone? I tell you that colour,  figure, and hardness, which you perceive, are not the real natures of those things, or in the least like them. The same may be said of all other real things, or corporeal substances, which compose the world. They have none of them anything of themselves, like those sensible qualities by us perceived. We should not therefore pretend to affirm or know anything of them, as they are in their own nature.

Phil. But surely, Hylas, I can distinguish gold, for example, from iron: and how could this be, if I knew not what either truly was?

Hyl. Believe me, Philonous, you can only distinguish between your own ideas. That yellowness, that weight, and other sensible qualities, think you they are really in the gold? They are only relative to the senses, and have no absolute existence in nature. And in pretending to distinguish the species of real things, by the appearances in your mind, you may perhaps act as wisely as he that should conclude two men were of a different species, because their clothes were not of the same colour.

Phil. It seems, then, we are altogether put off with the appearances of things, and those false ones too. The very meat I eat, and the cloth I wear, have nothing in them like what I see and feel.

Hyl. Even so.

Phil. But is it not strange the whole world should be thus imposed on, and so foolish as to believe their senses? And yet I know not how it is, but men eat, and drink, and sleep, and perform all the offices of life, as comfortably and conveniently as if they really knew the things they are conversant about.

Hyl. They do so: but you know ordinary practice does not require a nicety of speculative knowledge. Hence the vulgar retain their mistakes, and for all that make a shift to bustle through the affairs of life. But philosophers know better things.

Phil. You mean, they know that they know nothing .

Hyl. That is the very top and perfection of human knowledge.

Phil.  But are you all this while in earnest, Hylas; and are you seriously persuaded that you know nothing real in the world? Suppose you are going to write, would you  not call for pen, ink, and paper, like another man; and do you not know what it is you call for?

Hyl. How often must I tell you, that I know not the real nature of any one thing in the universe? I may indeed upon occasion make use of pen, ink, and paper. But what any one of them is in its own true nature, I declare positively I know not. And the same is true with regard to every other corporeal thing. And, what is more, we are not only ignorant of the true and real nature of things, but even of their existence. It cannot be denied that we perceive such certain appearances or ideas; but it cannot be concluded from thence that bodies really exist. Nay, now I think on it, I must, agreeably to my former concessions, farther declare that it is impossible any real corporeal thing should exist in nature.

Phil. You amaze me. Was ever anything more wild and extravagant than the notions you now maintain: and is it not evident you are led into all these extravagances by the belief of material substance ? This makes you dream of those unknown natures in everything. It is this occasions your distinguishing between the reality and sensible appearances of things. It is to this you are indebted for being ignorant of what everybody else knows perfectly well. Nor is this all: you are not only ignorant of the true nature of everything, but you know not whether anything really exists, or whether there are any true natures at all; forasmuch as you attribute to your material beings an absolute or external existence, wherein you suppose their reality consists. And, as you are forced in the end to acknowledge such an existence means either a direct repugnancy, or nothing at all, it follows that you are obliged to pull down your own hypothesis of material Substance, and positively to deny the real existence of any part of the universe. And so you are plunged into the deepest and most deplorable scepticism that ever man was. Tell me, Hylas, is it not as I say?

Hyl. I agree with you. Material substance was no more than an hypothesis; and a false and groundless one too. I will no longer spend my breath in defence of it. But whatever hypothesis you advance, or whatsoever scheme of things you introduce in its stead, I doubt not it will appear every whit as false: let me but be allowed to question you upon it. That is, suffer me to serve you in your own kind, and I warrant it shall conduct you through as many perplexities and contradictions, to the very same state of scepticism that I myself am in at present.

Phil. I assure you, Hylas, I do not pretend to frame any hypothesis at all. I am of a vulgar cast, simple enough to believe my senses, and leave things as I find them. To be plain, it is my opinion that the real things are those very things I see, and feel, and perceive by my senses. These I know; and, finding they answer all the necessities and purposes of life, have no reason to be solicitous about any other unknown beings. A piece of sensible bread, for instance, would stay my stomach better than ten thousand times as much of that insensible, unintelligible, real bread you speak of. It is likewise my opinion that colours and other sensible qualities are on the objects. I cannot for my life help thinking that snow is white, and fire hot. You indeed, who by snow and fire mean certain external, unperceived, unperceiving substances, are in the right to deny whiteness or heat to be affections inherent in them  . But I, who understand by those words the things I see and feel, am obliged to think like other folks. And, as I am no sceptic with regard to the nature of things, so neither am I as to their existence. That a thing should be really perceived by my senses, and at  the same time not really exist, is to me a plain contradiction; since I cannot prescind or abstract, even in thought, the existence of a sensible thing from its being perceived. Wood, stones, fire, water, flesh, iron, and the like things, which I name and discourse of, are things that I know. And I should not have known them but that I perceived them by my senses; and things perceived by the senses are immediately perceived; and things immediately perceived are ideas; and ideas cannot exist without the mind; their existence therefore consists in being perceived; when, therefore, they are actually perceived there can be no doubt of their existence. Away then with all that scepticism, all those ridiculous philosophical doubts. What a jest is it for a philosopher to question the existence of sensible things, till he hath it proved to him from the veracity of God; or to pretend our knowledge in this point falls short of intuition or demonstration! I might as well doubt of my own being, as of the being of those things I actually see and feel.

Hyl. Not so fast, Philonous: you say you cannot conceive how sensible things should exist without the mind. Do you not?

Phil. I do.

Hyl. Supposing you were annihilated, cannot you conceive it possible that things perceivable by sense may still exist?

Phil.  I can; but then it must be in another mind. When I deny sensible things an existence out of the mind, I do not mean my mind in particular, but all minds. Now, it is plain they have an existence exterior to my mind; since I find them by experience to be independent of it. There  is therefore some other Mind wherein they exist, during the intervals between the times of my perceiving them: as likewise they did before my birth, and would do after my supposed annihilation. And, as the same is true with regard to all other finite created spirits, it necessarily follows there is an omnipresent eternal Mind , which knows and comprehends all things, and exhibits them to our view in such a manner, and according to such rules, as He Himself hath ordained, and are by us termed the laws of nature .

Hyl. Answer me, Philonous. Are all our ideas perfectly inert beings? Or have they any agency included in them?

Phil. They are altogether passive and inert.

Hyl. And is not God an agent, a being purely active?

Phil. I acknowledge it.

Hyl. No idea therefore can be like unto, or represent the nature of God?

Phil. It cannot.

Hyl. Since therefore you have no idea of the mind of God, how can you conceive it possible that things should exist in His mind? Or, if you can conceive the mind of God, without having an idea of it, why may not I be allowed to conceive the existence of Matter, notwithstanding I have no idea of it?

Phil. As to your first question: I own I have properly no idea , either of God or any other spirit; for these being active, cannot be represented by things perfectly inert, as our ideas are. I do nevertheless know that I, who am a spirit or thinking substance, exist as certainly as I know my ideas exist. Farther, I know what I mean by the terms I and myself  ; and I know this immediately or intuitively,  though I do not perceive it as I perceive a triangle, a colour, or a sound. The Mind, Spirit, or Soul is that indivisible unextended thing which thinks, acts, and perceives. I say indivisible , because unextended; and unextended , because extended, figured, moveable things are ideas; and that which perceives ideas, which thinks and wills, is plainly itself no idea, nor like an idea. Ideas are things inactive, and perceived. And Spirits a sort of beings altogether different from them. I do not therefore say my soul is an idea, or like an idea. However, taking the word idea in a large sense, my soul may be said to furnish me with an idea, that is, an image or likeness of God — though indeed extremely inadequate. For, all the notion I have of God is obtained by reflecting on my own soul, heightening its powers, and removing its imperfections. I have, therefore, though not an inactive idea, yet in myself  some sort of an active thinking image of the Deity. And, though I perceive Him not by sense, yet I have a notion of Him, or know Him by reflexion and reasoning. My own mind and my own ideas I have an immediate knowledge of; and, by the help of these, do mediately apprehend the possibility of the existence of other spirits and ideas. Farther, from my own being, and from the dependency I find in myself and my ideas, I do, by an act of reason, necessarily infer the existence of a God, and of all created things in the mind of God. So much for your first question. For the second: I suppose by this time you can answer it yourself. For you neither perceive Matter objectively, as you do an inactive being or idea; nor know it, as you do yourself, by a reflex act; neither do  you mediately apprehend it by similitude of the one or the other; nor yet collect it by reasoning from that which you know immediately. All which makes the case of Matter widely different from that of the Deity .

[Hyl. You say your own soul supplies you with some sort of an idea or image of God. But, at the same time, you acknowledge you have, properly speaking, no idea of your own soul. You even affirm that spirits are a sort of beings altogether different from ideas. Consequently that no idea can be like a spirit. We have therefore no idea of any spirit. You admit nevertheless that there is spiritual Substance, although you have no idea of it; while you deny there can be such a thing as material Substance, because you have no notion or idea of it. Is this fair dealing? To act consistently, you must either admit Matter or reject Spirit. What say you to this?

Phil.  I say, in the first place, that I do not deny the existence of material substance, merely because I have no notion of it, but because the notion of it is inconsistent; or, in other words, because it is repugnant that there should be a notion of it. Many things, for aught I know, may exist, whereof neither I nor any other man hath or can have any idea or notion whatsoever. But then those things must be possible, that is, nothing inconsistent must be included in their definition. I say, secondly, that, although we believe things to exist which we do not perceive, yet we may not believe that any particular thing exists, without some reason for such belief: but I have no reason for believing the existence of Matter. I have no immediate intuition thereof: neither can I immediately from my sensations, ideas, notions, actions, or passions, infer an unthinking, unperceiving, inactive Substance — either by probable deduction, or necessary consequence. Whereas the being of my Self, that is, my own soul, mind, or thinking principle, I evidently know by reflexion.  You will forgive me if I repeat the same things in answer to the same objections. In the very notion or definition of material Substance , there is included a manifest repugnance and inconsistency. But this cannot be said of the notion of Spirit. That ideas should exist in what doth not perceive, or be produced by what doth not act, is repugnant. But, it is no repugnancy to say that a perceiving thing should be the subject of ideas, or an active thing the cause of them. It is granted we have neither an immediate evidence nor a demonstrative knowledge of the existence of other finite spirits; but it will not thence follow that such spirits are on a foot with material substances: if to suppose the one be inconsistent, and it be not inconsistent to suppose the other; if the one can be inferred by no argument, and there is a probability for the other; if we see signs and effects indicating distinct finite agents like ourselves, and see no sign or symptom whatever that leads to a rational belief of Matter. I say, lastly, that I have a notion of Spirit, though I have not, strictly speaking, an idea of it. I do not perceive it as an idea, or by means of an idea, but know it by reflexion.

Hyl. Notwithstanding all you have said, to me it seems that, according to your own way of thinking, and in consequence of your own principles, it should follow that you are only a system of floating ideas, without any substance to support them. Words are not to be used without a meaning. And, as there is no more meaning in spiritual Substance than in material Substance , the one is to be exploded as well as the other.

Phil. How often must I repeat, that I know or am conscious of my own being; and that I myself  am not my ideas, but somewhat else, a thinking, active principle that perceives, knows, wills, and operates about ideas. I know that I, one and the same self, perceive both colours and sounds: that a colour cannot perceive a sound, nor a sound a colour: that I am therefore one individual principle, distinct from colour and sound; and, for the same reason, from all other sensible things and inert ideas.  But, I am not in like manner conscious either of the existence or essence of Matter. On the contrary, I know that nothing inconsistent can exist, and that the existence of Matter implies an inconsistency. Farther, I know what I mean when I affirm that there is a spiritual substance or support of ideas, that is, that a spirit knows and perceives ideas. But, I do not know what is meant when it is said that an unperceiving substance hath inherent in it and supports either ideas or the archetypes of ideas. There is therefore upon the whole no parity of case between Spirit and Matter.]

Hyl. I own myself satisfied in this point. But, do you in earnest think the real existence of sensible things consists in their being actually perceived? If so; how comes it that all mankind distinguish between them? Ask the first man you meet, and he shall tell you, to be perceived is one thing, and to exist is another.

Phil. I am content, Hylas, to appeal to the common sense of the world for the truth of my notion. Ask the gardener why he thinks yonder cherry-tree exists in the garden, and he shall tell you, because he sees and feels it; in a word, because he perceives it by his senses. Ask him why he thinks an orange-tree not to be there, and he shall tell you, because he does not perceive it. What he perceives by sense, that he terms a real being, and saith it is or exists; but, that which is not perceivable, the same, he saith, hath no being.

Hyl. Yes, Philonous, I grant the existence of a sensible thing consists in being perceivable, but not in being actually perceived.

Phil. And what is perceivable but an idea? And can an idea exist without being actually perceived? These are points long since agreed between us.

Hyl. But, be your opinion never so true, yet surely you will not deny it is shocking, and contrary to the common sense of men. Ask the fellow whether yonder tree hath an existence out of his mind: what answer think you he would make?

Phil. The same that I should myself, to wit, that it doth exist out of his mind. But then to a Christian it cannot surely be shocking to say, the real tree, existing without his mind, is truly known and comprehended by (that is exists in ) the infinite mind of God. Probably he may not at first glance be aware of the direct and immediate proof there is of this; inasmuch as the very being of a tree, or any other sensible thing, implies a mind wherein it is. But the point itself he cannot deny. The question between the Materialists and me is not, whether things have a real existence out of the mind of this or that person, but, whether they have an absolute existence, distinct from being perceived by God, and exterior to all minds. This indeed some heathens and philosophers have affirmed, but whoever entertains notions of the Deity suitable to the Holy Scriptures will be of another opinion.

Hyl. But, according to your notions, what difference is there between real things, and chimeras formed by the imagination, or the visions of a dream — since they are all equally in the mind?

Phil. The ideas formed by the imagination are faint and indistinct; they have, besides, an entire dependence on the will. But the ideas perceived by sense, that is, real things, are more vivid and clear; and, being imprinted on the mind by a spirit distinct from us, have not the like dependence on our will. There is therefore no danger of confounding these with the foregoing: and there is as little of confounding them with the visions of a dream, which are dim, irregular, and confused. And, though they should happen to be never so lively and natural, yet, by their not being connected, and of apiece with the preceding and subsequent transactions of our lives, they might easily be distinguished from realities. In short, by whatever method you distinguish things from chimeras on your scheme, the same, it is evident, will hold also upon mine. For, it must be, I presume, by some perceived difference; and I am not for depriving you of any one thing that you perceive.

Hyl.  But still, Philonous, you hold, there is nothing in  the world but spirits and ideas. And this, you must needs acknowledge, sounds very oddly.

Phil. I own the word idea , not being commonly used for thing , sounds something out of the way. My reason for using it was, because a necessary relation to the mind is understood to be implied by that term; and it is now commonly used by philosophers to denote the immediate objects of the understanding. But, however oddly the proposition may sound in words, yet it includes nothing so very strange or shocking in its sense; which in effect amounts to no more than this, to wit, that there are only things perceiving, and things perceived; or that every unthinking being is necessarily, and from the very nature of its existence, perceived by some mind; if not by a finite created mind, yet certainly by the infinite mind of God, in whom ‘we live, and move, and have our being.’ Is this as strange as to say, the sensible qualities are not on the objects: or that we cannot be sure of the existence of things, or know anything of their real natures — though we both see and feel them, and perceive them by all our senses?

Hyl. And, in consequence of this, must we not think there are no such things as physical or corporeal causes; but that a Spirit is the immediate cause of all the phenomena in nature? Can there be anything more extravagant than this?

Phil. Yes, it is infinitely more extravagant to say — a thing which is inert operates on the mind, and which is unperceiving is the cause of our perceptions, [without any regard either to consistency, or the old known axiom, Nothing can give to another that which it hath not itself ]. Besides, that which to you, I know not for what reason, seems so extravagant is no more than the Holy Scriptures assert in a hundred places. In them God is represented as the sole and immediate Author of all those effects which some heathens and philosophers are wont to ascribe to Nature, Matter, Fate, or the like unthinking principle. This is so much the constant language of Scripture that it were needless to confirm it by citations.

Hyl.  You are not aware, Philonous, that, in making God  the immediate Author of all the motions in nature, you make Him the Author of murder, sacrilege, adultery, and the like heinous sins.

Phil. In answer to that, I observe, first, that the imputation of guilt is the same, whether a person commits an action with or without an instrument. In case therefore you suppose God to act by the mediation of an instrument, or occasion, called Matter , you as truly make Him the author of sin as I, who think Him the immediate agent in all those operations vulgarly ascribed to Nature. I farther observe that sin or moral turpitude doth not consist in the outward physical action or motion, but in the internal deviation of the will from the laws of reason and religion. This is plain, in that the killing an enemy in a battle, or putting a criminal legally to death, is not thought sinful; though the outward act be the very same with that in the case of murder. Since, therefore, sin doth not consist in the physical action, the making God an immediate cause of all such actions is not making Him the Author of sin. Lastly, I have nowhere said that God is the only agent who produces all the motions in bodies. It is true I have denied there are any other agents besides spirits; but this is very consistent with allowing to thinking rational beings, in the production of motions, the use of limited powers, ultimately indeed derived from God, but immediately under the direction of their own wills, which is sufficient to entitle them to all the guilt of their actions.

Hyl. But the denying Matter, Philonous, or corporeal Substance; there is the point. You can never persuade me that this is not repugnant to the universal sense of mankind. Were our dispute to be determined by most voices, I am confident you would give up the point, without gathering the votes.

Phil.  I wish both our opinions were fairly stated and submitted to the judgment of men who had plain common sense, without the prejudices of a learned education. Let me be represented as one who trusts his senses, who thinks he knows the things he sees and feels, and entertains  no doubts of their existence; and you fairly set forth with all your doubts, your paradoxes, and your scepticism about you, and I shall willingly acquiesce in the determination of any indifferent person. That there is no substance wherein ideas can exist beside spirit is to me evident. And that the objects immediately perceived are ideas, is on all hands agreed. And that sensible qualities are objects immediately perceived no one can deny. It is therefore evident there can be no substratum of those qualities but spirit; in which they exist, not by way of mode or property, but as a thing perceived in that which perceives it. I deny therefore that there is any unthinking substratum of the objects of sense, and in that acceptation that there is any material substance. But if by material substance is meant only sensible body — that which is seen and felt (and the unphilosophical part of the world, I dare say, mean no more) — then I am more certain of matter’s existence than you or any other philosopher pretend to be. If there be anything which makes the generality of mankind averse from the notions I espouse: it is a misapprehension that I deny the reality of sensible things. But, as it is you who are guilty of that, and not I, it follows that in truth their aversion is against your notions and not mine. I do therefore assert that I am as certain as of my own being, that there are bodies or corporeal substances (meaning the things I perceive by my senses); and that, granting this, the bulk of mankind will take no thought about, nor think themselves at all concerned in the fate of those unknown natures, and philosophical quiddities, which some men are so fond of.

Hyl. What say you to this? Since, according to you, men judge of the reality of things by their senses, how can a man be mistaken in thinking the moon a plain lucid surface, about a foot in diameter; or a square tower, seen at a distance, round; or an oar, with one end in the water, crooked?

Phil.  He is not mistaken with regard to the ideas he actually perceives, but in the inferences he makes from  his present perceptions. Thus, in the case of the oar, what he immediately perceives by sight is certainly crooked; and so far he is in the right. But if he thence conclude that upon taking the oar out of the water he shall perceive the same crookedness; or that it would affect his touch as crooked things are wont to do: in that he is mistaken. In like manner, if he shall conclude from what he perceives in one station, that, in case he advances towards the moon or tower, he should still be affected with the like ideas, he is mistaken. But his mistake lies not in what he perceives immediately, and at present, (it being a manifest contradiction to suppose he should err in respect of that) but in the wrong judgment he makes concerning the ideas he apprehends to be connected with those immediately perceived: or, concerning the ideas that, from what he perceives at present, he imagines would be perceived in other circumstances. The case is the same with regard to the Copernican system. We do not here perceive any motion of the earth: but it were erroneous thence to conclude, that, in case we were placed at as great a distance from that as we are now from the other planets, we should not then perceive its motion.

Hyl. I understand you; and must needs own you say things plausible enough. But, give me leave to put you in mind of one thing. Pray, Philonous, were you not formerly as positive that Matter existed, as you are now that it does not?

Phil. I was. But here lies the difference. Before, my positiveness was founded, without examination, upon prejudice; but now, after inquiry, upon evidence.

Hyl. After all, it seems our dispute is rather about words than things. We agree in the thing, but differ in the name. That we are affected with ideas from without is evident; and it is no less evident that there must be (I will not say archetypes, but) Powers without the mind, corresponding to those ideas. And, as these Powers cannot subsist by themselves, there is some subject of them necessarily to be admitted; which I call Matter , and you call Spirit . This is all the difference.

Phil. Pray, Hylas, is that powerful Being, or subject of powers, extended?

Hyl. It hath not extension; but it hath the power to raise in you the idea of extension,

Phil. It is therefore itself unextended?

Hyl. I grant it.

Phil. Is it not also active?

Hyl. Without doubt. Otherwise, how could we attribute powers to it?

Phil. Now let me ask you two questions: First , Whether it be agreeable to the usage either of philosophers or others to give the name Matter to an unextended active being? And, Secondly , Whether it be not ridiculously absurd to misapply names contrary to the common use of language?

Hyl. Well then, let it not be called Matter, since you will have it so, but some Third Nature distinct from Matter and Spirit. For what reason is there why you should call it Spirit? Does not the notion of spirit imply that it is thinking, as well as active and unextended?

Phil.  My reason is this: because I have a mind to have some notion of meaning in what I say: but I have no notion of any action distinct from volition, neither can I conceive volition to be anywhere but in a spirit: therefore, when I speak of an active being, I am obliged to mean a Spirit. Beside, what can be plainer than that a thing which hath no ideas in itself cannot impart them to me; and, if it hath ideas, surely it must be a Spirit. To make you comprehend the point still more clearly if it be possible. I assert as well as you that, since we are affected from without, we must allow Powers to be without, in a Being distinct from ourselves. So far we are agreed. But then we differ as to the kind of this powerful Being. I will have it to be Spirit, you Matter, or I know not what (I may add too, you know not what) Third Nature. Thus, I prove it to be Spirit. From the effects I see produced, I conclude there are actions; and, because  actions, volitions; and, because there are volitions, there must be a will . Again, the things I perceive must have an existence, they or their archetypes, out of my mind: but, being ideas, neither they nor their archetypes can exist otherwise than in an understanding; there is therefore an understanding . But will and understanding constitute in the strictest sense a mind or spirit. The powerful cause, therefore, of my ideas is in strict propriety of speech a Spirit .

Hyl. And now I warrant you think you have made the point very clear, little suspecting that what you advance leads directly to a contradiction. Is it not an absurdity to imagine any imperfection in God?

Phil. Without a doubt.

Hyl. To suffer pain is an imperfection?

Phil. It is.

Hyl. Are we not sometimes affected with pain and uneasiness by some other Being?

Phil. We are.

Hyl. And have you not said that Being is a Spirit, and is not that Spirit God?

Phil. I grant it.

Hyl. But you have asserted that whatever ideas we perceive from without are in the mind which affects us. The ideas, therefore, of pain and uneasiness are in God; or, in other words, God suffers pain: that is to say, there is an imperfection in the Divine nature: which, you acknowledged, was absurd. So you are caught in a plain contradiction.

Phil.  That God knows or understands all things, and that He knows, among other things, what pain is, even every sort of painful sensation, and what it is for His creatures to suffer pain, I make no question. But, that God, though He knows and sometimes causes painful sensations in us, can Himself suffer pain, I positively deny. We, who are limited and dependent spirits, are liable to impressions of sense, the effects of an external Agent, which, being produced against our wills, are sometimes painful and uneasy. But God, whom no external  being can affect, who perceives nothing by sense as we do; whose will is absolute and independent, causing all things, and liable to be thwarted or resisted by nothing: it is evident, such a Being as this can suffer nothing, nor be affected with any painful sensation, or indeed any sensation at all. We are chained to a body: that is to say, our perceptions are connected with corporeal motions. By the law of our nature, we are affected upon every alteration in the nervous parts of our sensible body; which sensible body, rightly considered, is nothing but a complexion of such qualities or ideas as have no existence distinct from being perceived by a mind. So that this connexion of sensations with corporeal motions means no more than a correspondence in the order of nature, between two sets of ideas, or things immediately perceivable. But God is a Pure Spirit, disengaged from all such sympathy, or natural ties. No corporeal motions are attended with the sensations of pain or pleasure in His mind. To know everything knowable, is certainly a perfection; but to endure, or suffer, or feel anything by sense, is an imperfection. The former, I say, agrees to God, but not the latter. God knows, or hath ideas; but His ideas are not conveyed to Him by sense, as ours are. Your not distinguishing, where there is so manifest a difference, makes you fancy you see an absurdity where there is none.

Hyl. But, all this while you have not considered that the quantity of Matter has been demonstrated to be proportioned to the gravity of bodies. And what can withstand demonstration?

Phil. Let me see how you demonstrate that point.

Hyl.  I lay it down for a principle, that the moments or quantities of motion in bodies are in a direct compounded reason of the velocities and quantities of Matter contained in them. Hence, where the velocities are equal, it follows the moments are directly as the quantity of Matter in each. But it is found by experience that all bodies (bating the small inequalities, arising from the resistance of the air) descend with an equal velocity; the motion therefore of descending bodies, and consequently their gravity, which  is the cause or principle of that motion, is proportional to the quantity of Matter; which was to be demonstrated.

Phil. You lay it down as a self-evident principle that the quantity of motion in any body is proportional to the velocity and Matter taken together; and this is made use of to prove a proposition from whence the existence of Matter is inferred. Pray is not this arguing in a circle?

Hyl. In the premise I only mean that the motion is proportional to the velocity, jointly with the extension and solidity.

Phil. But, allowing this to be true, yet it will not thence follow that gravity is proportional to Matter , in your philosophic sense of the word; except you take it for granted that unknown substratum , or whatever else you call it, is proportional to those sensible qualities; which to suppose is plainly begging the question. That there is magnitude and solidity, or resistance, perceived by sense, I readily grant; as likewise, that gravity may be proportional to those qualities I will not dispute. But that either these qualities as perceived by us, or the powers producing them, do exist in a material substratum ; this is what I deny, and you indeed affirm, but, notwithstanding your demonstration, have not yet proved.

Hyl. I shall insist no longer on that point. Do you think, however, you shall persuade me the natural philosophers have been dreaming all this while? Pray what becomes of all their hypotheses and explications of the phenomena, which suppose the existence of Matter?

Phil. What mean you, Hylas, by the phenomena ?

Hyl. I mean the appearances which I perceive by my senses.

Phil. And the appearances perceived by sense, are they not ideas?

Hyl. I have told you so a hundred times.

Phil. Therefore, to explain the phenomena is, to shew how we come to be affected with ideas, in that manner and order wherein they are imprinted on our senses. Is it not?

Hyl. It is.

Phil. Now, if you can prove that any philosopher has explained the production of any one idea in our minds by the help of Matter , I shall for ever acquiesce, and look on all that hath been said against it as nothing; but, if you cannot, it is vain to urge the explication of phenomena. That a Being endowed with knowledge and will should produce or exhibit ideas is easily understood. But that a Being which is utterly destitute of these faculties should be able to produce ideas, or in any sort to affect an intelligence, this I can never understand. This I say, though we had some positive conception of Matter, though we knew its qualities, and could comprehend its existence, would yet be so far from explaining things, that it is itself the most inexplicable thing in the world. And yet, for all this, it will not follow that philosophers have been doing nothing; for, by observing and reasoning upon the connexion of ideas, they discover the laws and methods of nature, which is a part of knowledge both useful and entertaining.

Hyl. After all, can it be supposed God would deceive all mankind? Do you imagine He would have induced the whole world to believe the being of Matter, if there was no such thing?

Phil. That every epidemical opinion, arising from prejudice, or passion, or thoughtlessness, may be imputed to God, as the Author of it, I believe you will not affirm. Whatsoever opinion we father on Him, it must be either because He has discovered it to us by supernatural revelation; or because it is so evident to our natural faculties, which were framed and given us by God, that it is impossible we should withhold our assent from it. But where is the revelation? or where is the evidence that extorts the belief of Matter? Nay, how does it appear, that Matter, taken for something distinct from what we perceive by our senses  , is thought to exist by all mankind; or, indeed, by any except a few philosophers, who do not know what  they would be at? Your question supposes these points are clear; and, when you have cleared them, I shall think myself obliged to give you another answer. In the meantime, let it suffice that I tell you, I do not suppose God has deceived mankind at all.

Hyl. But the novelty, Philonous, the novelty! There lies the danger. New notions should always be discountenanced; they unsettle men’s minds, and nobody knows where they will end.

Phil. Why the rejecting a notion that has no foundation, either in sense, or in reason, or in Divine authority, should be thought to unsettle the belief of such opinions as are grounded on all or any of these, I cannot imagine. That innovations in government and religion are dangerous, and ought to be discountenanced, I freely own. But is there the like reason why they should be discouraged in philosophy? The making anything known which was unknown before is an innovation in knowledge: and, if all such innovations had been forbidden, men would have made a notable progress in the arts and sciences. But it is none of my business to plead for novelties and paradoxes. That the qualities we perceive are not on the objects: that we must not believe our senses: that we know nothing of the real nature of things, and can never be assured even of their existence: that real colours and sounds are nothing but certain unknown figures and motions: that motions are in themselves neither swift nor slow: that there are in bodies absolute extensions, without any particular magnitude or figure: that a thing stupid, thoughtless, and inactive, operates on a spirit: that the least particle of a body contains innumerable extended parts: — these are the novelties, these are the strange notions which shock the genuine uncorrupted judgment of all mankind; and being once admitted, embarrass the mind with endless doubts and difficulties. And it is against these and the like innovations I endeavour to vindicate Common Sense. It is true, in doing this, I may perhaps be obliged to use some ambages  , and ways of speech not common. But, if my notions are once thoroughly understood, that which is most singular in them will, in effect, be found to amount to no more than this: — that it is absolutely impossible, and a plain contradiction, to suppose  any unthinking Being should exist without being perceived by a Mind. And, if this notion be singular, it is a shame it should be so, at this time of day, and in a Christian country.

Hyl. As for the difficulties other opinions may be liable to, those are out of the question. It is your business to defend your own opinion. Can anything be plainer than that you are for changing all things into ideas? You, I say, who are not ashamed to charge me with scepticism . This is so plain, there is no denying it.

Phil. You mistake me. I am not for changing things into ideas, but rather ideas into things; since those immediate objects of perception, which, according to you, are only appearances of things, I take to be the real things themselves.

Hyl. Things! You may pretend what you please; but it is certain you leave us nothing but the empty forms of things, the outside only which strikes the senses.

Phil. What you call the empty forms and outside of things seem to me the very things themselves. Nor are they empty or incomplete, otherwise than upon your supposition — that Matter is an essential part of all corporeal things. We both, therefore, agree in this, that we perceive only sensible forms: but herein we differ — you will have them to be empty appearances, I real beings. In short, you do not trust your senses, I do.

Hyl. You say you believe your senses; and seem to applaud yourself that in this you agree with the vulgar. According to you, therefore, the true nature of a thing is discovered by the senses. If so, whence comes that disagreement? Why is not the same figure, and other sensible qualities, perceived all manner of ways? and why should we use a microscope the better to discover the true nature of a body, if it were discoverable to the naked eye?

Phil.  Strictly speaking, Hylas, we do not see the same object that we feel; neither is the same object perceived  by the microscope which was by the naked eye. But, in case every variation was thought sufficient to constitute a new kind or individual, the endless number or confusion of names would render language impracticable. Therefore, to avoid this, as well as other inconveniences which are obvious upon a little thought, men combine together several ideas, apprehended by divers senses, or by the same sense at different times, or in different circumstances, but observed, however, to have some connexion in nature, either with respect to co-existence or succession; all which they refer to one name, and consider as one thing. Hence it follows that when I examine, by my other senses, a thing I have seen, it is not in order to understand better the same object which I had perceived by sight, the object of one sense not being perceived by the other senses. And, when I look through a microscope, it is not that I may perceive more clearly what I perceived already with my bare eyes; the object perceived by the glass being quite different from the former. But, in both cases, my aim is only to know what ideas are connected together; and the more a man knows of the connexion of ideas, the more he is said to know of the nature of things. What, therefore, if our ideas are variable; what if our senses are not in all circumstances affected with the same appearances? It will not thence follow they are not to be trusted; or that they are inconsistent either with themselves or anything else: except it be with your preconceived notion of (I know not what) one single, unchanged, unperceivable, real Nature, marked by each name. Which prejudice seems to have taken its rise from not rightly understanding the common language of men, speaking of several distinct ideas as united into one thing by the mind. And, indeed, there is cause to suspect several erroneous conceits of the philosophers are owing to the same original: while they began to build their schemes not so much on notions as on words, which were framed by the vulgar, merely for conveniency and dispatch in the common actions of life, without any regard to speculation.

Hyl . Methinks I apprehend your meaning.

Phil. It is your opinion the ideas we perceive by our senses are not real things, but images or copies of them. Our knowledge, therefore, is no farther real than as our ideas are the true representations of those originals  . But, as these supposed originals are in themselves unknown, it is impossible to know how far our ideas resemble them; or whether they resemble them at all. We cannot, therefore, be sure we have any real knowledge. Farther, as our ideas are perpetually varied, without any change in the supposed real things, it necessarily follows they cannot all be true copies of them: or, if some are and others are not, it is impossible to distinguish the former from the latter. And this plunges us yet deeper in uncertainty. Again, when we consider the point, we cannot conceive how any idea, or anything like an idea, should have an absolute existence out of a mind: nor consequently, according to you, how there should be any real thing in nature. The result of all which is that we are thrown into the most hopeless and abandoned scepticism. Now, give me leave to ask you, First, Whether your referring ideas to certain absolutely existing unperceived substances, as their originals, be not the source of all this scepticism? Secondly, whether you are informed, either by sense or reason, of the existence of those unknown originals? And, in case  you are not, whether it be not absurd to suppose them? Thirdly, Whether, upon inquiry, you find there is anything distinctly conceived or meant by the absolute or external existence of unperceiving substances ? Lastly, Whether, the premises considered, it be not the wisest way to follow nature, trust your senses, and, laying aside all anxious thought about unknown natures or substances, admit with the vulgar those for real things which are perceived by the senses?

Hyl. For the present, I have no inclination to the answering part. I would much rather see how you can get over what follows. Pray are not the objects perceived by the senses of one, likewise perceivable to others present? If there were a hundred more here, they would all see the garden, the trees, and flowers, as I see them. But they are not in the same manner affected with the ideas I frame in my imagination . Does not this make a difference between the former sort of objects and the latter?

Phil. I grant it does. Nor have I ever denied a difference between the objects of sense and those of imagination. But what would you infer from thence? You cannot say that sensible objects exist unperceived, because they are perceived by many.

Hyl. I own I can make nothing of that objection: but it hath led me into another. Is it not your opinion that by our senses we perceive only the ideas existing in our minds?

Phil. It is.

Hyl. But the same idea which is in my mind cannot be in yours, or in any other mind. Doth it not therefore follow, from your principles, that no two can see the same thing? And is not this highly absurd?

Phil. If the term same  be taken in the vulgar acceptation, it is certain (and not at all repugnant to the principles  I maintain) that different persons may perceive the same thing; or the same thing or idea exist in different minds. Words are of arbitrary imposition; and, since men are used to apply the word same where no distinction or variety is perceived, and I do not pretend to alter their perceptions, it follows that, as men have said before, several saw the same thing , so they may, upon like occasions, still continue to use the same phrase, without any deviation either from propriety of language, or the truth of things. But, if the term same be used in the acceptation of philosophers, who pretend to an abstracted notion of identity, then, according to their sundry definitions of this notion (for it is not yet agreed wherein that philosophic identity consists), it may or may not be possible for divers persons to perceive the same thing. But whether philosophers shall think fit to call a thing the same or no, is, I conceive, of small importance. Let us suppose several men together, all endued with the same faculties, and consequently affected in like sort by their senses, and who had yet never known the use of language; they would, without question, agree in their perceptions. Though perhaps, when they came to the use of speech, some regarding the uniformness of what was perceived, might call it the same thing: others, especially regarding the diversity of persons who perceived, might choose the denomination of different things. But who sees not that all the dispute is about a word? to wit, whether what is perceived by different persons may yet have the term same  applied to it? Or, suppose a house, whose walls or outward shell remaining unaltered, the chambers are all pulled down, and new ones built in their place; and that you should call this the  same , and I should say it was not the same house: — would we not, for all this, perfectly agree in our thoughts of the house, considered in itself? And would not all the difference consist in a sound? If you should say, We differed in our notions; for that you superadded to your idea of the house the simple abstracted idea of identity, whereas I did not; I would tell you, I know not what you mean by the abstracted idea of identity ; and should desire you to look into your own thoughts, and be sure you understood yourself. —— Why so silent, Hylas? Are you not yet satisfied men may dispute about identity and diversity, without any real difference in their thoughts and opinions, abstracted from names? Take this farther reflexion with you — that whether Matter be allowed to exist or no, the case is exactly the same as to the point in hand. For the Materialists themselves acknowledge what we immediately perceive by our senses to be our own ideas. Your difficulty, therefore, that no two see the same thing, makes equally against the Materialists and me.

Hyl. [Ay, Philonous,] But they suppose an external archetype, to which referring their several ideas they may truly be said to perceive the same thing.

Phil. And (not to mention your having discarded those archetypes) so may you suppose an external archetype on my principles; — external, I mean, to your own mind : though indeed it must be supposed to exist in that Mind which comprehends all things; but then, this serves all the ends of identity, as well as if it existed out of a mind. And I am sure you yourself will not say it is less intelligible.

Hyl. You have indeed clearly satisfied me — either that there is no difficulty at bottom in this point; or, if there be, that it makes equally against both opinions.

Phil. But that which makes equally against two contradictory opinions can be a proof against neither.

Hyl. I acknowledge it.

But, after all, Philonous, when I consider the substance of what you advance against Scepticism , it amounts to no more than this: — We are sure that we really see, hear, feel; in a word, that we are affected with sensible impressions.

Phil. And how are we concerned any farther? I see this cherry, I feel it, I taste it: and I am sure nothing cannot be seen, or felt, or tasted: it is therefore real . Take away the sensations of softness, moisture, redness, tartness, and you take away the cherry, since it is not a being distinct from sensations. A cherry, I say, is nothing but a congeries of sensible impressions, or ideas perceived by various senses: which ideas are united into one thing (or have one name given them) by the mind, because they are observed to attend each other. Thus, when the palate is affected with such a particular taste, the sight is affected with a red colour, the touch with roundness, softness, &c. Hence, when I see, and feel, and taste, in such sundry certain manners, I am sure the cherry exists, or is real; its reality being in my opinion nothing abstracted from those sensations. But if by the word cherry you mean an unknown nature, distinct from all those sensible qualities, and by its existence something distinct from its being perceived; then, indeed, I own, neither you nor I, nor any one else, can be sure it exists.

Hyl. But, what would you say, Philonous, if I should bring the very same reasons against the existence of sensible things in a mind which you have offered against their existing in a material substratum ?

Phil. When I see your reasons, you shall hear what I have to say to them.

Hyl. Is the mind extended or unextended?

Phil. Unextended, without doubt.

Hyl. Do you say the things you perceive are in your mind?

Phil. They are.

Hyl. Again, have I not heard you speak of sensible impressions?

Phil. I believe you may.

Hyl. Explain to me now, O Philonous! how it is possible there should be room for all those trees and houses to exist in your mind. Can extended things be contained in that which is unextended? Or, are we to imagine impressions made on a thing void of all solidity? You cannot say objects are in your mind, as books in your study: or that things are imprinted on it, as the figure of a seal upon wax. In what sense, therefore, are we to understand those expressions? Explain me this if you can: and I shall then be able to answer all those queries you formerly put to me about my substratum .

Phil. Look you, Hylas, when I speak of objects as existing in the mind, or imprinted on the senses, I would not be understood in the gross literal sense; as when bodies are said to exist in a place, or a seal to make an impression upon wax. My meaning is only that the mind comprehends or perceives them; and that it is affected from without, or by some being distinct from itself. This is my explication of your difficulty; and how it can serve to make your tenet of an unperceiving material substratum intelligible, I would fain know.

Hyl. Nay, if that be all, I confess I do not see what use can be made of it. But are you not guilty of some abuse of language in this?

Phil. None at all. It is no more than common custom, which you know is the rule of language, hath authorised: nothing being more usual, than for philosophers to speak of the immediate objects of the understanding as things existing in the mind. Nor is there anything in this but what is conformable to the general analogy of language; most part of the mental operations being signified by words borrowed from sensible things; as is plain in the terms comprehend , reflect , discourse , &c., which, being applied to the mind, must not be taken in their gross, original sense.

Hyl.  You have, I own, satisfied me in this point. But there still remains one great difficulty, which I know not how you will get over. And, indeed, it is of such importance  that if you could solve all others, without being able to find a solution for this, you must never expect to make me a proselyte to your principles.

Phil. Let me know this mighty difficulty.

Hyl. The Scripture account of the creation is what appears to me utterly irreconcilable with your notions. Moses tells us of a creation: a creation of what? of ideas? No, certainly, but of things, of real things, solid corporeal substances. Bring your principles to agree with this, and I shall perhaps agree with you.

Phil. Moses mentions the sun, moon, and stars, earth and sea, plants and animals. That all these do really exist, and were in the beginning created by God, I make no question. If by ideas you mean fictions and fancies of the mind, then these are no ideas. If by ideas you mean immediate objects of the understanding, or sensible things, which cannot exist unperceived, or out of a mind, then these things are ideas. But whether you do or do not call them ideas , it matters little. The difference is only about a name. And, whether that name be retained or rejected, the sense, the truth, and reality of things continues the same. In common talk, the objects of our senses are not termed ideas , but things . Call them so still: provided you do not attribute to them any absolute external existence, and I shall never quarrel with you for a word. The creation, therefore, I allow to have been a creation of things, of real things. Neither is this in the least inconsistent with my principles, as is evident from what I have now said; and would have been evident to you without this, if you had not forgotten what had been so often said before. But as for solid corporeal substances, I desire you to shew where Moses makes any mention of them; and, if they should be mentioned by him, or any other inspired writer, it would still be incumbent on you to shew those words were not taken in the vulgar acceptation, for things falling under our senses, but in the philosophic acceptation, for Matter, or  an unknown quiddity, with an absolute existence . When you have proved these points, then (and not till then) may you bring the authority of Moses into our dispute.

Hyl. It is in vain to dispute about a point so clear. I am content to refer it to your own conscience. Are you not satisfied there is some peculiar repugnancy between the Mosaic account of the creation and your notions?

Phil. If all possible sense which can be put on the first chapter of Genesis may be conceived as consistently with my principles as any other, then it has no peculiar repugnancy with them. But there is no sense you may not as well conceive, believing as I do. Since, besides spirits, all you conceive are ideas; and the existence of these I do not deny. Neither do you pretend they exist without the mind.

Hyl. Pray let me see any sense you can understand it in.

Phil.  Why, I imagine that if I had been present at the creation, I should have seen things produced into being — that is become perceptible — in the order prescribed by the sacred historian. I ever before believed the Mosaic account of the creation, and now find no alteration in my manner of believing it. When things are said to begin or end their existence, we do not mean this with regard to God, but His creatures. All objects are eternally known by God, or, which is the same thing, have an eternal existence in His mind: but when things, before imperceptible to creatures, are, by a decree of God, perceptible to them, then are they said to begin a relative existence, with respect to created minds. Upon reading therefore the Mosaic account of the creation, I understand that the several parts of the world became gradually perceivable to finite spirits, endowed with proper faculties; so that, whoever such were present, they were in truth perceived by them. This is the literal obvious sense  suggested to me by the words of the Holy Scripture: in which is included no mention, or no thought, either of substratum , instrument, occasion, or absolute existence. And, upon inquiry, I doubt not it will be found that most plain honest men, who believe the creation, never think of those things any more than I. What metaphysical sense you may understand it in, you only can tell.

Hyl. But, Philonous, you do not seem to be aware that you allow created things, in the beginning, only a relative, and consequently hypothetical being: that is to say, upon supposition there were men to perceive them; without which they have no actuality of absolute existence, wherein creation might terminate. Is it not, therefore, according to you, plainly impossible the creation of any inanimate creatures should precede that of man? And is not this directly contrary to the Mosaic account?

Phil. In answer to that, I say, first, created beings might begin to exist in the mind of other created intelligences, beside men. You will not therefore be able to prove any contradiction between Moses and my notions, unless you first shew there was no other order of finite created spirits in being, before man. I say farther, in case we conceive the creation, as we should at this time, a parcel of plants or vegetables of all sorts produced, by an invisible Power, in a desert where nobody was present — that this way of explaining or conceiving it is consistent with my principles, since they deprive you of nothing, either sensible or imaginable; that it exactly suits with the common, natural, and undebauched notions of mankind; that it manifests the dependence of all things on God; and consequently hath all the good effect or influence, which it is possible that important article of our faith should have in making men humble, thankful, and resigned to their [great] Creator. I say, moreover, that, in this naked conception of things, divested of words, there will not be found any notion of what you call the actuality of absolute existence . You may indeed raise a dust with those terms, and so lengthen our dispute to no purpose. But I entreat you calmly to look into your own thoughts, and then tell me if they are not a useless and unintelligible jargon.

Hyl. I own I have no very clear notion annexed to them. But what say you to this? Do you not make the existence of sensible things consist in their being in a mind? And were not all things eternally in the mind of God? Did they not therefore exist from all eternity, according to you? And how could that which was eternal be created in time? Can anything be clearer or better connected than this?

Phil. And are not you too of opinion, that God knew all things from eternity?

Hyl. I am.

Phil. Consequently they always had a being in the Divine intellect.

Hyl. This I acknowledge.

Phil. By your own confession, therefore, nothing is new, or begins to be, in respect of the mind of God. So we are agreed in that point.

Hyl. What shall we make then of the creation?

Phil. May we not understand it to have been entirely in respect of finite spirits; so that things, with regard to us, may properly be said to begin their existence, or be created, when God decreed they should become perceptible to intelligent creatures, in that order and manner which He then established, and we now call the laws of nature? You may call this a relative , or hypothetical existence if you please. But, so long as it supplies us with the most natural, obvious, and literal sense of the Mosaic history of the creation; so long as it answers all the religious ends of that great article; in a word, so long as you can assign no other sense or meaning in its stead; why should we reject this? Is it to comply with a ridiculous sceptical humour of making everything nonsense and unintelligible? I am sure you cannot say it is for the glory of God. For, allowing it to be a thing possible and conceivable that the corporeal world should have an absolute existence extrinsical to the mind of God, as well as to the minds of all created spirits; yet how could this set forth either the immensity or omniscience of the Deity, or the necessary and immediate dependence of all things on Him? Nay, would it not rather seem to derogate from those attributes?

Hyl.  Well, but as to this decree of God’s, for making things perceptible, what say you, Philonous? Is it not  plain, God did either execute that decree from all eternity, or at some certain time began to will what He had not actually willed before, but only designed to will? If the former, then there could be no creation, or beginning of existence, in finite things. If the latter, then we must acknowledge something new to befall the Deity; which implies a sort of change: and all change argues imperfection.

Phil. Pray consider what you are doing. Is it not evident this objection concludes equally against a creation in any sense; nay, against every other act of the Deity, discoverable by the light of nature? None of which can we conceive, otherwise than as performed in time, and having a beginning. God is a Being of transcendent and unlimited perfections: His nature, therefore, is incomprehensible to finite spirits. It is not, therefore, to be expected, that any man, whether Materialist or Immaterialist, should have exactly just notions of the Deity, His attributes, and ways of operation. If then you would infer anything against me, your difficulty must not be drawn from the inadequateness of our conceptions of the Divine nature, which is unavoidable on any scheme; but from the denial of Matter, of which there is not one word, directly or indirectly, in what you have now objected.

Hyl. I must acknowledge the difficulties you are concerned to clear are such only as arise from the non-existence of Matter, and are peculiar to that notion. So far you are in the right. But I cannot by any means bring myself to think there is no such peculiar repugnancy between the creation and your opinion; though indeed where to fix it, I do not distinctly know.

Phil.  What would you have? Do I not acknowledge a twofold state of things — the one ectypal or natural, the other archetypal and eternal? The former was created in time; the latter existed from everlasting in the mind of God. Is not this agreeable to the common notions of divines? or, is any more than this necessary in order to conceive the creation? But you suspect some peculiar  repugnancy, though you know not where it lies. To take away all possibility of scruple in the case, do but consider this one point. Either you are not able to conceive the creation on any hypothesis whatsoever; and, if so, there is no ground for dislike or complaint against any particular opinion on that score: or you are able to conceive it; and, if so, why not on my Principles, since thereby nothing conceivable is taken away? You have all along been allowed the full scope of sense, imagination, and reason. Whatever, therefore, you could before apprehend, either immediately or mediately by your senses, or by ratiocination from your senses; whatever you could perceive, imagine, or understand, remains still with you. If, therefore, the notion you have of the creation by other Principles be intelligible, you have it still upon mine; if it be not intelligible, I conceive it to be no notion at all; and so there is no loss of it. And indeed it seems to me very plain that the supposition of Matter, that is a thing perfectly unknown and inconceivable, cannot serve to make us conceive anything. And, I hope it need not be proved to you that if the existence of Matter doth not make the creation conceivable, the creation’s being without it inconceivable can be no objection against its non-existence.

Hyl. I confess, Philonous, you have almost satisfied me in this point of the creation.

Phil. I would fain know why you are not quite satisfied. You tell me indeed of a repugnancy between the Mosaic history and Immaterialism: but you know not where it lies. Is this reasonable, Hylas? Can you expect I should solve a difficulty without knowing what it is? But, to pass by all that, would not a man think you were assured there is no repugnancy between the received notions of Materialists and the inspired writings?

Hyl. And so I am.

Phil. Ought the historical part of Scripture to be understood in a plain obvious sense, or in a sense which is metaphysical and out of the way?

Hyl. In the plain sense, doubtless.

Phil.  When Moses speaks of herbs, earth, water, &c. as having been created by God; think you not the sensible  things commonly signified by those words are suggested to every unphilosophical reader?

Hyl. I cannot help thinking so.

Phil. And are not all ideas, or things perceived by sense, to be denied a real existence by the doctrine of the Materialist?

Hyl. This I have already acknowledged.

Phil. The creation, therefore, according to them, was not the creation of things sensible, which have only a relative being, but of certain unknown natures, which have an absolute being, wherein creation might terminate?

Hyl. True.

Phil. Is it not therefore evident the assertors of Matter destroy the plain obvious sense of Moses, with which their notions are utterly inconsistent; and instead of it obtrude on us I know not what; something equally unintelligible to themselves and me?

Hyl. I cannot contradict you.

Phil. Moses tells us of a creation. A creation of what? of unknown quiddities, of occasions, or substratum ? No, certainly; but of things obvious to the senses. You must first reconcile this with your notions, if you expect I should be reconciled to them.

Hyl. I see you can assault me with my own weapons.

Phil. Then as to absolute existence  ; was there ever known a more jejune notion than that? Something it is so abstracted and unintelligible that you have frankly owned you could not conceive it, much less explain anything by it. But allowing Matter to exist, and the notion of absolute existence to be as clear as light; yet, was this ever known to make the creation more credible? Nay, hath it not furnished the atheists and infidels of all ages with the most plausible arguments against a creation? That a corporeal substance, which hath an absolute existence without the minds of spirits, should be produced out of nothing, by the mere will of a Spirit, hath been looked upon as a thing so contrary to all reason, so impossible and absurd, that not only the most celebrated among the ancients, but even divers modern and Christian philosophers have thought Matter co-eternal with the Deity.  Lay these things together, and then judge you whether Materialism disposes men to believe the creation of things.

Hyl. I own, Philonous, I think it does not. This of the creation is the last objection I can think of; and I must needs own it hath been sufficiently answered as well as the rest. Nothing now remains to be overcome but a sort of unaccountable backwardness that I find in myself towards your notions.

Phil. When a man is swayed, he knows not why, to one side of the question, can this, think you, be anything else but the effect of prejudice, which never fails to attend old and rooted notions? And indeed in this respect I cannot deny the belief of Matter to have very much the advantage over the contrary opinion, with men of a learned education.

Hyl. I confess it seems to be as you say.

Phil.  As a balance, therefore, to this weight of prejudice, let us throw into the scale the great advantages that arise from the belief of Immaterialism, both in regard to religion and human learning. The being of a God, and incorruptibility of the soul, those great articles of religion, are they not proved with the clearest and most immediate evidence? When I say the being of a God, I do not mean an obscure general Cause of things, whereof we have no conception, but God, in the strict and proper sense of the word. A Being whose spirituality, omnipresence, providence, omniscience, infinite power and goodness, are as conspicuous as the existence of sensible things, of which (notwithstanding the fallacious pretences and affected scruples of Sceptics) there is no more reason to doubt than of our own being. — Then, with relation to human sciences. In Natural Philosophy, what intricacies, what obscurities, what contradictions hath the belief of Matter led men into! To say nothing of the numberless disputes about its extent, continuity, homogeneity, gravity, divisibility, &c. — do they not pretend to explain all things by bodies operating on bodies, according to the laws of motion? and yet, are they able to comprehend how one body should move another? Nay,  admitting there was no difficulty in reconciling the notion of an inert being with a cause, or in conceiving how an accident might pass from one body to another; yet, by all their strained thoughts and extravagant suppositions, have they been able to reach the mechanical production of any one animal or vegetable body? Can they account, by the laws of motion, for sounds, tastes, smells, or colours; or for the regular course of things? Have they accounted, by physical principles, for the aptitude and contrivance even of the most inconsiderable parts of the universe? But, laying aside Matter and corporeal causes, and admitting only the efficiency of an All-perfect Mind, are not all the effects of nature easy and intelligible? If the phenomena are nothing else but ideas ; God is a spirit , but Matter an unintelligent, unperceiving being. If they demonstrate an unlimited power in their cause; God is active and omnipotent, but Matter an inert mass. If the order, regularity, and usefulness of them can never be sufficiently admired; God is infinitely wise and provident, but Matter destitute of all contrivance and design. These surely are great advantages in Physics . Not to mention that the apprehension of a distant Deity naturally disposes men to a negligence in their moral actions; which they would be more cautious of, in case they thought Him immediately present, and acting on their minds, without the interposition of Matter, or unthinking second causes. — Then in Metaphysics : what difficulties concerning entity in abstract, substantial forms, hylarchic principles, plastic natures, substance and accident, principle of individuation, possibility of Matter’s thinking, origin of ideas, the manner how two independent substances so widely different as Spirit and Matter , should mutually operate on each other? what difficulties, I say, and endless disquisitions, concerning these and innumerable other the like points, do we escape, by supposing only Spirits and ideas? — Even the Mathematics  themselves, if we take away the absolute existence of extended things, become much more clear and easy; the most shocking paradoxes and intricate speculations in those sciences depending on the infinite divisibility of finite  extension; which depends on that supposition. — But what need is there to insist on the particular sciences? Is not that opposition to all science whatsoever, that frenzy of the ancient and modern Sceptics, built on the same foundation? Or can you produce so much as one argument against the reality of corporeal things, or in behalf of that avowed utter ignorance of their natures, which doth not suppose their reality to consist in an external absolute existence? Upon this supposition, indeed, the objections from the change of colours in a pigeon’s neck, or the appearance of the broken oar in the water, must be allowed to have weight. But these and the like objections vanish, if we do not maintain the being of absolute external originals, but place the reality of things in ideas, fleeting indeed, and changeable; — however, not changed at random, but according to the fixed order of nature. For, herein consists that constancy and truth of things which secures all the concerns of life, and distinguishes that which is real from the irregular visions of the fancy.

Hyl. I agree to all you have now said, and must own that nothing can incline me to embrace your opinion more than the advantages I see it is attended with. I am by nature lazy; and this would be a mighty abridgment in knowledge. What doubts, what hypotheses, what labyrinths of amusement, what fields of disputation, what an ocean of false learning, may be avoided by that single notion of Immaterialism !

Phil. After all, is there anything farther remaining to be done? You may remember you promised to embrace that opinion which upon examination should appear most agreeable to Common Sense and remote from Scepticism. This, by your own confession, is that which denies Matter, or the absolute existence of corporeal things. Nor is this all; the same notion has been proved several ways, viewed in different lights, pursued in its consequences, and all objections against it cleared. Can there be a greater evidence of its truth? or is it possible it should have all the marks of a true opinion and yet be false?

Hyl. I own myself entirely satisfied for the present in all respects. But, what security can I have that I shall still continue the same full assent to your opinion, and that no unthought-of objection or difficulty will occur hereafter?

Phil. Pray, Hylas, do you in other cases, when a point is once evidently proved, withhold your consent on account of objections or difficulties it may be liable to? Are the difficulties that attend the doctrine of incommensurable quantities, of the angle of contact, of the asymptotes to curves, or the like, sufficient to make you hold out against mathematical demonstration? Or will you disbelieve the Providence of God, because there may be some particular things which you know not how to reconcile with it? If there are difficulties attending Immaterialism , there are at the same time direct and evident proofs of it. But for the existence of Matter there is not one proof, and far more numerous and insurmountable objections lie against it. But where are those mighty difficulties you insist on? Alas! you know not where or what they are; something which may possibly occur hereafter. If this be a sufficient pretence for withholding your full assent, you should never yield it to any proposition, how free soever from exceptions, how clearly and solidly soever demonstrated.

Hyl. You have satisfied me, Philonous.

Phil. But, to arm you against all future objections, do but consider: That which bears equally hard on two contradictory opinions can be proof against neither. Whenever, therefore, any difficulty occurs, try if you can find a solution for it on the hypothesis of the Materialists . Be not deceived by words; but sound your own thoughts. And in case you cannot conceive it easier by the help of Materialism , it is plain it can be no objection against Immaterialism . Had you proceeded all along by this rule, you would probably have spared yourself abundance of trouble in objecting; since of all your difficulties I challenge you to shew one that is explained by Matter: nay, which is not more unintelligible with than without that supposition; and consequently makes rather against than for  it. You should consider, in each  particular, whether the difficulty arises from the non-existence of Matter . If it doth not, you might as well argue from the infinite divisibility of extension against the Divine prescience, as from such a difficulty against Immaterialism . And yet, upon recollection, I believe you will find this to have been often, if not always, the case. You should likewise take heed not to argue on a petitio principii . One is apt to say — The unknown substances ought to be esteemed real things, rather than the ideas in our minds: and who can tell but the unthinking external substance may concur, as a cause or instrument, in the productions of our ideas? But is not this proceeding on a supposition that there are such external substances? And to suppose this, is it not begging the question? But, above all things, you should beware of imposing on yourself by that vulgar sophism which is called ignoratio clenchi . You talked often as if you thought I maintained the non-existence of Sensible Things. Whereas in truth no one can be more thoroughly assured of their existence than I am. And it is you who doubt; I should have said, positively deny it. Everything that is seen, felt, heard, or any way perceived by the senses, is, on the principles I embrace, a real being; but not on yours. Remember, the Matter you contend for is an Unknown Somewhat (if indeed it may be termed somewhat ), which is quite stripped of all sensible qualities, and can neither be perceived by sense, nor apprehended by the mind. Remember, I say, that it is not any object which is hard or soft, hot or cold, blue or white, round or square, &c. For all these things I affirm do exist. Though indeed I deny they have an existence distinct from being perceived; or that they exist out of all minds whatsoever. Think on these points; let them be attentively considered and still kept in view. Otherwise you will not comprehend the state of the question; without which your objections will always be wide of the mark, and, instead of mine, may possibly be directed (as more than once they have been) against your own notions.

Hyl. I must needs own, Philonous, nothing seems to have kept me from agreeing with you more than this same mistaking the question  . In denying Matter, at first glimpse I am tempted to imagine you deny the things  we see and feel: but, upon reflexion, find there is no ground for it. What think you, therefore, of retaining the name Matter , and applying it to sensible things ? This may be done without any change in your sentiments: and, believe me, it would be a means of reconciling them to some persons who may be more shocked at an innovation in words than in opinion.

Phil. With all my heart: retain the word Matter, and apply it to the objects of sense, if you please; provided you do not attribute to them any subsistence distinct from their being perceived. I shall never quarrel with you for an expression. Matter , or material substance , are terms introduced by philosophers; and, as used by them, imply a sort of independency, or a subsistence distinct from being perceived by a mind: but are never used by common people; or, if ever, it is to signify the immediate objects of sense. One would think, therefore, so long as the names of all particular things, with the terms sensible , substance , body , stuff , and the like, are retained, the word Matter should be never missed in common talk. And in philosophical discourses it seems the best way to leave it quite out: since there is not, perhaps, any one thing that hath more favoured and strengthened the depraved bent of the mind towards Atheism than the use of that general confused term.

Hyl. Well but, Philonous, since I am content to give up the notion of an unthinking substance exterior to the mind, I think you ought not to deny me the privilege of using the word Matter as I please, and annexing it to a collection of sensible qualities subsisting only in the mind. I freely own there is no other substance, in a strict sense, than Spirit . But I have been so long accustomed to the term Matter that I know not how to part with it: to say, there is no Matter in the world, is still shocking to me. Whereas to say — There is no Matter , if by that term be meant an unthinking substance existing without the mind; but if by Matter is meant some sensible thing, whose existence consists in being perceived, then there is Matter : — this distinction gives it quite another turn; and men will come into your notions with small difficulty, when they are proposed in that manner. For, after all, the controversy about Matter  in the strict acceptation of it, lies altogether  between you and the philosophers: whose principles, I acknowledge, are not near so natural, or so agreeable to the common sense of mankind, and Holy Scripture, as yours. There is nothing we either desire or shun but as it makes, or is apprehended to make, some part of our happiness or misery. But what hath happiness or misery, joy or grief, pleasure or pain, to do with Absolute Existence; or with unknown entities, abstracted from all relation to us ? It is evident, things regard us only as they are pleasing or displeasing: and they can please or displease only so far forth as they are perceived. Farther, therefore, we are not concerned; and thus far you leave things as you found them. Yet still there is something new in this doctrine. It is plain, I do not now think with the philosophers; nor yet altogether with the vulgar. I would know how the case stands in that respect; precisely, what you have added to, or altered in my former notions.

Phil. I do not pretend to be a setter-up of new notions. My endeavours tend only to unite, and place in a clearer light, that truth which was before shared between the vulgar and the philosophers: — the former being of opinion, that those things they immediately perceive are the real things ; and the latter, that the things immediately perceived are ideas, which exist only in the mind . Which two notions put together, do, in effect, constitute the substance of what I advance.

Hyl. I have been a long time distrusting my senses: methought I saw things by a dim light and through false glasses. Now the glasses are removed and a new light breaks in upon my understanding. I am clearly convinced that I see things in their native forms, and am no longer in pain about their unknown natures or absolute existence  . This is the state I find myself in at present; though, indeed, the course that brought me to it I do not  yet thoroughly comprehend. You set out upon the same principles that Academics, Cartesians, and the like sects usually do; and for a long time it looked as if you were advancing their philosophical Scepticism: but, in the end, your conclusions are directly opposite to theirs.

Phil. You see, Hylas, the water of yonder fountain, how it is forced upwards, in a round column, to a certain height; at which it breaks, and falls back into the basin from whence it rose: its ascent, as well as descent, proceeding from the same uniform law or principle of gravitation. Just so, the same Principles which, at first view, lead to Scepticism, pursued to a certain point, bring men back to Common Sense.

 An Essay towards Preventing the Ruin of Great Britain (1721) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

1752 TEXT

Avaritia fidem, probitatem, caeterasque artes bonas subvertit: pro his superbiam, crudelitatem, deos negligere, omnia venalia habere, edocuit.

SALLUST.

Ii qui per largitionem magistratus adepti sunt, dederunt operam ut ita potestatem gererent, ut illam lacunam rei familiaris explerent.

CICERO.

Omnes aut de honoribus suis, aut de praemiis pecuniae, aut de persequendis inimicis agebant.

CAESAR.

First Printed in London,

A. D. MDCCXXI.

AN ESSAY TOWARDS PREVENTING THE RUIN OF GREAT-BRITAIN. [image "img71.jpg" file=Image00070.jpg] 

W HETHER THE P ROSPERITY that preceded, or the Calamities that succeed the South Sea Project have most contributed to our undoing, is not so clear a Point as it is that we are actually undone, and lost to all Sense of our true Interest; nothing less than this could render it pardonable, to have Recourse to those old fashioned trite Maxims concerning Religion, Industry, Frugality, and public Spirit, which are now forgotten, but if revived and put in practice, may not only prevent our final Ruin, but also render us a more happy and flourishing People than ever.

Religion hath in former Days been cherished and reverenced by wise Patriots and Lawgivers, as knowing it to be impossible that a Nation should thrive and flourish without Virtue, or that Virtue should subsist: without Conscience, or Conscience without Religion: insomuch that an Atheist or Infidel was looked on with Abhorrence, and treated as an Enemy to his Country. But in these wiser Times, a cold Indifference for the national Religion, and indeed for all Matters of Faith and divine Worship, is thought good Sense. It is even become fashionable to decry Religion; and that little Talent of Ridicule is applied to such wrong Purposes, that a good Christian can hardly keep himself in Countenance.

Liberty is the greatest human Blessing that a virtuous Man can possess, and is very consistent with the Duties of a good Subject and a good Christian, but the present Age aboundeth with injudicious Patrons of Liberty, who not distinguishing between that and Licentiousness, take the surest Method to discredit what they would seem to propagate; for, in effect, can there be a greater Affront offered to that just Freedom of Thought and Action, which is the Prerogative of a rational Creature, or can any Thing recommend it less to honest Minds than under Colour thereof to obtrude Scurrility and Profaneness on the World? But it hath been always observed of weak Men, that they know not how to avoid one Extreme without running into another.

Too many of this Sort pass upon vulgar Readers for great Authors, and Men of profound Thought, not on account of any Superiority either in Sense or Stile, both which they possess in a very moderate Degree, nor of any Discoveries they have made in Arts and Sciences, which they seem to be little acquainted with: but purely because they flatter the Passions of corrupt Men, who are pleased to have the Clamours of Conscience silenced, and those great Points of the Christian Religion made suspected, which withheld them from many Vices of Pleasure and Interest, or made them uneasy in the Commission of them.

In order to promote that laudable Design of effacing all Sense of Religion from among us, they form themselves into Assemblies, and proceed with united Counsels and Endeavours; with what Success, and with what Merit towards the Public, the Effect too plainly shews; I will not say, these Gentlemen have formed a direct Design to ruin their Country, or that they have the Sense to see half the ill Consequences, which must necessarily flow from the spreading of their Opinions, but the Nation feels them, and it is high time the Legislature put a stop to them.

I am not for placing an invidious Power in the Hands of the Clergy, or complying with the narrowness of any mistaken Zealots, who should incline to persecute Dissenters: but whatever Conduct, common Sense, as well as Christian Charity obligeth us to use, towards those who differ from us in some Points of Religion, yet the public Safety requireth, that the avowed Contemners of all Religion should be severely chastised, and perhaps it may be no easy matter to assign a good Reason why Blasphemy against God should not be inquired into, and punished with the same Rigour as Treason against the King.

For though we may attempt to patch up our Affairs, yet it will be to no Purpose, the Finger of God will unravel all our vain Projects, and make them Snares to draw us into greater Calamities, if we do not reform that scandalous Libertinism which (whatever some shallow Men may think) is our worst Symptom and the surest Prognostic of our Ruin.

Industry is the natural sure Way to Wealth; this is so true, that it is impossible an industrious free People should want the Necessaries and Comforts of Life, or an idle enjoy them under any Form of Government. Money is so far useful to the Public, as it promoteth Industry, and Credit having the same Effect, is of the same Value with Money; but Money or Credit circulating through a Nation from hand to hand without producing Labour and Industry in the Inhabitants, is direct Gaming.

It is not impossible for cunning Men to make such plausible Schemes, as may draw those who are less skilful into their own and the public Ruin. But surely there is no Man of Sense and Honesty, but must see and own, whether he understands the Game or not, that it is an evident Folly for any People, instead of prosecuting the old honest Methods of Industry and Frugality, to sit down to a public Gaming-table, and play off their Money one to another.

The more Methods there are in a State for acquiring Riches without Industry or Merit, the less there will be of either in that State; this is as evident as the Ruin that attends it. Besides, when Money is shifted from hand to hand in such a blind fortuitous Manner, that some Men shall from nothing in an instant acquire vast Estates, without the least Desert; while others are as suddenly stript of plentiful Fortunes, and left on the Parish by their own Avarice and Credulity, what can be hoped for on the one hand, but abandoned Luxury and Wantonness, or on the other, but extreme Madness and Despair.

In short, all Project for growing rich by sudden and extraordinary Methods, as they operate violently on the Passions of Men, and encourage them to despise the slow moderate Gains that are to be made by an honest Industry, must be ruinous to the Public, and even the Winners themselves will at length be involved in the public Ruin.

It is an easy matter to contrive Projects for the Encouragement of Industry; I wish it were as easy to persuade Men to put them in Practice. There is no Country in Europe where there is so much Charity collected for the Poor, and none where it is so ill managed. If the Poor-tax was fixed at a Medium in every Parish, taken from a Calculation of the last ten Years, and raised for seven Years by Act of Parliament, that Sum (if the common Estimate be not very wrong) frugally and prudently laid out in Work-houses, would for ever free the Nation from the Care of providing for the Poor, and at the same time considerably improve our Manufactures. We might by these means rid our Streets of Beggars, even the Children, the maimed and the blind, might be put in a way of doing something for their Livelihood. As for the small Number of those, who by Age or Infirmities are utterly incapable of all Employment, they might be maintained by the Labour of others; and the Public would receive no small Advantage from the Industry of those, who are now so great a Burden and Expence to it.

The same Tax, continued three Years longer, might be very usefully employed in making high Roads, and rendering Rivers navigable, two Things of so much Profit and Ornament to a Nation, that we seem the only People in Europe Who have neglected them. So that in the space of ten Years the Public may be for ever freed from a heavy Tax, Industry encouraged, Commerce facilitated, and the whole Country improved, and all this only by a frugal honest Management, without raising one Peny extraordinary.

The Number of People is both Means and Motives to Industry; it should therefore be of great use to encourage Propagation, by allowing some Reward or Privilege to those who have a certain Number of Children; and on the other hand, enacting that the Public shall inherit half the unintailed Estates of all who die unmarried of either Sex.

Besides the immediate End proposed by the foregoing Methods, they furnish Taxes upon Passengers, and dead Bachelors, which are in no sort grievous to the Subject, and may be applied towards clearing the public Debt, which, all Mankind agree, highly concerneth the Nation in general, both Court and Country. Caesar indeed, mentions it as a Piece of Policy, that he borrowed Money from his Officers to bestow it on the Soldiers, which fixed both to his Interest; and though something like this may pass for Skill at certain Junctures in civil Government, yet if carried too far, it will prove a dangerous Experiment.

There is still Room for Invention or Improvement in most Trades and Manufactures, and it is probable, that Praemiums given on that Account to ingenious Artists, would soon be re-paid an hundred-fold to the Public. No Colour is so much wore in Italy, Spain, and Portugal as Black; but our black Cloth is neither so lasting, nor of so good a Dye as the Dutch, which is the Reason of their ingrossing the Profit of that Trade; this is so true, that I have known English Merchants abroad wear black Cloth of Holland themselves, and sell and recommend it as better than that of their own Country. It is commonly said the Water of Leyden hath a peculiar Property for colouring Black, but it hath been also said and passed current, that good Glasses may be made no where but at Venice, and there only in the Island of Murano: which was attributed to some peculiar Property in the Air; and we may possibly find other Opinions of that sort to be as groundless, should the Legislature think it worth while to propose Praemiums in the foregoing, or in the like Cases of general Benefit to the Public; but I remember to have seen, about seven Years ago, a Man pointed at in a Coffee-House, who (they said) had first introduced the right scarlet Dye among us, by which the Nation in general, as well as many private Persons, have since been great Gainers though he was himself a Beggar, who, if this be true, deserved an honourable Maintenance from the Public.

There are also several Manufactures which we have from abroad, that may be carried on to as great Perfection here as elsewhere. If it be considered that more fine Linen is wore in Great-Britain than in any other Country of Europe, it will be difficult to assign a Reason why Paper may not be made here as good, and in the same Quantity, as in Holland, or France, or Genoa. This is a Manufacture of great Consumption, and would save much to the Public. The like may be said of Tapestry, Lace, and other Manufactures, which is set on foot in cheap Parts of the Country, would employ many Hands, and save Money to the Nation, as well as bring it from abroad. Projects for improving old Manufactures, or setting up new ones, should not be despised in a trading Country, but the making them Pretences for Stockjobbing hath been a fatal Imposition.

As Industry dependeth upon Trade, and this, as well as the public Security, upon our Navigation, it concerneth the Legislature to provide, that the Number of our Sailors do not decrease, to which it would very much conduce, if a Law were made prohibiting the Payment of Sailors in foreign Parts; for it is usual with those on board Merchant-Men as soon as they set foot on Shore to receive their Pay, which is soon spent in riotous Living; and when they have emptied their Pockets, the Temptation of a Pistole present Money, never faileth to draw them into any foreign Service. To this, (if I may credit the Information I have had from some English Factors abroad) it is chiefly owing, that the Venetians, Spaniards, and others, have so many English on board their Ships; some Merchants indeed and Masters of Vessels may make a Profit in defrauding those poor Wretches when they pay them in strange Coin (which I have been assured often amounts to twelve Pence in the Crown) as well as in ridding themselves of the Charge of keeping them when they sell their Ships, or stay long in Port, but the Public lose both the Money and the Men; who, if their Arrears were to be cleared at home, would be sure to return, and spend them in their own Country: It is a Shame this Abuse should not be remedied.

Frugality of Manners is the Nourishment and Strength of Bodies politic. It is that by which they grow and subsist, until they are corrupted by Luxury; the natural Cause of their Decay and Ruin. Of this we have Examples in the Persians, Lacedaemonians, and Romans: not to mention many later Governments which have sprung up, continued a while, and then perished by the same natural Causes. But these are, it seems, of no use to us; and, in spite of them, we are in a fair Way of becoming ourselves, another useless Example to future Ages.

Men are apt to measure national Prosperity by Riches, it would be righter to measure it by the Use that is made of them. Where they promote an honest Commerce among Men, and are Motives to Industry and Virtue, they are without doubt of great Advantage; but where they are made (as too often happens) an Instrument to Luxury, they enervate and dispirit the bravest People. So just is that Remark of Machiavel, that there is no Truth in the common Saying, Money is the Nerves of War; and though we may subsist tolerably for a Time among corrupt Neighbours, yet if ever we have to do with a hardy, temperate, religious Sort of Men, we shall find to our Cost, that all our Riches are but a poor Exchange for that Simplicity of Manners which we despise in our Ancestors. This sole Advantage hath been the main Support of all the Republics that have made a Figure in the World; and perhaps it might be no ill Policy in a Kingdom to form itself upon the Manners of a Republic.

Simplicity of Manners may be more easily preserved in a Republic than a Monarchy; but if once lost, may be sooner recovered in a Monarchy, the Example of a Court being of great Efficacy, either to reform or to corrupt a People; that alone were sufficient to discountenance the wearing of Gold or Silver, either in Cloaths or Equipage, and it the same were prohibited by Law, the saving so much Bullion would be the smallest Benefit of such an Institution; there being nothing more apt to debase the Virtue and good Sense of our Gentry of both Sexes, than the trifling Vanity of Apparel, which we have learned from France, and which hath had such visible ill Consequences on the Genius of that People. Wiser Nations have made it their Care to shut out this Folly by severe Laws and Penalties, and its spreading among us can forbode no good, if there be any Truth in the Observation of one of the Ancients, that the direct Way to ruin a Man is to dress him up in fine Cloaths.

It cannot be denied that Luxury of Dress giveth a light Behaviour to our Women, which may pass for a small Offence, because it is a common one, but is in truth the Source of great Corruptions. For this very Offence the Prophet Isaiah denounced a severe Judgment against the Ladies of his Time. I shall give the Passage at length;

‘Moreover, the LORD saith, because the Daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth Necks and wanton Eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a Tinkling with their Feet; therefore the LORD will smite with a Scab the Crown of the Head of the Daughters of Zion, and the LORD will discover their secret Parts. In that Day the Lord will take away the Bravery of their tinkling Ornaments about their Feet, and their Cauls, and their round Tires like the Moon, the Chains, and the Bracelets, and the Mufflers, the Bonnets, and the Ornaments of the Legs, and the Head-bands, and the Tablets, and the Earrings, the Rings, and Nose jewels, the changeable Suits of Apparel, and the Mantles, and the Wimples, and the crisping Pins, the Glasses, and the fine Linen, and the Hoods and the Vails. And it shall come to pass that instead of a sweet Smell there shall be a Stink; and instead of a Girdle a Rent; and instead of well-set Hair, Baldness; and instead of a Stomacher, a Girding of Sackcloth; and Burning instead of Beauty:’

The Scab, the Stench, and the Burning are terrible pestilential Symptoms, and our Ladies would do well to consider, they may chance to resemble those of Zion, in their Punishment as well as their Offence.

But Dress is not the only Thing to be reformed, sumptuary Laws are useful in many other Points. In former Times the natural Plainness and good Sense of the English made them less necessary. But ever since the luxurious Reign of King Charles the second, we have been doing violence to our Natures, and are by this time so much altered for the worse, that it is to be feared, the very same Dispositions that make them necessary, will for ever hinder them from being enacted or put in Execution.

A private Family in difficult Circumstances, all Men agree, ought to melt down their Plate, walk on Foot, retrench the Number of their Servants, wear neither Jewels nor rich Cloaths, and deny themselves expensive Diversions; and why not the Public? had any Thing like this been done, our Taxes had been less, or which is the same thing, we should have felt them less. But it is very remarkable, that Luxury was never at so great a Height, nor spread so generally through the Nation, as during the Expence of the late Wars, and the heavy Debt that still lieth upon us.

This Vice draweth after it a Train of Evils which cruelly infest the Public; Faction, Ambition, Envy, Avarice, and that of the worst kind, being much more hurtful in its Consequences, though not so infamous as Penury. It was the great Art of Cardinal Richelieu, by encouraging Luxury and Expence to impoverish the French Nobility, and render them altogether dependent on the Crown, which hath been since very successfully effected. These and many more Considerations shew the Necessity there is for sumptuary Laws, nor can any thing be said against them in this Island, which might not with equal Force be objected in other Countries, which have nevertheless judged the public Benefit of such Institutions, to be of far greater Importance than the short Sufferings of a few, who subsist by the Luxury of others.

It is evident, that old Taxes may be better born, as well as new ones raised by sumptuary Laws judiciously framed, not to damage our Trade, but retrench our Luxury. It is evident, that for want of these, Luxury (which, like the other Fashions, never faileth to descend) hath infected all Ranks of People, and that this enableth the Dutch and French to undersell us, to the great Prejudice of our Traffic. We cannot but know that in our present Circumstances, it should be our Care, as it is our Interest to make Poverty tolerable; in short we have the Experience of many Ages to convince us, that a corrupt luxurious People must of themselves fall into Slavery, although no Attempt be made upon them. These and the like obvious Reflections should, one would think, have forced any People in their Senses upon frugal Measures.

But we are doomed to be undone. Neither the plain Reason of the Thing, nor the Experience of past Ages, nor the Examples we have before our Eyes, can restrain us from imitating, not to say surpassing, the most corrupt and ruined People, in those very Points of Luxury that ruined them. Our Gaming, our Operas, our Maskerades, are, in spite of our Debts and Poverty, become the Wonder of our Neighbours. If there be any Man so void of all Thought and common Sense, as not to see where this must end, let him but compare what Venice was at the League of Cambray, with what it is at present, and he will be convinced, how truly those fashionable Pastimes are calculated to depress and ruin a Nation.

But neither Venice nor Paris, nor any other Town in any Part of the World, ever knew such an expensive ruinous Folly as our Maskerade. This alone is sufficient to inflame and satisfy the several Appetites for Gaming, Dressing, Intriguing, luxurious Eating and Drinking. It is a most skilful Abridgment, the very Quintessence, the abstract of all those senseless Vanities, that have ever been the Ruin of Fools and Detestation of wise Men. And all this under the Notion of an elegant Entertainment, hath been admitted among us; though it be in truth a Contagion of the worst Kind. The Plague, dreadful as it is, is an Evil of short duration; Cities have often recovered and flourished after it; but when was it known that a People broken and corrupt by Luxury recovered themselves? not to say, that general Corruption of Manners never faileth to draw after it some heavy Judgment of War, Famine, or Pestilence. Of this we have a fresh Instance in one of the most debauched Towns of Europe, and no Body knows how soon it may be our own Case. This elegant Entertainment is indeed suspended for the present, but there remains so strong a Propension towards it, that, if the Wisdom of the Legislature does not interpose, it will soon return with the additional Temptation of having been forbid for a Time. It were stupid and barbarous to declaim against keeping up the Spirit of the People by proper Diversions, but then they should be proper, such as polish and improve their Mind, or increase the Strength and Activity of their Bodies; none of which Ends are answered by the Maskerade, no more than by those French and Italian Follies, which, to our Shame, are imported and encouraged at a Time, when the Nation ought to be too grave for such Trifles.

It is not to be believed, what Influence public Diversions have on the Spirit and Manners of a People. The Greeks wisely saw this, and made a very serious Affair of their public Sports. For the same Reason, it will perhaps seem worthy the Care of our Legislature, to regulate the public Diversions, by an absolute Prohibition of those which have a direct Tendency to corrupt our Morals, as well as by a Reformation of the Drama; which, when rightly managed, is such a noble Entertainment, and gave those fine Lessons of Morality and good Sense to the Athenians of old, and to our British Gentry above a Century ago; but for these last ninety Years, hath entertained us, for the most part, with such wretched Things as spoil, instead of improving the Taste and Manners of the Audience. Those who are attentive to such Propositions only, as may fill their Pockets, will probably slight these Things as Trifles below the Care of the Legislature. But I am sure, all honest thinking Men must lament to see their Country run headlong into all those luxurious Follies, which, it is evident, have been fatal to other Nations, and will undoubtedly prove fatal to us also, if a timely Stop be not put to them.

Public Spirit, that glorious Principle of all that is great and good, is so far from being cherished or encouraged, that it is become ridiculous in this enlightened Age, which is taught to laugh at every Thing that is serious as well as sacred. The same atheistical narrow Spirit, centring all our Cares upon private Interest, and contracting all our Hopes within the Enjoyment of this present Life, equally produceth a Neglect of what we owe to God and our Country. Tully hath long since observed,

“that it is impossible for those, who have no Belief of the Immortality of the Soul or a future State of Rewards and Punishments, to sacrifice their particular Interests and Passions to the public Good, or have a generous Concern for Posterity,”

and our own Experience confirmeth the Truth of this Observation.

In order therefore to recover a Sense of public Spirit, it is to be wished that Men were first affected with a true Sense of Religion; pro aris & focis, having ever been the great Motive to Courage and Perseverance in a public Cause.

It would likewise be a very useful Policy, and warranted by the Example of the wisest Governments, to make the natural Love of Fame and Reputation subservient to promoting that noble Principle. Triumphal Arches, Columns, Statues, Inscriptions, and the like Monuments of public Services, have in former Times been found great Incentives to Virtue and Magnanimity, and would probably have the same Effects on Englishmen which they have had on Greeks and Romans. And perhaps a Pillar of Infamy would be found a proper and exemplary Punishment in Cases of signal public Villany, where the Loss of Fortune, Liberty, or Life, are not proportioned to the Crime; or, where the Skill of the Offender, or the Nature of his Offence, may skreen him from the Letter of the Law.

 Several of these are to be seen at Genoa, Milan, and other Towns of Italy, where it is the Custom to demolish the House of a Citizen, who hath conspired the Ruin of his Country, or been guilty of any enormous Crime towards the Public, and in place thereof to erect a Monument of the Crime, and Criminal described, in the blackest manner. We have nothing of this sort, that I know, but that which is commonly called the Monument, which in the last Age was erected for an Affair no way more atrocious than the modern unexampled Attempt of Men easy in their Fortunes, and unprovoked by Hardships of any sort, in cool Blood, and with open Eyes to ruin their native Country. This Fact will never be forgotten, and it were to be wished that with it the public Detestation thereof may be transmitted to Posterity, which would in some measure vindicate the Honour of the present, and be a useful Lesson to future Ages.

Those noble Arts of Architecture, Sculpture, and Paintings do not only adorn the Public, but have also an Influence on the Minds and Manners of Men, filling them with great Ideas, and spiriting them up to an Emulation of worthy Actions. For this Cause they were cultivated and encouraged by the Greek Cities, who vied with each other in building and adorning their Temples, Theatres, Porticos, and the like public Works, at the same Time that they discouraged private Luxury, the very Reverse of our Conduct.

To propose the building a Parliament House, Courts of Justice, Royal Palace, and other public Edifices, suitable to the Dignity of the Nation, and adorning them with Paintings and Statues, which may transmit memorable Things and Persons to Posterity, would probably be laughed at as a vain Affair, of great Expence, and little Use to the Public; and it must be owned, we have reduced ourselves to such Straits, that any Proposition of Expence-suiteth ill with our present Circumstances. But how proper soever this Proposal may be for the Times, yet it comes so properly into a Discourse of public Spirit, that I could not but say something of it. And at another Time it will not seem unreasonable, if we consider that it is no more than the wisest Nations have done before us, that it would spirit up new Arts, employ many Hands, keep the Money circulating at home, and lastly, that it would be a notable Instance of public Spirit, as well as a Motive to it.

The same noble Principle may be also encouraged by erecting an Academy of ingenious Men, whose Employment it would be to compile the History of Great-Britain, to make Discourses proper to inspire Men with a Zeal for the Public, and celebrate the Memory of those who have been Ornaments to the Nation, or done it eminent Service. Not to mention that this would improve our Language, and amuse some busy Spirits of the Age; which perhaps would be no ill Policy.

This is not without Example; for to say nothing of the French Academy, which is prostituted to meaner Purposes, it hath been the Custom of the Venetian Senate to appoint one of their Order to continue the History of the Republic. This was introduced in the flourishing State of that People, and is still in force. We fall short of other Nations in the Number of good Historians, though no Nation in Christendom hath produced greater Events, or more worthy to be recorded. The Athenian Senate appointed Orators to commemorate annually, those who died in Defence of their Country, which Solemnity was performed at the Monuments erected in Honour of them by the Public; and the Panegyrics, composed by Isocrates and Pericles, as well as many Passages in Tully, inform us with what Pleasure the ancient Orators used to expatiate in Praise of their Country.

Concord and Union among ourselves is rather to be hoped for, as an Effect, of public Spirit, than proposed as a Means to promote it. Candid, generous Men, who are true Lovers of their Country, can never be Enemies to one half of their Countrymen, or carry their Resentment so far as to ruin the Public for the sake of a Party. Now I have fallen upon the mention of our Parties, I shall beg leave to insert a Remark or two, for the Service both of Whig and Tory, without entering into their respective Merits. First, it is impossible for either Party to ruin the other, without involving themselves and their Posterity in the same Ruin. Secondly, it is very feasible for either Paty to get the better of the other, if they could first get the better of themselves; and instead of indulging the little womanish Passions of Obstinacy, Resentment, and Revenge, steadily promote the true Interest of their Country, in those great clear Points of Piety, Industry, Sobriety of Manners, and an honest Regard for Posterity; which, all Men of Sense agree, are essential to public Happiness. There would be something so great and good in this Conduct, as must necessarily overbear all Calumny and Opposition. But that Men should act reasonably, is rather to be wished than hoped.

I am well aware, that to talk of public Spirit, and the Means of retrieving it, must to narrow sordid Minds be matter of Jest and Ridicule, how conformable soever it be to right Reason, and the Maxims of Antiquity. Though one would think, the most selfish Man might see it was their Interest to encourage a Spirit in others, by which they, to be sure, must be Gainers. Yet such is the Corruption and Folly of the present Age, that a public Spirit is treated like Ignorance of the World, and want of Sense; and all the Respect is paid to cunning Men, who bend and wrest the public Interest to their own private Ends, that in other Times hath been thought due to those who were generous enough to sacrifice their private Interest to that of their Country.

Such Practices and such Maxims as these must necessarily ruin a State. But if the contrary should prevail, we may hope to see Men in Power prefer the public Wealth and Security to their own, and Men of Money make free Gifts, or lend it without Interest to their Country. This, how strange and incredible soever it may seem to us, hath been often done in other States. And the natural English Temper considered, together with the Force of Example, no one can tell how far a Proposal for a free Gift may go among the moneyed Men, when set on foot by the Legislature, and encouraged by the Example of two or three Men of Figure, who have the Spirit to do a generous Thing, and the Understanding to see it is every private Man’s Interest to support that of the Public.

If they who have their Fortunes in Money should make a voluntary Gift, the Public would be eased, and at the same time maintain its Credit. Nor is a generous Love of their Country the only Motive that should induce them to this. Common Equity requires, that all Subjects should equally share the public Burden. And common Sense shews, that those who are foremost in the Danger, should not be the most backward in contributing to prevent it.

Before I leave this Subject, I cannot but take notice of that most infamous Practice of Bribery, than which nothing can be more opposite to public Spirit, since every one who takes a Bribe plainly owns, that he prefers his private Interest to that of his Country. This Corruption is become a national Crime, having infected the lowest as well as the highest among us, and is so general and notorious, that, as it cannot be matched in former Ages, so it is to be hoped it will not be imitated by Posterity.

This calls to mind another national Guilt, which we possess in a very eminent Degree; there being no Nation under the Sun, where solemn Perjury is so common, or where there are such Temptations to it. The making Men swear so often in their own Cases, and where they have an Interest to conceal the Truth, hath gradually wore off that awful Respect which was once thought due to an Appeal to Almighty God; insomuch, that Men now a Days break their Fast, and a Custom-House Oath with the same Peace of Mind. It is a Policy peculiar to us, the obliging Men to perjure or betray themselves, and hath had no one good Effect, but many very ill ones. Sure I am, that other Nations, without the hundredth Part of our Swearing, contrive to do their Business, at least as well as we do. And perhaps our Legislature will think it proper to follow their Example. For whatever Measures are taken, so long as we lie under such a Load of Guilt, as national Perjury and national Bribery, it is impossible we can prosper.

This poor Nation hath sorely smarted of late, and to ease the present Smart, a sudden Remedy (as is usual in such Cases) hath been thought of. But we must beware not to mistake an Anodyne for a Cure. Where the Vitals are touched, and the whole Mass of Humours vitiated, it is not enough to ease the Part pained, we must look further, and apply general Correctives; otherwise the ill Humour may soon shew itself in some other Part.

The South-Sea Affair, how sensible soever, is not the original Evil, or the great Source of our Misfortunes, it is but the natural Effect of those Principles, which for many Years have been propagated with great Industry. And as a sharp Distemper, by reclaiming a Man from Intemperance, may prolong his Life, so it is not impossible but this public Calamity that lies so heavy on the Nation may prevent its Ruin. It would certainly prove the greatest of Blessings, if it should make all honest Men of one Party; if it should put Religion and Virtue in Countenance, restore a Sense of public Spirit, and convince Men it is a dangerous Folly to pursue private Aims in Opposition to the Good of their Country, if it should turn our Thoughts from Cozenage and Stock-jobbing, to Industry and frugal Methods of Life; in fine, if it should revive and inflame that native Spark of British Worth and Honour, which hath too long lain smothered and oppressed.

With this View I have, among so many Projects for remedying the ill State of our Affairs in a particular Instance, ventured to publish the foregoing general Hints, which as they have been thrown together from a Zeal for the public Good, so I heartily wish they may be regarded neither more nor less, than as they are fitted to promote that End.

Though it must be owned, that little can be hoped if we consider the corrupt degenerate Age we live in. I know it is an old Folly to make peevish Complaints of the Times, and charge the common Failures of human Nature on a particular Age. One may nevertheless venture to affirm, that the present hath brought forth new and portentous Villanies, not to be paralleled in our own or any other History. We have been long preparing for some great Catastrophe. Vice and Villany have by degrees grown reputable among us; our Infidels have passed for fine Gentlemen, and our venal Traitors for Men of Sense, who knew the World. We have made a Jest of public Spirit, and cancelled all Respect for whatever our Laws and Religion repute sacred. The old English Modesty is quite worn off, and instead of blushing for our Crimes, we are ashamed only of Piety and Virtue. In short, other Nations have been wicked, but we are the first who have been wicked upon Principle.

The Truth is, our Symptoms are so bad, that notwithstanding all the Care and Vigilance of the Legislature, it is to be feared the final Period of our State approaches. Strong Constitutions, whether politic or natural, do not feel light Disorders. But, when they are sensibly affected, the Distemper is for the most part violent and of an ill Prognostic. Free Governments like our own were planted by the Goths in most Parts of Europe; and though we all know what they are come to, yet we seem disposed rather to follow their Example, than to profit by it.

Whether it be in the Order of Things, that civil States should have, like natural Products, their several Periods of Growth, Perfection, and Decay; or whether it be an Effect, as seems more probable, of human Folly, that as Industry produces Wealth, so Wealth should produce Vice, and Vice Ruin.

God grant the Time be not near, when Men shall say,

‘This Island was once inhabited by a religious, brave, sincere People, of plain uncorrupt Manners, respecting inbred Worth rather than Titles and Appearances, Assertors of Liberty, Lovers of their Country, jealous of their own Rights, and unwilling to infringe the Rights of others; Improvers of Learning and useful Arts, Enemies to Luxury, tender of other Mens Lives, and prodigal of their own; inferior in nothing to the old Greeks or Romans, and superior to each of those People in the Perfections of the other. Such were our Ancestors during their Rise and Greatness; but they degenerated, grew servile Flatterers of Men in Power, adopted Epicurean Notions, became venal corrupt, injurious, which drew upon them the Hatred of God and Man, and occasioned their final Ruin.’

 De Motu (1721) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

OXFORD CLARENDON PRESS 1901 TEXT

De motu: Sive; de motu principio et natura, et de causa communicationis motuum (On Motion: or The Principle and Nature of Motion and the Cause of the Communication of Motions) was first published in 1721. The essay was unsuccessfully submitted for a prize that had been offered by the Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris. In the text, Berkeley rejects Sir Isaac Newton’s absolute space, time and motion. He argues that we must pay attention to facts regarding things and their nature, not to words or to someone’s authority. The mind should be concerned with particular and concrete things themselves, not with abstract terms. The effects that are felt on our senses should be noticed. The causes of these effects are rationally inferred and are occult qualities.

To Berkeley, gravity and force are examples of occult qualities, yet they can be regarded as useful terms. Gravity can designate concrete bodies in motion and force can designate the concrete effort of resisting. However, they should not be used abstractly, separate from concrete, individual things. If no change occurs and there is no effect, then there is no force. Force, gravity, and attraction are mathematical, hypothetical abstractions and they are not found in nature as physical qualities. The parallelogram of composite forces is not a physical quality. It is mathematical. Attempts to explain the cause and origin of motion are abstract and obscure. They are not particular and determinate assertions. Such attempts try to explain the unknown by something that is even more unknown.

In the essay, Berkeley upholds that to determine the true nature of motion, we must follow three rules: (1) distinguish mathematical hypotheses from the nature of things; (2) beware of abstractions; (3) consider motion as sensible or imaginable and be content with relative measures.

 [image "img72.jpg" file=Image00071.jpg] 

Portrait of Sir Isaac Newton by Godfrey Kneller, 1689

CONTENTSEditor’s Preface to ‘De Motu’

 De Motu

 

 Editor’s Preface to ‘De Motu’ [image "img73.jpg" file=Image00072.jpg] 

T HIS L ATIN DISSERTATION on Motion, or change of place in the component atoms of the material world, was written in 1720, when Berkeley was returning to Ireland, after he had spent some years in Italy, on leave of absence from Trinity College. A prize for an essay on the “Cause of Motion,” had, it seems, been offered in that year by the Paris Academy of Sciences. The subject suggested an advance on the line of thought pursued in Berkeley’s Principles and Dialogues . The mind-dependent reality of the material world, prominent in those works, was in them insisted on, not as a speculative paradox, but mainly in order to shew the spiritual character of the Power that is continually at work throughout the universe. This essay on what was thus a congenial subject was finished at Lyons, and published early in 1721, soon after Berkeley arrived in London. It was reprinted in his Miscellany in 1752. I have not found evidence that it was ever submitted to the French Academy. At any rate the prize was awarded to Crousaz, the well-known logician and professor of philosophy at Lausanne.

The De Motu is interesting biographically as well as philosophically, as a revelation of Berkeley’s way of thinking about the causal relations of Matter and Spirit seven years after the publication of the Dialogues . In 1713 his experience of life was confined to Ireland. Now, after months in London, in the society of Swift, and Pope, and Addison, he had observed nature and men in France and Italy. His eager temperament and extraordinary social charm opened the way in those years of travel to frequent intercourse with famous men. This, for the time, superseded controversy with materialism and scepticism, and diverted his enthusiasm to nature and high art. One likes to see how he handles the old questions as they now arise in the philosophical treatment of motion in space, which was regarded by many as the key to all other phenomena presented in the material world.

For one thing, the unreality of the data of sense after total abstraction of living mind, the chief Principle in the earlier works, lies more in the background in the De Motu . Yet it is tacitly assumed, as the basis of an argument for the powerlessness of all sensible things, and for refunding all active power in the universe into conscious agency. Mens agitat molem might be taken as a motto for the De Motu . Then there is more frequent reference to scientific and philosophical authorities than in his more juvenile treatises. Plato and Aristotle are oftener in view. Italy seems to have introduced him to the physical science of Borelli and Torricelli. Leibniz, who died in 1716, when Berkeley was in Italy, is named by him for the first time in the De Motu  . Perhaps he had learned something when he was abroad about the most illustrious philosopher of the time. And it is interesting by the way to find in one of those years what is, I think, the only allusion to Berkeley by Leibniz. It is contained in one of the German philosopher’s letters to Des Bosses, in 1715. “Qui in Hybernia corporum  realitatem impugnat,” Leibniz writes, “videtur nec rationes afferre idoneas, nee mentem suam satis explicare. Suspicor esse ex eo hominum genere qui per Paradoxa cognosci volunt.” This sentence is interesting on account of the writer, although it suggests vague, and perhaps second-hand knowledge of the Irishman and his principles. The name of Hobbes does not appear in the De Motu . Yet one might have expected it, in consideration of the supreme place which motion takes in his system, which rests upon the principle that all changes in the universe may be resolved into change of place.

In the De Motu the favourite language of ideal realism is abandoned for the most part. “Bodies,” not “ideas of sense,” are contrasted with mind or spirit, although body still means significant appearance presented to the senses. Indeed the term idea occurs less often in this and the subsequent writings of Berkeley.

I will now give some account of salient features in the De Motu .

Like the Principles the tract opens with a protest against the empty abstractions, and consequent frivolous discussions, which even mechanical science had countenanced although dealing with matters so obvious to sense as the phenomena of motion. Force , effort , solicitation of gravity , nisus , are examples of abstract terms connected with motion, to which nothing in what is presented to the senses is found to correspond. Yet corporeal power is spoken of as if it were something perceptible by sense, and so found within the bodies we see and touch (sect. 1-3).

But it turns out differently when philosophers and naturalists try to imagine the physical force  that is supposed to inhabit bodies, and to explain their motions. The conception of motion has been the parent of innumerable paradoxes and seeming contradictions among ancient Greek thinkers; for it presents, in a striking form, the  metaphysical difficulties in the way of a reconciliation of the One and the Many — difficulties which Berkeley had already attributed to perverse abstractions, with which philosophers amused themselves and blocked up the way to concrete knowledge; first wantonly raising a dust, and then complaining that they could not see. Nor has modern mechanical science in this respect fared better than the old philosophies. Even its leaders, Torricelli, for instance, and Leibniz, offer us scholastic shadows — empty metaphysical abstractions — when they speak about an active power that is supposed to be lodged within the things of sense. Torricelli tells us that the forces within the things around us, and within our own bodies, are “subtle quintessences, enclosed in a corporeal substance as in the enchanted vase of Circe”; and Leibniz speaks of their active powers as their “substantial form,” whatever that can be conceived to mean. Others call the power to which change of place is due, the hylarchic principle, an appetite in bodies, a spontaneity inherent in them; or they assume that, besides their extension, solidity, and other qualities which appear in sense, there is also something named force, latent in them if not patent — in all which we have a flood of words, empty of concrete thought. At best the language is metaphorical (sect. 2-9).

For showing the active cause at work in the production of motion in bodies, it is of no avail to name, as if it were a datum of sense, what is not presentable to our senses. Let us, instead, turn to the only other sort of data in realised experience. For we find only two sorts of realities in experience, the one sort revealed by our senses, the other by inward consciousness. We can affirm nothing about the contents of bodies  except what our senses present, namely, concrete things, extended, figured, solid, having also innumerable other qualities, which seem all to depend upon change of place in the things, or in their constituent particles. The contents  of mind or spirit , on the other hand, are disclosed to inner consciousness, which reveals a sentient Ego that is actively percipient and exertive. And it must be in the second of these two concrete revelations of reality, that active causation, on which motion and all other change depends, is to be found — not in empty abstractions, covered by words like power , cause , force , or nisus , which correspond to nothing perceived by the senses (sect. 21).

So that which we call body presents within itself nothing in which change of place or state can originate causally. Extension, figure, solidity, and all the other perceptible constituents of bodies are appearances only — passive phenomena, which succeed one another in an orderly cosmical procession, on which doubtless our pains and pleasures largely depend. But there is no sensibly perceptible power found among those sensuous appearances. They can only be caused causes , adapted, as we presuppose, to signify to us what we may expect to follow that appearance. The reason of their significance, i.e. of the constancy of their sequences and coexistences, must be sought for outside of themselves . Experimental research may discover new terms among the correlated cosmical sequences or coexistences, but the newly discovered terms must still be only passive phenomena previously unperceived. Body means only what is presentable to the senses. Those who attribute to it something not perceptible by sense, which they call the force or power in which its motions originate, say in other words that the origin of motion is unknowable by sense (sect. 22-24).

 Turn now from things of sense, the data of perception, to Mind or Spirit, as revealed in inner consciousness. Here we have a deeper and more real revelation of what underlies, or is presupposed in, the passive cosmical procession that is presented to the senses. Our inward consciousness plainly shews the thinking being actually  exercising power to move its animated body. We find that we can, by a causal exertion of which we are distinctly conscious, either excite or arrest movements in bodies. In voluntary exertion we have thus a concrete example of force or power, producing and not merely followed by motion. In the case of human volition this is no doubt conditioned power; nevertheless it exemplifies Power on a greater scale than human, even Divine power, universally and continuously operative, in all natural motions, and in the cosmical laws according to which they proceed (sect. 25-30).

Thus those who pretend to find force or active causation within bodies, pretend to find what their sensuous experience does not support, and they have to sustain their pretence by unintelligible language. On the other hand, those who explain motion by referring it to conscious exertion of personal agents, say what is supported by their own consciousness, and confirmed by high authorities, including Anaxagoras, Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, and Newton, demonstrating that in Spirit only do we find power to change its own state, as well as the states and mutual relations of bodies. Motion in nature is God continuously acting (sect. 31-34). But physical science is conveniently confined to the order of the passive procession of sensuous appearances, including experiments in quest of the rules naturally exemplified in the motions of bodies: reasoning on mathematical and mechanical principles, it leaves the contemplation of active causation to a more exalted science (sect. 35-42).

In all this it can hardly be said that Berkeley has in this adequately sounded the depths of Causation. He proclaims inability to find through his senses more than sequence of significant sensuous appearances, which are each and all empty of active power; while he apparently insists that he has found active power in the mere  feeling of exertion ; which after all, as such, is only one sort of antecedent sign of the motion that is found to follow it. This is still only sequence of phenomena; not active power. But is not causation a relation that cannot be truly presented empirically, either in outer or inner consciousness? And is not the Divine order that is presupposed by us in all change, a presupposition that is inevitable in trustworthy intercourse with a changing universe; unless we are to confess atheistically , that our whole sensuous experience may in the end put us to utter confusion? The passive, uneasy feeling of strain, more or less involved in the effort to move our bodies and their surroundings, is no doubt apt to be confused with active causation; for as David Hume remarks, “the animal nisus which we experience, though it can afford no accurate precise idea of power, enters very much into the vulgar, inaccurate idea which is formed of it.” So when Berkeley supposes that he has found a concrete example of originating power in the nisus of which we are conscious when we move our bodies, he is surely too easily satisfied. The nisus followed by motion is, per se , only a natural sequence, a caused cause, which calls for an originating cause that is absolutely responsible for the movement. Is not the index to this absolutely responsible agency an ethical one, which points to a free moral agent as alone necessarily connected with, or responsible for, the changes which he can control? Persons are causally responsible for their own actions; and are accordingly pronounced good or evil on account of acts of will that are not mere caused causes — passively dependent terms in the endless succession of cosmical change. They must originate in self, be absolutely self-referable, in a word supernatural issues of the personality. Moral reason implies that they are not determined ab extra  , and so points to moral agents as our only concrete examples of independent power; but this only so far as those issues go for which they are morally  responsible. Is not faith in the Universal Power necessarily faith-venture in the absolutely perfect and trustworthy moral agency of God?

While the principle of Causation, in its application to change of place on the part of bodies and their constituent atoms, is the leading thought in the De Motu , this essay also investigates articulately the nature of the phenomenon which we call motion (sect. 43-66). It assumes that motion is only an effect, seeing that no one who reflects can doubt that what is presented to our senses in the case of motion is altogether passive: there is nothing in the successive appearance of the same body in different places that involves action on the part of either of the moving or the moved body, or that can be more than inert effect (sect. 49). And all concrete motion, it is assumed, must be something that can be perceived by our senses. Accordingly it must be a perceptible relation between bodies , as far as it is bodily: it could make no appearance at all if space contained only one solitary body: a plurality of bodies is indispensable to its appearance. Absolute motion of a solitary body, in otherwise absolutely empty space, is an unmeaning abstraction, a collocation of empty words. This leads into an inquiry about relative space as well as relative place, and the intelligibility of absolute space, place, and motion (sect. 52-64).

Local motion is unintelligible unless we understand the meaning of space  . Now some philosophers distinguish between absolute space, which with them is ultimately the only real space, and that which is conditioned by the senses, or relative. The former is said to be boundless, pervading and embracing the material world, but not itself presentable to our senses; the other is the space marked out or differentiated by bodies contained in it, and it is in this way exposed to our senses (sect. 52). What must remain after the annihilation of all bodies in the  universe is relativeless, undifferentiated, absolute space, of which all attributes are denied, even its so-called extension being neither divisible nor measurable; necessarily imperceptible by sense, unimaginable, and unintelligible, in every way unrealisable in experience; so that the words employed about it denote nothing (sect. 53).

It follows that we must not speak of the real space which a body occupies as part of a space that is necessarily abstracted from all sentient experience; nor of real motion as change within absolute space, without any relation between bodies, either perceived or conceived. All change of place in one body must be relative to other bodies, among which the moving body is supposed to change its place — our own bodies which we animate being of course recognised among the number. Motion, it is argued, is unintelligible, as well as imperceptible and unimaginable, without some relation between the moving body and at least one other body: the truth of this is tested when we try to suppose the annihilation of all other bodies, our own included, and retain only a solitary globe: absolute motion is found unthinkable. So that, on the whole, to see what motion means we must rise above the mathematical postulates that are found convenient in mechanical science; we must beware of empty abstractions; we must treat motion as something that is real only so far as it is presented to our senses, and remain modestly satisfied with the perceived relations under which it then appears (sect. 65-66).

 Finally, is motion, thus explained, something that can be spoken of as an entity communicable from one body to another body? May we think of it as a datum of sense existing in the striking body, and then passing from it into the struck body, the one losing exactly as much as the other receives? (sect. 67). Deeper thought finds in those questions only a revival of the previously  exploded postulate of “force” as something sensible , yet distinct from all the significant appearances sense presents. The language used may perhaps be permitted in mathematical hypotheses, or postulates of mechanical science, in which we do not intend to go to the root of things. But the obvious fact is, that the moving body shews less perceptible motion, and the moved body more. To dispute whether the perceptible motion acquired is numerically the same with that lost leads into frivolous verbal controversy about Identity and Difference, the One and the Many, which it was Berkeley’s aim to expel from science, and so to simplify its procedure and result. Whether we say that motion passes from the striking body into the struck, or that it is generated anew within the struck body and annihilated in the striking, we make virtually the same statement. In each way of expression the facts remain, that the one body presents perceptible increase of its motion and the other diminution. Mind or Spirit is the active cause of all that we then see. Yet in mechanical science — which explains things only physically, by shewing the significant connexion of events with their mechanical rules — terms which seem to imply the conveyance of motion out of one body into another may be pardoned, in consideration of the limits within which physical science is confined, and its narrower point of view. In physics we confine ourselves to the sensuous signs which arise in experience, and their natural interpretation, in all which mathematical hypotheses are found convenient; so that gravitation, for example, and other natural rules of procedure, are spoken of as causes of the events which conform to them, no account being taken of the Active Power that is ultimately responsible for the rules. For the Active Power in which we live, move, and have our being, is not a datum of sense; meditation brings it into light. But to pursue this thought would carry us beyond the physical laws of Motion (sect. 69-72).

The De Motu may be compared with what we found in the Principles   , sect. 25-28 and 101-117. The total powerlessness of the significant appearances presented to the senses, and the omnipotence of Mind in the economy of external nature, is its chief philosophical lesson.

 De Motu [image "img73.jpg" file=Image00072.jpg] 

1. A D VERITATEM inveniendam præcipuum est cavisse ne voces males intellectæ nobis officiant: quod omnes fere monent philosophi, pauci observant. Quanquam id quidem haud adeo difficile videtur, in rebus præsertim physicis tractandis, ubi locum habent sensus, experientia, et ratiocinium geometricum. Seposito igitur, quantum licet, omni præjudicio, tam a loquendi consuetudine quam a philosphorum auctoritate nato, ipsa rerum natura diligenter inspicienda. Neque enim cujusquam auctoritatem usque adeo valere oportet, ut verba ejus et voces in pretio sint, dummodo nihil clari et certi iis subesse comperiatur.

2. Motus contemplatio mire torsit veterum philosophorum mentes, unde natæ sunt variæ opiniones supra modem difficiles, ne dicam absurdæ; quæ, quum jam fere in desuetudinem abierint, haud merentur ut iis discutiendis nimio studio immoremur. Apud recentiores autem et saniores hujus ævi philosophos, ubi de Motu agitur, vocabula haud pauca abstractæ nimium et obscuræ significationis occurrunt, cujusmodi sunt solicitatio gravitatis , conatus , vires mortuæ  , &c., quæ scriptis, alioqui doctissimis, tenebras offundunt, sententiisque non minus a vero, quam a sensu hominum communi abhorrentibus, ortum præbent.  Hæc vero necesse est ut, veritatis gratia, non alios refellendi studio, accurate discutiantur.

3. Solicitatio et nisus , sive conatus , rebus solummodo animatis revera competunt. Cum aliis rebus tribuuntur, sensu metaphorico accipiantur necesse est. A metaphoris autem abstinendum philosopho. Porro, seclusa omni tarn animæ affectione quam corporis motione, nihil clari ac distincti iis vocibus significari, cuilibet constabit qui modo rem serio perpenderit.

4. Quamdiu corpora gravia a nobis sustinentur, sentimus in nobismet ipsis nisum, fatigationem, et molestiam. Percipimus etiam in gravibus cadentibus motum acceleratum versus centrum telluris; ope sensuum præterea nihil. Ratione tamen colligitur causam esse aliquam vel principium horum phænomenon; illud autem gravitas vulgo nuncupatur. Quoniam vero causa descensus gravium cæca sit et incognita, gravitas ea acceptione proprie dici nequit qualitas sensibilis; est igitur qualitas occulta. Sed vix, et ne vix quidem, concipere licet quid sit qualitas occulta, aut qua ratione qualitas ulla agere aut operari quidquam possit. Melius itaque foret, si, missa qualitate occulta, homines attenderent solummodo ad effectus sensibiles; vocibusque abstractis (quantumvis illæ ad disserendum utiles sint) in meditatione omissis, mens in particularibus et concretis, hoc est in ipsis rebus, defigeretur.

5. Vis similiter corporibus tribuitur: usurpatur autem vocabulum illud, tanquam significaret qualitatem cognitam, distinctamque tarn a motu, figura, omnique alia re sensibili, quam ab omni animalis affectione: id vero nihil aliud esse quam qualitatem occultam , rem acrius rimanti constabit. Nisus animalis et motus corporeus vulgo spectantur tanquam symptomata et mensuræ hujus qualitatis occultæ.

 6. Patet igitur gravitatem aut vim frustra poni pro principio motus: nunquid enim principium illud clarius  cognosci potest ex eo quod dicatur qualitas occulta? Quod ipsum occultum est, nihil explicat: ut omittamus causam agentem incognitam rectius dici posse substantiam quam qualitatem. Porro vis , gravitas , et istiusmodi voces, sæpius, nec inepte, in concreto usurpantur; ita ut connotent corpus motum, difficultatem resistendi, &c. Ubi vero a philosophis adhibentur ad significandas naturas quasdam, ab hisce omnibus præcisas et abstractas, quæ nec sensibus subjiciuntur, nec ulla mentis vi intelligi nec imaginatione effingi possunt, turn demum errores et confusionem pariunt.

7. Multos autem in errorem ducit, quod voces generales et abstractas in disserendo utiles esse videant, nec tamen earum vim satis capiant. Partim vero a consuetudine vulgari inventæ sunt illæ ad sermonem abbreviandum, partim a philosophis ad docendum excogitatæ; non quod ad naturas rerum accommodatas sint, quæ quidem singulares et concretæ existunt; sed quod idoneæ ad tradendas disciplinas, propterea quod faciant notiones, vel saltem propositiones, universales.

8. Vim corpoream esse aliquid conceptu facile plerumque existimamus. Ii tamen qui rem accuratius inspexerunt in diversa sunt opinione; uti apparet ex mira verborum obscuritate qua laborant, ubi illam explicare conantur. Torricellius ait vim et impetum esse res quasdam abstractas subtilesque et quintessentias, quæ includuntur in substantia corporea, tanquam in vase magico Circes. Leibnitius item in naturæ vi explicanda hæc habet —  Vis activa, primitiva, quæ est ἐντελέχεια πρώτη, animæ vel formæ substantiali respondet . Vide Acta Erudit. Lips. Usque adeo necesse est ut vel summi viri, quamdiu abstractionibus indulgent, voces nulla certa significatione præditas, et meras scholasticorum umbras sectentur. Alia ex neotericorum scriptis, nec pauca quidem ea, producere liceret; quibus abunde constaret, metaphysicas abstractiones non usquequaque cessisse mechanicæ et experimentis, sed negotium inane philosophis etiamnum facessere.

9. Ex illo fonte derivantur varia absurda, cujus generis est illud, vim percussionis, utcunque exiguæ, esse infinite magnam . Quod sane supponit, gravitatem esse qualitatem quandam realem ab aliis omnibus diversam; et gravitationem esse quasi actum hujus qualitatis, a motu realiter distinctum: minima autem percussio producit effectum majorem quam maxima gravitatio sine motu; ilia scilicet motum aliquem edit, hæc nullum. Unde sequitur, vim percussionis ratione infinita excedere vim gravitationis, hoc est, esse infinite magnam. Videantur experimenta Galilæi, et quæ de definita vi percussionis scripserunt Torricellius, Borellus, et alii.

10. Veruntamen fatendum est vim nullam per se immediate sentiri; neque aliter quam per effectum cognosci et mensurari. Sed vis mortuæ, seu gravitationis simplicis, in corpore quiescente subjecto, nulla facta mutatione, effectus nullus est; percussionis autem, effectus aliquis. Quoniam, ergo, vires sunt effectibus proportionales, concludere licet vim mortuam esse nullam. Neque tamen propterea vim percussionis esse infinitam: non enim oportet quantitatem ullam positivam habere pro infinita, propterea quod ratione infinita superet quantitatem nullam sive nihil.

11. Vis gravitationis a momento secerni nequit; momentum autem sine celeritate nullum est, quum sit moles in celeritatem ducta: porro celeritas sine motu intelligi non potest; ergo nec vis gravitationis. Deinde vis nulla nisi per actionem innotescit, et per eandem mensuratur; actionem autem corporis a motu præscindere non possumus; ergo quamdiu corpus grave plumbi subjecti vel chordæ figuram mutat, tamdiu movetur; ubi vero quiescit, nihil agit, vel, quod idem est, agere prohibetur. Breviter, voces istæ vis mortua et gravitatio , etsi per abstractionem metaphysicam aliquid significare supponuntur diversum a movente, moto, motu et quiete, revera tamen id totum nihil est.

12. Siquis diceret pondus appensum vel impositum agere in chordam, quoniam impedit quominus se restituat vi elastica: dico, pari ratione corpus quodvis inferum agere in superius incumbens, quoniam illud descendere prohibet: dici vero non potest actio corporis, quod prohibeat aliud corpus existere in eo loco quern occupat.

13. Pressionem corporis gravitantis quandoque sentimus. Verum sensio ista molesta oritur ex motu corporis istius gravis fibris nervisque nostri corporis communicato, et eorundem situm immutante; adeoque percussioni accepta referri debet. In hisce rebus multis et gravibus præjudiciis laboramus, sed illa acri atque iterata meditatione subigenda sunt, vel potius penitus averruncanda.

14. Quo probetur quantitatem ullam esse infinitam, ostendi oportet partem aliquam finitam homogeneam in ea infinities contineri. Sed vis mortua se habet ad vim percussionis, non ut pars ad totum, sed ut punctum ad lineam, juxta ipsos vis infinitæ percussionis auctores. Multa in hanc rem adjicere liceret, sed vereor ne prolixus sim.

 15. Ex principiis præmissis lites insignes solvi possunt, quæ viros doctos multum exercuerunt. Hujus rei exemplum sit controversia illa de proportione virium. Una pars dum concedit, momenta, motus, impetus, data mole, esse simpliciter ut velocitates, affirmat vires esse ut quadrata velocitatum. Hanc autem sententiam supponere vim  corporis distingui a momento, motu, et impetu; eaque suppositione sublata corruere, nemo non videt.

16. Quo clarius adhuc appareat, confusionem quandam miram per abstractiones metaphysicas in doctrinam de motu introductam esse, videamus quantum intersit inter notiones virorum celebrium de vi et impetu. Leibnitius impetum cum motu confundit. Juxta Newtonum impetus revera idem est cum vi inertiæ. Borellus asserit impetum non aliud esse quam gradum velocitatis. Alii impetum et conatum inter se differre, alii non differre volunt. Plerique vim motricem motui proportionalem intelligunt. Nonnulli aliam aliquam vim præter motricem, et diversimode mensurandam, utpote per quadrata velocitatum in moles, intelligere præ se ferunt. Sed infinitum esset hæc prosequi.

17. Vis , gravitas , attractio , et hujusmodi voces, utiles sunt ad ratiocinia et computationes de motu et corporibus motis; sed non ad intelligendam simplicem ipsius motus naturam, vel ad qualitates totidem distinctas designandas. Attractionem certe quod attinet, patet illam ab Newtono adhiberi, non tanquam qualitatem veram et physicam, sed solummodo ut hypothesin mathematicam. Quinetiam Leibnitius, nisum elementarem seu solicitationem ab impetu distinguens, fatetur illa entia non re ipsa inveniri in rerum natura, sed abstractione facienda esse.

18. Similis ratio est compositionis et resolutionis virium quarumcunque directarum in quascunque obliquas, per diagonalem et latera parallelogrammi. Hæc mechanicæ et computationi inserviunt: sed aliud est computationi et demonstrationibus mathematicis inservire, aliud rerum naturam exhibere.

 19. Ex recentioribus multi sunt in ea opinione, ut putent  motum neque destrui nec de novo gigni, sed eandem semper motus quantitatem permanere. Aristoteles etiam dubium illud olim proposuit — utrum motus factus sit et corruptus, an vero ab æterno? Phys. lib. viii. Quod vero motus sensibilis pereat, patet sensibus: illi autem eundem impetum, nisum, aut summam virium eandem manere velle videntur. Unde affirmat Borellus, vim in percussione non imminui, sed expandi; impetus etiam contrarios suscipi et retineri in eodem corpore. Item Leibnitius nisum ubique et semper esse in materia, et ubi non patet sensibus, ratione intelligi contendit. — Hæc autem nimis abstracta esse et obscura, ejusdemque fere generis cum formis substantialibus et entelechiis, fatendum.

20. Quotquot ad explicandam motus causam atque originem, vel principio hylarchico, vel naturæ indigentia, vel appetitu, aut denique instinctu naturali utuntur, dixisse aliquid potius quam cogitasse censendi sunt. Neque ab hisce multum absunt qui supposuerint partes terræ esse se moventes, aut etiam spiritus iis implantatos ad instar formæ , ut assignent causam accelerationis gravium cadentium: aut qui dixerit, in corpore præter solidam extensionem debere etiam poni aliquid unde virium consideratio oriatur . Siquidem hi omnes vel nihil particulare et determinatum enuntiant; vel, si quid sit, tarn difficile erit illud explicare, quam id ipsum cujus explicandi causa adducitur.

21. Frustra ad naturam illustrandam adhibentur ea quæ nec sensibus patent, nec ratione intelligi possunt. Videndum ergo quid sensus, quid experientia, quid demum ratio iis innixa, suadeat. Duo sunt summa rerum genera — corpus et anima  . Rem extensam, solidam, mobilem, figuratam, aliisque qualitatibus quæ sensibus occurrunt præditam, ope sensuum; rem vero sentientem, percipientem, intelligentem, conscientia quadam interna cognovimus.  Porro, res istas plane inter se diversas esse, longeque heterogeneas, cernimus. Loquor autem de rebus cognitis: de incognitis enim disserere nil juvat.

22. Totum id quod novimus, cui nomen corpus indidimus, nihil in se continet quod motus principium seu causa efficiens esse possit. Etenim impenetrabilitas, extensio, figura nullam includunt vel connotant potentiam producendi motum; quinimo e contrario non modo illas, verum etiam alias, quotquot sint, corporis qualitates sigillatim percurrentes, videbimus omnes esse revera passivas, nihilque iis activum inesse, quod ullo modo intelligi possit tanquam fons et principium motus. Gravitatem quod attinet, voce illa nihil cognitum et ab ipso effectu sensibili, cujus causa quæritur, diversum significari jam ante ostendimus. Et sane quando corpus grave dicimus, nihil aliud intelligimus, nisi quod feratur deorsum; de causa hujus effectus sensibilis nihil omnino cogitantes.

23. De corpore itaque audacter pronunciare licet, utpote de re comperta, quod non sit principium motus. Quod si quisquam, præter solidam extensionem ejusque modificationes, vocem corpus qualitatem etiam occultam , virtutem, formam, essentiam complecti sua significatione contendat; licet quidem illi inutili negotio sine ideis disputare, et nominibus nihil distincte exprimentibus abuti. Cæterum sanior philosophandi ratio videtur ab notionibus abstractis et generalibus (si modo notiones dici debent quæ intelligi nequeunt) quantum fieri potest abstinuisse.

 24. Quicquid continetur in idea corporis novimus; quod  vero novimus in corpore, id non esse principium motus constat. Qui præterea aliquid incognitum in corpore, cujus ideam nullam habent, comminiscuntur, quod motus principium dicant, ii revera nihil aliud quam principium motus esse incognitum dicunt. Sed hujusmodi subtilitatibus diutius immorari piget.

25. Præter res corporeas alterum est genus rerum cogitantium . In iis autem potentiam inesse corpora movendi, propria experientia didicimus; quandoquidem anima nostra pro lubitu possit ciere et sistere membrorum motus, quacunque tandem ratione id fiat. Hoc certe constat, corpora moveri ad nutum animæ; eamque proinde haud inepte dici posse principium motus: particulare quidem et subordinatum, quodque ipsum dependeat a primo et universali Principio.

26. Corpora gravia feruntur deorsum, etsi nullo impulsu apparente agitata; non tamen existimandum propterea in iis contineri principium motus: cujus rei hanc rationem assignat Aristoteles; — Gravia et levia (inquit) non moventur a seipsis; id enim vitale esset, et se sistere possent  . Gravia omnia una eademque certa et constanti lege centrum telluris petunt, neque in ipsis animadvertitur principium vel facultas ulla motum istum sistendi, minuendi, vel, nisi pro rata proportione, augendi, aut denique ullo modo immutandi: habent adeo se passive. Porro idem, stricte et accurate loquendo, dicendum de corporibus percussivis. Corpora ista quamdiu moventur, ut et in ipso percussionis momento, si gerunt passive, perinde scilicet atque cum quiescunt. Corpus iners tam agit quam corpus motum, si  res ad verum exigatur: id quod agnoscit Newtonus, ubi ait, vim inertiæ esse eandem cum impetu. Corpus autem iners et quietum nihil agit, ergo nee motum.

27. Revera corpus æque perseverat in utrovis statu, vel motus vel quietis. Ista vero perseverantia non magis dicenda est actio corporis, quam existentia ejusdem actio diceretur. Perseverantia nihil aliud est quam continuatio in eodem modo existendi, quæ proprie dici actio non potest. Cæterum resistentiam, quam experimur in sistendo corpore moto, ejus actionem esse fingimus vana specie delusi. Revera enim ista resistentia quam sentimus, passio est in nobis, neque arguit corpus agere, sed nos pati: constat utique nos idem passuros fuisse, sive corpus illud a se moveatur, sive ab alio principio impellatur.

28. Actio et reactio dicuntur esse in corporibus: nec incommode ad demonstrationes mechanicas. Sed cavendum, ne propterea supponamus virtutem aliquam realem, quæ motus causa sive principium sit, esse in iis. Etenim voces illæ eodem modo intelligendæ sunt ac vox attractio ; et quemadmodum hæc est hypothesis solummodo mathematica, non autem qualitas physica: idem etiam de illis intelligi debet, et ob eandem rationem. Nam sicut veritas et usus theorematum de mutua corporum attractione in philosophia mechanica stabiles manent, utpote unice fundati in motu corporum, sive motus iste causari supponatur per actionem corporum se mutuo attrahentium, sive per actionem agentis alicujus a corporibus diversi impellentis et moderantis corpora; pari ratione, quæcunque tradita sunt de regulis et legibus motuum, simul ac theoremata inde deducta, manent inconcussa, dum modo concedantur effectus sensibiles, et ratiocinia iis innixa; sive supponamus actionem ipsam, aut vim horum effectuum causatricem, esse in corpore, sive in agente incorporeo.

 29. Auferantur ex idea corporis extensio, soliditas, figura, remanebit nihil. Sed qualitates istæ sunt ad motum  indifferentes, nec in se quidquam habent quod motus principium dici possit. Hoc ex ipsis ideis nostris perspicuum est. Si igitur voce corpus significatur id quod concipimus, plane constat inde non peti posse principium motus: pars scilicet nulla aut attributum illius causa efficiens vera est, quæ motum producat. Vocem autem proferre, et nihil concipere, id demum indignum esset philosopho.

30. Datur res cogitans, activa, quam principium motus ... in nobis experimur. Hanc animam , mentem , spiritum ... Datur etiam res extensa, iners, impenetrabilis, ... quæ a priori toto cœlo differt, novumque genus ... Quantum intersit inter res cogitantes et extensas, primus omnium deprehendens Anaxagoras, vir longe sapientissimus, asserebat mentem nihil habere cum corporibus commune, id quod constat ex primo libro Aristotelis De Anima . Ex neotericis idem optime animadvertit Cartesius. Ab eo alii rem satis claram vocibus obscuris impeditam ac difficilem reddiderunt.

31. Ex dictis manifestum est eos qui vim activam, actionem, motus principium, in corporibus  revera inesse affirmant, sententiam nulla experientia fundatam amplecti, eamque terminis obscuris et generalibus adstruere, nec  quid sibi velint satis intelligere. E contrario, qui mentem esse principium motus volunt, sententiam propria experientia munitam proferunt, hominumque omni ævo doctissimorum suffragiis comprobatam.

32. Primus Anaxagoras τὸν νοῦν introduxit, qui motum inerti materiæ imprimeret. Quam quidem sententiam probat etiam Aristoteles, pluribusque confirmat, aperto pronuncians primum movens esse immobile, indivisibile, et nullam habens magnitudinem. Dicere autem, omne me vum esse mobile, recte animadvertit idem esse ac s diceret, omne ædificativum esse ædificabile, Physic , lib Plato insuper in Timæo tradit machinam hanc corpo seu mundum visibilem, agitari et animari a mente, sensum omnem fugiat. Quinetiam hodie philosophi siani principium motuum naturalium Deum agnoscun. Et Newtonus passim nec obscure innuit, non solummodo motum ab initio a numine profectum esse, verum adhuc systema mundanum ab eodem actu moveri. Hoc sacris literis consonum est: hoc scholasticorum calculo comprobatur. Nam etsi Peripatetici naturam tradant esse principium motus et quietis, interpretantur tamen naturam naturantem esse Deum. Intelligunt nimirum corpora omnia systematis hujusce mundani a mente præpotenti juxta certam et constantem rationem moveri.

 33. Cæterum qui principium vitale corporibus tribuunt, obscurum aliquid et rebus parum conveniens fingunt. Quid enim aliud est vitali principio præditum esse quam  vivere? aut vivere quam se movere, sistere, et statum suum mutare? Philosophi autem hujus sæculi doctissimi pro principio indubitato ponunt, omne corpus perseverare in statu suo, vel quietis vel motus uniformis in directum, nisi quatenus aliunde cogitur statum ilium mutare: e contrario, in anima sentimus esse facultatem tam statum suum quam aliarum rerum mutandi; id quod proprie dicitur vitale, animamque a corporibus longe discriminat.

34. Motum et quietem in corporibus recentiores considerant velut duos status existendi, in quorum utrovis corpus omne sua natura iners permaneret, nulla vi externa urgente. Unde colligere licet, eandem esse causam motus et quietis, quæ est existentiæ corporum. Neque enim quærenda videtur alia causa existentiæ corporis successivæ in diversis partibus spatii, quam illa unde derivatur existentia ejusdem corporis successiva in diversis partibus temporis. De Deo autem Optimo Maximo rerum omnium Conditore et Conservatore tractare, et qua ratione res cunctæ a summo et vero Ente pendeant demonstrare, quamvis pars sit scientiæ humanæ præcellentissima, spectat tamen potius ad philosophiam primam, seu metaphysicam et theologiam, quam ad philosophiam naturalem, quæ hodie fere omnis continetur in experimentis et mechanica. Itaque cognitionem de Deo vel supponit philosophia naturalis, vel mutuatur ab aliqua scientia superiori. Quanquam verissimum sit, naturæ investigationem scientiis altioribus argumenta egregia ad sapientiam, bonitatem, et potentiam Dei illustrandam et probandam undequaque subministrare.

35. Quod hæc minus intelligantur, in causa est, cur nonnulli immerito repudient physicæ principia mathematica, eo scilicet nomine quod illa causas rerum efficientes non assignant: quum tamen revera ad physicam aut mechanicam spectet regulas solummodo, non causas efficientes, impulsionum attractionumve, et ut verbo dicam, motuum leges tradere; ex iis vero positis phænomenon particularium solutionem, non autem causam efficientem assignare.

36. Multum intererit considerasse quid proprie sit principium, et quo sensu intelligenda sit vox illa apud philosophos. Causa quidem vera efficiens et conservatrix rerum omnium jure optimo appellatur fons et principium earundem. Principia vero philosophiæ experimentalis proprie dicenda sunt fundamenta quibus illa innititur, seu fontes unde derivatur, (non dico existentia, sed) cognitio rerum corporearum, sensus utique ex experientia. Similiter, in philosophia mechanica, principia dicenda sunt, in quibus fundatur et continetur universa disciplina, leges illæ motuum primariæ, quæ experimentis comprobatæ, ratiocinio etiam excultæ sunt et redditæ universales. Hæ motuum leges commode dicuntur principia, quoniam ab iis tam theoremata mechanica generalia quam particulares τῶν φαινομένων explicationes derivantur.

37. Tum nimirum dici potest quidpiam explicari mechanice, cum reducitur ad ista principia simplicissima et universalissima, et per accuratum ratiocinium, cum iis consentaneum et connexum esse ostenditur. Nam inventis semel naturæ legibus, deinceps monstrandum est philosopho, ex constanti harum legum observatione, hoc est, ex iis principiis phænomenon quodvis necessario consequi: id quod est phænomena explicare et solvere, causamque, id est rationem cur fiant, assignare.

 38. Mens humana gaudet scientiam suam extendere et dilatare. Ad hoc autem notiones et propositiones generales efformandæ sunt, in quibus quodam modo continentur propositiones et cognitiones particulares, quæ turn demum intelligi creduntur cum ex primis illis continuo nexu deducuntur. Hoc geometris notissimum est. In mechanica etiam præmittuntur notiones, hoc est definitiones, et enunciationes de motu primæ et generales, ex quibus  postmodum methodo mathematica conclusiones magis remotæ et minus generales colliguntur. Et sicut per applicationem theorematum geometricorum, corporum particularium magnitudines mensurantur; ita etiam per applicationem theorematum mechanices universalium, systematis mundani partium quarumvis motus, et phænomena inde pendentia, innotescunt et determinantur: ad quem scopum unice collineandum physico.

39. Et quemadmodum geometræ, disciplinæ causa, multa comminiscuntur, quæ nec ipsi describere possunt, nec in rerum natura invenire; simili prorsus ratione mechanicus voces quasdam abstractas et generales adhibet, fingitque in corporibus vim , actionem , attractionem , solicitationem , &c. quæ ad theorias et enunciationes, ut et computationes de motu apprime utiles sunt, etiamsi in ipsa rerum veritate et corporibus actu existentibus frustra quærerentur, non minus quam quæ a geometris per abstractionem mathematicam finguntur.

40. Revera ope sensuum nil nisi effectus seu qualitates sensibiles, et res corporeas omnino passivas, sive in motu sint sive in quiete, percipimus: ratioque et experientia activum nihil præter mentem aut animam esse suadet. Quidquid ultra fingitur, id ejusdem generis esse cum aliis hypothesibus et abstractionibus mathematicis existimandum: quod penitu sanimo infigere oportet. Hoc ni fiat, facile in obscuram scholasticorum subtilitatem, quæ per tot sæcula, tanquam dira quædam pestis, philosophiam corrupit, relabi possumus.

41. Principia mechanica legesque motuum aut naturæ universales, sæculo ultimo feliciter inventæ, et subsidio geometriæ tractatæ et applicatæ, miram lucem in philosophiam intulerunt. Principia vero metaphysica causæque reales efficientes motus et existentiæ corporum attributorumve corporeorum nullo modo ad mechanicam aut experimenta pertinent; neque eis lucem dare possunt, nisi quatenus, velut præcognita, inserviant ad limites physicæ præfiniendos, eaque ratione ad tollendas difficultates quæstionesque peregrinas.

42. Qui a spiritibus motus principium petunt, ii vel rem corpoream vel incorpoream voce spiritus  intelligunt. Si rem corpoream, quantumvis tenuem, tamen redit difficultas: si incorpoream, quantumvis id verum sit, attamen ad  physicam non proprie pertinet. Quod si quis philosophiam naturalem ultra limites experimentorum et mechanicæ extenderit, ita ut rerum etiam incorporearum, et inextensarum cognitionem complectatur, latior quidem illa vocis acceptio tractationem de anima, mente, seu principio vitali admittit. Cæterum commodius erit, juxta usum jam fere receptum, ita distinguere inter scientias, ut singulæ propriis circumscribantur cancellis, et philosophus naturalis totus sit in experimentis, legibusque motuum, et principiis mechanicis, indeque depromptis ratiociniis; quidquid autem de aliis rebus protulerit, id superiori alicui scientiæ acceptum referat. Etenim ex cognitis naturæ legibus pulcherrimæ theoriæ, praxes etiam mechanicæ ad vitam utiles consequuntur. Ex cognitione autem ipsius naturæ Auctoris considerationes longe præstantissimæ quidem illæ, sed metaphysicæ, theologicæ, morales oriuntur.

43. De principiis hactenus: nunc dicendum de natura  motus. Atque is quidem, cum sensibus clare percipiatur, non tam natura sua, quam doctis philosophorum commentis obscuratus est. Motus nunquam in sensus nostros incurrit sine mole corporea, spatio, et tempore. Sunt tamen qui motum, tanquam ideam quandam simplicem et abstractam, atque ab omnibus aliis rebus sejunctam, contemplari student. Verum idea illa tenuissima et subtilissima intellectus aciem eludit: id quod quilibet secum meditando experiri potest. Hinc nascuntur magnæ difficultates de natura motus, et definitiones, ipsa re quam illustrare debent longe obscuriores. Hujusmodi sunt definitiones illæ Aristotelis et Scholasticorum, qui motum dicunt esse  actum mobilis quatenus est mobile, vel actum entis in potentia quatenus in potentia . Hujusmodi etiam est illud viri inter recentiores celebris, qut asserit nihil in motu esse reale præter momentaneum illud quod in vi ad mutationem nitente constitui debet . Porro constat, horum et similium definitionum auctores in animo habuisse abstractam motus naturam, seclusa omni temporis et spatii consideratione, explicare: sed qua ratione abstracta ilia motus quintessentia (ut ita dicam) intelligi possit, non video.

44. Neque hoc contenti, ulterius pergunt, partesque ipsius motus a se invicem dividunt et secernunt, quarum ideas distinctas, tanquam entium revera distinctorum, efformare conantur. Etenim sunt qui motionem a motu distinguant, illam velut instantaneum motus elementum spectantes. Velocitatem insuper, conatum, vim, impetum totidem res essentia diversas esse volunt, quarum quæque per propriam atque ab aliis omnibus segregatam et abstractam ideam intellectui objiciatur. Sed in hisce rebus discutiendis, stantibus iis quæ supra disseruimus, non est cur diutius immoremur.

45. Multi etiam per transitum motum definiunt, obliti, scilicet, transitum ipsum sine motu intelligi non posse, et per motum definiri oportere. Verissimum adeo est definitiones, sicut nonnullis rebus lucem, ita vicissim aliis tenebras afferre. Et profecto, quascumque res sensu percipimus, eas clariores aut notiores definiendo efficere vix quisquam potuerit. Cujus rei vana spe allecti res faciles difficillimas reddiderunt philosophi, mentesque suas difficultatibus, quas ut plurimum ipsi peperissent, implicavere. Ex hocce definiendi, simul ac abstrahendi studio, multæ tam de motu quam de aliis rebus natæ subtilissimæ quæstiones, eædemque nullius utilitatis, hominum ingenia frustra torserunt; adeo ut Aristoteles ultro et sæpius fateatur motum esse actum quendam cognitu difficilem , et nonnulli ex veteribus usque eo nugis exercitati deveniebant, ut motum omnino esse negarent.

46. Sed hujusmodi minutiis distineri piget. Satis sit fontes solutionum indicasse: ad quos etiam illud adjungere libet: quod ea quæ de infinita divisione temporis et spatii in mathesi traduntur, ob congenitam rerum naturam paradoxa et theorias spinosas (quales sunt illæ omnes in quibus agitur de infinito) in speculationes de motu intulerunt. Quidquid autem hujus generis sit, id omne motus commune habet cum spatio et tempore, vel potius ad ea refert acceptum.

47. Et quemadmodum ex una parte nimia abstractio seu divisio rerum vere inseparabilium, ita ab altera parte compositio seu potius confusio rerum diversissimarum motus naturam perplexam reddidit. Usitatum enim est motum cum causa motus efficiente confundere. Unde accidit ut motus sit quasi biformis, unam faciem sensibus obviam, alteram caliginosa nocte obvolutam habens. Inde obscuritas et confusio, et varia de motu paradoxa originem trahunt, dum effectui perperam tribuitur id quod revera causæ solummodo competit.

48. Hinc oritur opinio illa, eandem semper motus quantitatem conservari. Quod, nisi intelligatur de vi et potentia causæ, sive causa ilia dicatur natura, sive νοῦς, vel quodcunque tandem agens sit, falsum esse cuivis facile constabit. Aristoteles quidem l. viii. Physicorum , ubi quærit utrum motus factus sit et corruptus, an vero ab æterno tanquam vita immortalis insit rebus omnibus, vitale principium potius, quam effectum externum, sive mutationem loci, intellexisse videtur.

49. Hinc etiam est, quod multi suspicantur motum non esse meram passionem in corporibus. Quod si intelligamus id quod in motu corporis sensibus objicitur, quin omnino passivum sit nemo dubitare potest. Ecquid enim in se habet successiva corporis existentia in diversis locis, quod actionem referat, aut aliud sit quam nuduset iners effectus?

50. Peripatetici, qui dicunt motum esse actum unum utriusque, moventis et moti, non satis discriminant causam ab effectu. Similiter, qui nisum aut conatum in motu fingunt, aut idem corpus simul in contrarias partes ferri putant, eadem idearum confusione, eadem vocum ambiguitate ludificari videntur.

51. Juvat multum, sicut in aliis omnibus, ita in scientia de motu accuratam diligentiam adhibere, tam ad aliorum conceptus intelligendos quam ad suos enunciandos: in qua re nisi peccatum esset, vix credo in disputationem trahi potuisse, utrum corpus indifferens sit ad motum et ad quietem, necne. Quoniam enim experientia constat, esse legem naturæ primariam, ut corpus perinde perseveret in statu motus ac quietis, quamdiu aliunde nihil accidat ad statum istum mutandum ; et propterea vim inertiæ sub diverso respectu esse vel resistentiam, vel impetum, colligitur: hoc sensu profecto corpus dici potest sua natura indifferens ad motum vel quietem. Nimirum tam difficile est quietem in corpus motum, quam motum in quiescens inducere: cum vero corpus pariter conservet statum utrumvis, quidni dicatur ad utrumvis se habere indifferenter?

52. Peripatetici pro varietate mutationum, quas res aliqua subire potest, varia motus genera distinguebant. Hodie de motu agentes intelligunt solummodo motum localem . Motus autem localis intelligi nequit nisi simul intelligatur quid sit locus : is vero a neotericis definitur pars spatii quam corpus occupat  : unde dividitur in relativum et absolutum pro ratione spatii. Distinguunt enim inter spatium absolutum sive verum, ac relativum sive apparens. Volunt scilicet dari spatium undequaque immensum, immobile, insensibile, corpora universa permeans et continens, quod  vocant spatium absolutum. Spatium autem a corporibus comprehensum vel definitum, sensibusque adeo subjectum, dicitur spatium relativum, apparens, vulgare.

53. Fingamus itaque corpora cuncta destrui, et in nihilum redigi. Quod reliquum est vocant spatium absolutum, omni relatione quæ a situ et distantiis corporum oriebatur, simul cum ipsis corporibus, sublata. Porro spatium illud est infinitum, immobile, indivisibile, insensibile, sine relatione et sine distinctione. Hoc est, omnia ejus attributa sunt privativa vel negativa: videtur igitur esse merum nihil. Parit solummmodo difficultatem aliquam quod extensum sit. Extensio autem est qualitas positiva. Verum qualis tandem extensio est illa quæ nec dividi potest, nec mensurari, cujus nullam partem, nec sensu percipere, nec imaginatione depingere possumus? Etenim nihil in imaginationem cadit, quod, ex natura rei, non possibile est ut sensu percipiatur; siquidem imaginatio nihil aliud est quam facultas representatrix rerum sensibilium, vel actu existentium, vel saltem possibilium. Fugit insuper intellectum purum , quum facultas illa versetur tantum circa res spirituales et inextensas, cujusmodi sunt mentes nostræ, earumque habitus, passiones, virtutes, et similia. Ex spatio igitur absoluto auferamus modo vocabula, et nihil remanebit in sensu, imaginatione, aut intellectu: nihil aliud ergo iis designatur, quam pura privatio aut negatio, hoc est, merum nihil.

 54. Confitendum omnino est nos circa hanc rem gravissimis præjudiciis teneri, a quibus ut liberemur, omnis animi vis exercenda. Etenim multi, tantum abest quod spatium absolutum pro nihilo ducant, ut rem esse ex omnibus (Deo excepto) unicam existiment, quæ annihilari non possit: statuantque illud suapte natura necessario existere, æternumque esse et increatum, atque adeo attributorum divinorum particeps. Verum enimvero quum certissimum sit, res omnes, quas nominibus designamus, per qualitates  aut relationes, vel aliqua saltem ex parte cognosci (ineptum enim foret vocabulis uti quibus cogniti nihil, nihil notionis, ideæ vel conceptus subjiceretur), inquiramus diligenter, utrum formare liceat ideam ullam spatii illius puri, realis, absoluti, quod post omnium corporum annihilationem perseveret existere. Ideam porro talem paulo acrius intuens, reperio ideam esse nihili purissimam, si modo idea appellanda sit. Hoc ipse summa adhibita diligentia expertus sum: hoc alios pari adhibita diligentia experturos reor.

55. Decipere nos nonnunquam solet, quod aliis omnibus corporibus imaginatione sublatis, nostrum tamen manere supponimus. Quo supposito, motum membrorum ab omni parte liberrimum imaginamur. Motus autem sine spatio concipi non potest. Nihilominus si rem attento animo recolamus, constabit primo concipi spatium relativum partibus nostri corporis definitum: 2°. movendi membra potestatem liberrimam nullo obstaculo retusam: et præter hæc duo nihil. Falso tamen credimus tertium aliquod, spatium videlicet immensum, realiter existere, quod liberam potestatem nobis faciat movendi corpus nostrum: ad hoc enim requiritur absentia solummodo aliorum corporum. Quam absentiam, sive privationem corporum, nihil esse positivum fateamur necesse est.

56. Cæterum hasce res nisi quis libero et acri examine perspexerit, verba et voces parum valent. Meditanti vero, et rationes secum reputanti, ni fallor, manifestum erit, quæcunque de spatio puro et absoluto prædicantur, ea omnia de nihilo prædicari posse. Qua ratione mens humana facillime liberatur a magnis difficultatibus simulque ab ea absurditate tribuendi existentiam necessariam ulli rei præterquam soli Deo optimo maximo.

 57. In proclivi esset sententiam nostram argumentis a posteriori (ut loquuntur) ductis confirmare, quæstiones de spatio absoluto proponendo; exempli gratia, utrum sit substantia vel accidens? utrum creatum vel increatum?  et absurditates ex utravis parte consequentes demonstrando. Sed brevitati consulendum. Illud tamen omitti non debet, quod sententiam hancce Democritus olim calculo suo comprobavit, uti auctor est Aristoteles 1. i. Phys. ubi hæc habet: Democritus solidum et inane ponit principia, quorum aliud quidem ut quod est, aliud ut quod non est esse dicit. Scrupulum si forte injiciat, quod distinctio illa inter spatium absolutum et relativum a magni nominis philosophis usurpetur, eique quasi fundamento inædificentur multa præclara theoremata, scrupulum istum vanum esse, ex iis quæ secutura sunt, apparebit.

58. Ex præmissis patet, non convenire ut definiamus locum verum corporis esse partem spatii absoluti quam occupat corpus, motumque verum seu absolutum esse mutationem loci veri et absoluti. Siquidem omnis locus est relativus, ut et omnis motus. Veruntamen ut hoc clarius appareat, animadvertendum est, motum nullum intelligi posse sine determinatione aliqua seu directione, quæ quidem intelligi nequit, nisi praeter corpus motum, nostrum etiam corpus, aut aliud aliquod, simul intelligatur existere. Nam sursum, deorsum, sinistrorsum, dextrorsum, omnesque plagæ et regiones in relatione aliqua fundantur, et necessario corpus a moto diversum connotant et supponunt. Adeo ut, si reliquis corporibus in nihilum redactis, globus, exempli gratia, unicus existere supponatur; in illo motus nullus concipi possit: usque adeo necesse est, ut detur aliud corpus, cujus situ motus determinari intelligatur. Hujus sententiæ veritas clarissime elucebit, modo corporum omnium tam nostri quam aliorum, præter globum istum unicum, annihilationem recte supposuerimus.

59. Concipiantur porro duo globi, et præterea nil corporeum, existere. Concipiantur deinde vires quomodocunque applicari: quicquid tandem per applicationem virium intelligamus, motus circularis duorum globorum circa commune centrum nequit per imaginationem concipi. Supponamus deinde cœlum fixarum creari: subito ex concepto appulsu globorum ad diversas cœli istius partes motus concipietur. Scilicet cum motus natura sua sit relativus, concipi non potuit priusquam darentur corpora correlata. Quemadmodum nec ulla relatio alia sine correlatis concipi potest.

60. Ad motum circularem quod attinet, putant multi, crescente motu vero circulari, corpus necessario magis semper magisque ab axe niti. Hoc autem ex eo provenit, quod, cum motus circularis spectari possit tanquam in omni momento a duabus directionibus ortum trahens, una secundum radium, altera secundum tangentem; si in hac ultima tantum directione impetus augeatur, tum a centro recedet corpus motum, orbita vero desinet esse circularis. Quod si æqualiter augeantur vires in utraque directione, manebit motus circularis, sed acceleratus conatu, qui non magis arguet vires recedendi ab axe, quam accedendi ad eundem, auctas esse. Dicendum igitur, aquam in situla circumactam ascendere ad latera vasis, propterea quod, applicatis novis viribus in directione tangentis ad quamvis particulam aquæ, eodem instanti non applicentur novæ vires æquales centripetæ. Ex quo experimento nullo modo sequitur, motum absolutum circularem per vires recedendi ab axe motus necessario dignosci. Porro qua ratione intelligendæ sunt voces istæ, vires corporum et conatus , ex præmissis satis superque innotescit.

61. Quo modo curva considerari potest tanquam constans ex rectis infinitis, etiamsi revera ex illis non constet, sed quod ea hypothesis ad geometriam utilis sit, eodem modo motus circularis spectari potest tanquam a directionibus rectilineis infinitis ortum ducens, quæ suppositio utilis est in philosophia mechanica. Non tamen ideo affirmandum, impossibile esse, ut centrum gravitatis corporis cujusvis successive existat in singulis punctis peripheriae circularis, nulla ratione habita directionis ullius rectilineæ, sive in tangente sive in radio.

 62. Haud omittendum est, motum lapidis in funda, aut aquæ in situla circumacta, dici non posse motum vere circularem, juxta mentem eorum qui per partes spatii absoluti definiunt loca vera corporum; cum sit mire compositus ex motibus non solum situlæ vel fundæ, sed etiam telluris diurno circa proprium axem, menstruo circa commune centrum gravitatis terræ et lunæ, et annuo circa solem: et propterea particula quævis lapidis vel aquæ describat lineam a circulari longe abhorrentem. Neque revera est, qui creditur, conatus axifugus, quoniam non respicit unum aliquem axem ratione spatii absoluti, supposito quod detur tale spatium: proinde non video quomodo appellari possit  conatus unicus, cui motus vere circularis tanquam proprio et adaequato effectui respondet.

63. Motus nullus dignosci potest, aut mensurari, nisi per res sensibiles. Cum ergo spatium absolutum nullo modo in sensus incurrat, necesse est ut inutile prorsus sit ad distinctionem motuum. Præterea determinatio sive directio motui essentialis est, ilia vero in relatione consistit. Ergo impossibile est ut motus absolutus concipiatur.

64. Porro quoniam pro diversitate loci relativi varius sit motus ejusdem corporis, quinimo uno respectu moveri, altero quiescere dici quidpiam possit; ad determinandum motum verum et quietem veram, quo scilicet tollatur ambiguitas, et consulatur mechanicæ philosophorum, qui systema rerum latius contemplantur, satis fuerit spatium relativum fixarum cœlo, tanquam quiescente spectato, conclusum adhibere, loco spatii absoluti. Motus autem et quies tali spatio relativo definiti, commode adhiberi possunt loco absolutorum, qui ab illis nullo symptomate discerni possunt. Etenim imprimantur utcunque vires, sint quicunque conatus, concedamus motum distingui per actiones in corpora exercitas; nunquam tamen inde sequetur, dari spatium illud et locum absolutum, ejusque mutationem esse locum verum.

65. Leges motuum, effectusque, et theoremata eorundem proportiones et calculos continentia, pro diversis viarum figuris, accelerationibus itidem et directionibus diversis, mediisque plus minusve resistentibus, hæc omnia constant sine calculatione motus absoluti. Uti vel ex eo patet quod, quum secundum illorum principia qui motum absolutum inducunt, nullo symptomate scire liceat, utrum integra rerum compages quiescat, an moveatur uniformiter in directum, perspicuum sit motum absolutum nullius corporis cognosci posse.

 66. Ex dictis patet ad veram motus naturam perspiciendam summopere juvaturum, 1°. Distinguere inter hypotheses mathematicas et naturas rerum: 2°. Cavere ab abstractionibus: 3°. Considerare motum tanquam aliquid sensibile, vel saltem imaginabile; mensurisque relativis esse contentos. Quæ si fecerimus, simul clarissima quæque  philosophiæ mechanicæ theoremata, quibus reserantur naturæ recessus, mundique systema calculis humanis subjicitur, manebunt intemerata, et motus contemplatio a mille minutiis, subtilitatibus, ideisque abstractis libera evadet. Atque hæc de natura motus dicta sufficiant.

67. Restat, ut disseramus de causa communicationis motuum. Esse autem vim impressam in corpus mobile causam motus in eo, plerique existimant. Veruntamen illos non assignare causam motus cognitam, et a corpore motuque distinctam, ex præmissis constat. Patet insuper vim non esse rem certam et determinatam, ex eo quod viri summi de ilia multum diversa, immo contraria, proferant, salva tamen in consequentiis veritate. Siquidem Newtonus ait vim impressam consistere in actione sola, esseque actionem exercitam in corpus ad statum ejus mutandum, nee post actionem manere. Torricellius cumulum quendam sive aggregatum virium impressarum per percussionem in corpus mobile recipi, ibidemque manere atque impetum constituere contendit. Idem fere Borellus aliique prædicant. At vero, tametsi inter se pugnare videantur Newtonus et Torricellius, nihilominus, dum singuli sibi consentanea proferunt, res satis commode ab utrisque explicatur. Quippe vires omnes corporibus attributæ tam sunt hypotheses mathematicæ quam vires attractivæ in planetis et sole. Cæterum entia mathematica in rerum natura stabilem essentiam non habent: pendent autem a notione definientis; unde eadem res diversimode explicari potest.

 68. Statuamus motum novum in corpore percusso conservari, sive per vim insitam, qua corpus quodlibet perseverat in statu suo vel motus vel quietis uniformis in directum; sive per vim impressam, durante percussione in corpus percussum receptam ibidemque permanentem; idem erit quoad rem, differentia existente in nominibus tantum. Similiter, ubi mobile percutiens perdit, et  percussum acquirit motum, parum refert disputare, utrum motus acquisitus sit idem numero cum motu perdito, ducit enim in minutias metaphysicas et prorsus nominales de identitate. Itaque sive dicamus motum transire a percutiente in percussum, sive in percusso motum de novo generari, destrui autem in percutiente, res eodem recidit. Utrobique intelligitur unum corpus motum perdere, alterum acquirere, et præterea nihil.

69. Mentem, quæ agitat et continet universam hancce molem corpoream, estque causa vera efficiens motus, eandem esse, proprie et stricte loquendo, causam communicationis ejusdem haud negaverim. In philosophia tamen physica, causas et solutiones phænomenon a principiis mechanicis petere oportet. Physice igitur res explicatur non assignando ejus causam vere agentem et incorpoream, sed demonstrando ejus connexionem cum principiis mechanicis: cujusmodi est illud, actionem et reactionem esse semper contrarias et æquales , a quo, tanquam fonte et principio primario, eruuntur regulæ de motuum communicatione, quæ a neotericis, magno scientiarum bono, jam ante repertæ sunt et demonstratæ.

70. Nobis satis fuerit, si innuamus principium illud alio modo declarari potuisse. Nam si vera rerum natura potius quam abstracta mathesis spectetur, videbitur rectius dici, in attractione vel percussione passionem corporum, quam actionem, esse utrobique æqualem. Exempli gratia, lapis fune equo alligatus tantum trahitur versus equum, quantum equus versus lapidem: corpus etiam motum in aliud quiescens impactum, patitur eandem mutationem cum corpore quiescente. Et quoad effectum realem, percutiens est item percussum, percussumque percutiens. Mutatio autem illa est utrobique, tam in corpore equi quam in lapide, tam in moto quam in quiescente, passio mera. Esse autem vim, virtutem, aut actionem corpoream talium effectuum vere et proprie causatricem non constat. Corpus motum in quiescens impingitur; loquimur tamen active, dicentes illud hoc impellere: nec absurde in mechanicis, ubi ideæ mathematicæ potius quam veræ rerum naturæ spectantur.

 71. In physica, sensus et experientia, quæ ad effectus  apparentes solummodo pertingunt, locum habent; in mechanica, notiones abstractæ mathematicorum admittuntur. In philosophia prima, seu metaphysica, agitur de rebus incorporeis, de causis, veritate, et existentia rerum. Physicus series sive successiones rerum sensibilium contemplatur, quibus legibus connectuntur, et quo ordine, quid præcedit tanquam causa, quid sequitur tanquam effectus, animadvertens. Atque hac ratione dicimus corpus motum esse causam motus in altero, vel ei motum imprimere, trahere etiam, aut impellere. Quo sensu causæ secundæ corporeæ intelligi debent, nulla ratione habita veræ sedis virium, vel potentiarum actricum, aut causæ realis cui insunt. Porro dici possunt causæ vel principia mechanica, ultra corpus, figuram, motum, etiam axiomata scientiæ mechanicæ primaria, tanquam causæ consequentium spectata.

72. Causæ vere activæ meditatione tantum et ratiocinio e tenebris erui quibus involvuntur possunt, et aliquatenus cognosci. Spectat autem ad philosophiam primam, seu metaphysicam, de iis agere. Quodsi cuique scientiæ provincia sua tribuatur, limites assignentur, principia et objecta accurate distinguantur, quæ ad singulas pertinent, tractare licuerit majore, cum facilitate, tum perspicuitate.

 A Proposal for Better Supplying Churches in our Foreign Plantations (1725) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

AND FOR CONVERTING THE SAVAGE AMERICANS TO CHRISTIANITY BY A COLLEGE TO BE ERECTED IN THE SUMMER ISLANDS

FIRST EDITION TEXT

A

PROPOSAL

For the better Supplying of

CHURCHES

IN OUR

Foreign Plantations ,

AND FOR

Converting the Savage Americans   to Christianity,

By a College to be erected in the  Summer Islands , otherwise called the  Isles of Bermuda .

The harvest is truly great, but the labourers are  few ,  Luke c. 10. v. 2.

LONDON ,

Printed by H. Woodfall, at Elzevir’s-Head without  Temple-Bar : And sold by J. Roberts,  near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick-Lane , 1725.  (Price Sixpence.)

 

 [image "img74.jpg" file=Image00073.jpg] 

A PROPOSAL FOR THE  BETTER SUPPLYING OF  CHURCHES IN OUR FOREIGN  PLANTATIONS, &C. [image "img75.jpg" file=Image00074.jpg] 

A LTHOUGH THERE ARE several excellent persons of the church of England, whose good intentions and endeavours have not been wanting to propagate the gospel in foreign parts, who have even combined into societies for that very purpose, and given great encouragement, not only for English missionaries in the West-Indies, but also, for the reformed of other nations, led by their example, to propagate christianity in the East: It is nevertheless acknowledged, that there is at this day, but little sense of religion, and a most notorious corruption of manners, in the English colonies settled on the continent of America, and the islands. It is also acknowledged, that the gospel hath hitherto made but a very inconsiderable progress among the neighbouring Americans, who still continue in much-what the same ignorance and barbarism, in which we found them above a hundred years ago.

I shall therefore venture to submit my thoughts upon a point, that I have long consider’d, to better judgments, in hopes that any expedient will be favourably hearkned to, which is proposed for the remedy of these evils. Now in order to effect this, it should seem the natural proper method, to provide, in the first place, a constant supply of worthy clergy-men for the English churches in those parts; and in the second place, a like constant supply of zealous missionaries well fitted for propagating Christianity among the savages.

For though the surest means to reform the morals, and soften the behaviour of men, be, to preach to them the pure uncorrupt doctrine of the gospel, yet it cannot be denied that the success of preaching dependeth in good measure on the character and skill of the preacher: Forasmuch as mankind are more apt to copy characters than to practise precepts, and forasmuch as argument, to attain its full strength, doth not less require the life of zeal, than the weight of reason; and the same doctrine, which maketh great impression, when delivered with decency and address, loseth very much of its force by passing through aukward or unskilful hands.

Now the clergy sent over to America have proved, too many of them, very meanly qualified both in learning and morals for the discharge of their office. And indeed little can be expected from the example or instruction of those, who quit their native country on no other motive, than that they are not able to procure a livelihood in it, which is known to be often the case.

To this may be imputed the small care that hath been taken to convert the negroes of our plantations, who, to the infamy of England, and scandal of the world, continue Heathen under Christian masters, and in Christian countries. Which cou’d never be, if our planters were rightly instructed and made sensible, that they disappointed their own baptism by denying it to those who belong to them:

That it would be of advantage to their affairs, to have slaves who should obey in all things their masters according to the flesh, not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but, in singleness of heart as fearing God : That gospel liberty consists with temporal servitude: and that their slaves would only become better slaves by being Christian.

And though it be allowed that some of the clergy in our colonies have approved themselves men of merit, it will at the same time be allowed, that the most zealous and able missionary from England must find himself but ill qualified for converting the American Heathen, if we consider the difference of language, their wild way of living, and above all, the great jealousy and prejudice which savage nations have towards foreigners, or innovations introduced by them.

These considerations make it evident, that a college or seminary in those parts is very much wanted; and therefore the providing such a seminary, is earnestly proposed and recommended to all those, who have it in their power, to contribute to so good a work. By this, two ends would be obtained.

First, the youth of our English plantations might be themselves fitted for the ministry; and men of merit would be then glad to fill the churches of their native country, which are now a drain for the very dregs and refuse of ours.

At present, there are, I am told, many churches vacant in our plantations, and many very ill supplied; nor can all the vigilance and wisdom of that great prelate, whose peculiar care it is, prevent this, so long as the aforesaid churches are supplied from England.

And supplied they must be, with such as can be pick’d up in England or Ireland, till a nursery of learning for the education of the natives is founded. This indeed might provide a constant succession of learned and exemplary pastors; and what effect this must be supposed to have on their flocks, I need not say.

Secondly, the children of savage Americans, brought up in such a seminary, and well instructed in religion and learning, might make the ablest and properest missionaries for spreading the gospel among their countrymen; who would be less apt to suspect, and readier to embrace a doctrine recommended by neighbours or relations, men of their own blood and language, than if it were proposed by foreigners, who would not improbably be thought to have designs on the liberty or property of their converts.

The young Americans necessary for this purpose, may, in the beginning be procured, either by peaceable methods from those savage nations, which border on our colonies, and are in friendship with us, or by taking captive the children of our enemies.

It is proposed to admit into the aforesaid college only such savages as are under ten years of age, before evil habits have taken a deep root; and yet not so early as to prevent retaining their mother tongue, which should be preserved by intercourse among themselves.

It is further proposed, to ground these young Americans thoroughly in religion and morality, and to give them a good tincture of other learning; particularly of eloquence, history, and practical mathematicks: to which it may not be improper to add some skill in physick.

If there were a yearly supply of ten or a dozen such missionaries sent abroad into their respective countries, after they had received the degree of master of arts in the aforesaid college, and holy orders in England, (till such time as episcopacy be established in those parts) it is hardly to be doubted, but, in a little time the world would see good and great effects thereof.

For, to any considering man, the employing American missionaries for the conversion of America, will, of all others, appear the most likely method to succeed; especially if care be taken, that, during the whole course of their education, an eye should be had to their mission; that they should be taught betimes to consider themselves as trained up in that sole view, without any other prospect of provision, or employment; that a zeal for religion, and love of their country, should be early and constantly instilled into their minds, by repeated lectures and admonitions; that they should not only be incited by the common topics of religion and nature, but farther animated and enflamed by the great examples, in past ages, of publick spirit and virtue, to rescue their countrymen from their savage manners, to a life of civility and religion.

If his majesty would graciously please to grant a charter for a college to be erected in a proper place for these uses, it is to be hoped a fund may be soon raised, by the contribution of well-disposed persons, sufficient for building and endowing the same. For as the necessary expence would be small, so there are men of religion and humanity in England, who would be pleased to see any design set forward for the glory of God and the good of mankind.

A small expence would suffice to subsist and educate the American missionaries in a plain simple manner, such as might make it easy for them to return to the coarse and poor methods of life in use among their countrymen; and nothing can contribute more to lessen this expence, than a judicious choice of the situation, where the seminary is to stand.

Many things ought to be considered in the choice of a situation. It should be in a good air; in a place where provisions are cheap and plenty; where an intercourse might easily be kept up with all parts of America and the islands; in a place of security, not exposed to the insults of pyrates, savages, or other enemies; where there is no great trade, which might tempt the readers or fellows of the college to become merchants, to the neglect of their proper business; where there are neither riches nor luxury to divert, or lessen their application, or to make them uneasy and dissatisfied with a homely frugal subsistence: lastly, where the inhabitants, if such a place may be found, are noted for innocence and simplicity of manners. I need not say of how great importance this point would be toward forming the morals of young students, and what mighty influence it must have on the mission.

It is evident the college long since projected in Barbadoes would be defective in many of these particulars; for though it may have its use among the inhabitants, yet a place of so high trade, so much wealth and luxury, and such dissolute morals, (not to mention the great price and scarcity of provisions;) must at first light seem a very improper situation for a general seminary intended for the forming missionaries, and educating youth in religion and sobriety of manners. The same objections lie against the neighbouring islands.

And if we consider the accounts given of their avarice and licentiousness, their coldness in the practice of religion, and their aversion from propagating it, (which appears in the withholding their slaves from baptism) it is to be feared, that the inhabitants in the populous parts of our plantations on the continent are not much fitter, than those in the islands above mentioned, to influence or assist such a design. And as to the more remote and less frequented parts, the difficulty of being supplied with necessaries, the danger of being exposed to the inroads of savages, and above all, the want of intercourse with other places, render them improper situations for a seminary of religion and learning.

It will not be amiss to insert here an observation, I remember to have seen in an abstract of the proceedings, &c. annexed to the Dean of Canterbury’s sermon, before the society for the propagation of the gospel in foreign parts; that the savage Indians, who live on the continent, will not suffer their children to learn English or Dutch, lest they should be debauched by conversing with their European neighbours: which is a melancholy, but strong confirmation of the truth of what hath been now advanced.

A general intercourse and correspondence with all the English colonies, both on the islands and the continent, and with other parts of America, hath been before laid down, as a necessary circumstance, the reason whereof is very evident. But this circumstance is hardly to be found. For on the continent, where there are neither inns, nor carriages, nor bridges over the rivers, there is no travelling by land between distant places. And the English settlements are reputed to extend along the sea-coast for the space of fifteen hundred miles. It is therefore plain, there can be no convenient communication between them, otherwise than by sea; no advantage therefore, in this point, can be gained by settling on the continent.

There is another consideration, which equally regards the continent and islands, that the general course of trade and correspondence lies from all those colonies to Great Britain alone: Whereas, for our present purpose, it would be necessary to pitch upon a place, if such could be found, which maintains a constant intercourse with all the other colonies, and whose commerce lies chiefly or altogether (not in Europe, but) in America.

There is but one spot that I can find, to which this circumstance agrees: and that is the isles of Bermuda, otherwise called the Summer Islands. These having no rich commodity or manufacture, such as sugar, tobacco, or the like, wherewithal to trade to England, are obliged to become carriers for America, as the Dutch are for Europe. The Bermudans are excellent shipwrights and sailors, and have a great number of very good sloops, which are always passing and repassing from all parts of America. They drive a constant trade to the islands of Jamaica, Barbadoes, Antego, &c. with butter, onions, cabbages, and other roots and vegetables, which they have in great plenty and perfection. They have also some small manufactures of joyner’s work and matting, which they export to the plantations on the continent. Hence Bermudan sloops are oftener seen in the ports of America, than any other. And indeed, by the best information I could get, it appears they are the only people of all the British plantations, who hold a general correspondence with the rest.

And, as the commerce of Bermuda renders it a very fit place, wherein to erect a seminary, so likewise doth its situation, it being placed between our plantations on the continent, and those in the isles, so as equally to respect both. To which may be added, that it lies in the way of vessels passing from America to Great Britain; all which makes it plain, that the youth, to be educated in a seminary placed in the Summer Islands, would have frequent opportunities of going thither and corresponding with their friends. It must indeed be owned, that some will be obliged to go a long way to any one place, which we suppose resorted to, from all parts of our plantations; but if we were to look out a spot the nearest approaching to an equal distance from all the rest, I believe it Would be found to be Bermuda. It remains, that we see whether it enjoys the other qualities or conditions laid down as well as this.

The Summer Islands are situated near the latitude of thirty-three degrees; no part of the world enjoys a purer air, or a more temperate climate, the great ocean which environs them, at once moderating the heat of the south winds, and the severity of the north-west. Such a latitude on the continent might be thought too hot; but the air in Bermuda is perpetually fanned and kept cool by sea breezes, which render the weather the most healthy and delightful that could be wished, being, (as is affirmed by persons who have long lived there) of one equal tenour almost throughout the whole year, like the latter-end of a fine May; insomuch that it is resorted to as the Montpelier of America.

Nor are these isles (if we may believe the accounts given of them) less remarkable for plenty than for health; there being, besides beef, mutton, and fowl, great abundance of fruits, and garden-stuff of all kinds in perfection: To this, if we add the great plenty and variety of fish, which is every day taken on their coasts, it would seem, that a seminary could no where be supplied with better provisions, or cheaper than here.

About forty years ago, upon cutting down many tall cedars, that sheltered their orange-trees from the north west-wind (which sometimes blows, even there, so as to affect that delicate plant) great part of their orange plantations suffered; but other cedars are since grown up, and no doubt a little industry would again produce as great plenty of oranges, as ever was there heretofore. I mention this, because some have inferred from the present scarcity of that fruit, for which Bermuda was once so famous, that there hath been a change in the soil and climate for the worse. But this, as hath been observed, proceeded from another cause, which is now in great measure taken away.

Bermuda is a cluster of small islands, which lie in a very narrow compass, containing, in all, not quite twenty thousand acres. This groupe of isles is (to use Mr. Waller’s expression) walled round with rocks, which render them inaccessible to pyrates, or enemies; there being but two narrow entrances, both well guarded by forts. It would therefore be impossible to find any where, a more secure retreat for students.

The trade of Bermuda consists only in garden-stuff, and some poor manufactures, principally of cedar and the palmetto-leaf. Bermuda hats are worn by our ladies: They are made of a sort of mat, or (as they call it) platting made of the palmetto leaf, which is the only commodity that I can find exported from Bermuda to Great Britain; and as there is no prospect of making a fortune by this small trade, so it cannot be supposed to tempt the fellows of the college to engage in it, to the neglect of their peculiar business, which might possibly be the case elsewhere.

Such as their trade is, such is their wealth; the inhabitants being much poorer than the other colonies, who do not fail to despise them upon that account. But if they have less wealth, they have withal less vice and expensive folly than their neighbours. They are represented as a contented, plain, innocent sort of people, free from avarice and luxury, as well as the other corruptions that attend those vices.

I am also informed, that they are more constant attendants on divine service, more kind and respectful to their pastor (when they have one) and shew much more humanity to their slaves, and charity to one another, than is observed among the English in the other plantations: one reason of this may be, that condemned criminals, being employed in the manufactures of sugar and tobacco, were never transported thither. But, whatever be the cause, the facts are attested by a Clergyman of good credit, who lived long among them.

Among a people of this character, and in a situation thus circumstantiated, it would seem that a seminary of religion and learning might very fitly be placed. The correspondence with other parts of America, the goodness of the air, the plenty and security of the place, the frugality and innocence of the inhabitants, all conspiring to favour such a design. Thus much at least is evident, that young students would be there less liable to be corrupted in their morals; and the governing part would be easier, and better contented with a small stipend, and a retired academical life, in a corner from whence avarice and luxury are excluded, than they can be supposed to be in the midst of a full trade and great riches, attended with all that high living and parade which our planters affect, and which, as well as all fashionable vices, should be far removed from the eyes of the young American missionaries, who are to lead a life of poverty and self-denial among their countrymen.

After all, it must be acknowledged, that though every thing else should concur with our wishes, yet if a set of good governors and teachers be wanting, who are acquainted with the methods of education, and have the zeal and ability requisite for carrying on a design of this nature, it would certainly come to nothing.

An institution of this kind should be set on foot by men of prudence, spirit, and zeal, as well as competent learning, who should be led to it by other motives than the necessity of picking up a maintenance. For upon this view, what man of merit can be supposed to quit his native country, and take up with a poor college-subsistence in another part of the world, where there are so many considerable parishes actually void, and so many others ill supplied for want of fitting incumbents? Is it likely, that fellowships of fifty or sixty pounds a year should tempt abler or worthier men, than benefices of many times their value?

And except able and worthy men do first engage in this affair, with a resolution to exert themselves in forming the manners of the youth, and giving them a proper education, it is evident the mission and the college will be but in a very bad way. This inconvenience seems the most difficult to provide against, and, if not provided against, it will be the most likely to obstruct any design of this nature. So true it is, that where ignorance or ill manners once take place in a seminary, they are sure to be handed down in a succession of illiterate or worthless men.

But this apprehension, which seems so well grounded, that a college in any part of America would either lie unprovided, or be worse provided than their churches are, hath no place in Bermuda; there being at this time several gentlemen in all respects very well qualified, and in possession of good preferments, and fair prospects at home, who having seriously considered the great benefit that may arise to the church and to mankind from such an undertaking, are ready to engage in it, and to dedicate the remainder of their lives to the instructing the youth of America, and prosecuting their own studies upon a very moderate subsistence in a retirement, so sweet, and so secure, and every way so well fitted for a place of education, and study, as Bermuda.

Thus much the writer hereof thought himself obliged to say of his associates: for himself, he can only say, that as he values no preferment upon earth, so much as that of being employed in the execution of this design; so he hopes to make up for other defects, by his industry and zeal.

In Europe, the protestant religion hath of late years considerably lost ground, and America seems the likeliest place, wherein to make up for what hath been lost in Europe, provided the proper methods are taken: Otherwise the Spanish missionaries in the South, and the French in the North, are making such a progress, as may one day spread the religion of Rome, and with it the usual hatred to protestants, throughout all the savage nations in America; which would probably end in the utter extirpation of our colonies, on the safety whereof depends so much of the nation’s wealth, and so considerable a branch of his majesty’s revenue.

But if this scheme were pursued, it would in all probability have much greater influence on the Americans, than the utmost endeavours of popish emissaries can possibly have; who from the difference of country, language and interest, must lie under far greater difficulties and discouragements than those, whom we suppose yearly sent out from Bermuda to preach among their countrymen.

It cannot indeed be denied, that the great number of poor regulars, inured to hard living, and brought up in an implicit obedience to their superiors, hath hitherto given the church of Rome, in regard to her missions, great advantage over the reformed churches. But from what hath been said, it is, I think, evident, that this advantage may be over-ballanced by our employing American missionaries.

Nor is the honour of the crown, nation, and church of England unconcerned in this scheme; which, it is to be hoped, will remove the reproach, we have so long lain under, that we fall as far short of our neighbours of the Romish communion in zeal for propagating religion, as we surpass them in the soundness and purity of it. And at the same time, that the doing what may be so easily done, takes away our reproach; it will cast no small lustre on his majesty’s reign, and derive a blessing from heaven on his administration, and those who live under the influence thereof.

Men of narrow minds have a peculiar talent at objection, being never at a loss for something to say against whatsoever is not of their own proposing. And perhaps, it will be said in opposition to this proposal, that if we thought ourselves capable of gaining converts to the church, we ought to begin with infidels, papists, and dissenters of all denominations at home, and to make proselytes of these before we think of foreigners; and that therefore our scheme is against duty. And further, that considering the great opposition, which is found on the part of those who differ from us at home, no success can be expected among savages abroad, and that therefore it is against reason and experience.

In answer to this I say, that religion like light is imparted without being diminished. That whatever is done abroad, can be no hindrance or lett to the conversion of infidels or others at home. That those who engage in this affair, imagine they will not be missed, where there is no want of schools or clergy; but that they may be of singular service in countries but thinly supplied with either, or altogether deprived of both: That our colonies being of the same blood, language, and religion with ourselves, are in effect our countrymen. But that christian charity, not being limited by those regards, doth extend to all mankind. And this may serve for an answer to the first point, that our design is against duty.

To the second point I answer; That ignorance is not so incurable as error; that you must pull down as well as build, erase as well as imprint, in order to make proselytes at home: Whereas, the savage Americans, if they are in a state purely natural, and unimproved by education, they are also unincumbred with all that rubbish of superstition and prejudice, which is the effect of a wrong one. As they are less instructed, they are withal less conceited, and more teachable. And not being violently attached to any false system of their own, are so much the fitter to receive that which is true. Hence it is evident, that success abroad ought not to be measured by that which we observe at home, and that the inference, which was made from the difficulty of the one to the impossibility of the other, is altogether groundless.

It hath more the appearance of reason to object (what will possibly be objected by some) that this scheme hath been already tried to no purpose, several Indians having returned to their savage manners after they had been taught to write and read, and instructed in the Christian religion; a clear proof that their natural stupidity is not to be overcome by education.

In answer to this, I say, that the scheme now proposed hath never been tried, forasmuch as a thorough education in religion and morality, in divine and humane learning, doth not appear to have been ever given to any savage American; that much is to be hoped from a man ripe in years, and well grounded in religion and useful knowledge, while little or nothing can be expected from a youth but slightly instructed in the elements of either: that from the miscarriage or gross stupidity of some, a general incapacity of all Americans cannot be fairly inferred: that they shew as much natural sense as other uncultivated nations: that the empires of Mexico and Peru were evident proofs of their capacity, in which there appeared a reach of politics, and a degree of art and politeness, which no European people were ever known to have arrived at without the use of letters or of iron, and which some perhaps have fallen short of with both those advantages.

To what hath been said, it may not be improper to add, that young Americans, educated in an island at some distance from their own country, will more easily be kept under discipline till they have attained a compleat education, than on the continent; where they might find opportunities of running away to their countrymen, and returning to their brutal customs, before they were thoroughly imbued with good principles and habits.

It must nevertheless be acknowledged a difficult attempt, to plant religion among the Americans, so long as they continue their wild and roving life. He who is obliged to hunt for his daily food, will have little curiosity or leisure to receive instruction. It would seem therefore the right way, to introduce religion and civil life at the same time into that part of the world: either attempt will assist and promote the other. Those therefore of the young savages, who upon trial are found less likely to improve by academical studies, may be taught agriculture, or the most necessary trades. And when husband-men, weavers, carpenters, and the like, have planted those useful arts among their savage country-men, and taught them to live in settled habitations, to canton out their land and till it, to provide vegetable food of all kinds, to preserve flocks and herds of cattle, to make convenient houses, and to cloath themselves decently: This will assist the spreading of the gospel among them; this will dispose them to social vertues, and enable them to see and to feel the advantages of a religious and civil education.

And that this view of propagating the gospel and civil life among the savage nations of America, was a principal motive which induced the crown to send the first English colonies thither, doth appear from the charter granted by King James I. to the adventurers in Virginia. See Purchas’s pilgrims, part 4. b. 9. c.i. And it is now but just (what might then seem charitable) that these poor creatures should receive some advantage with respect to their spiritual interests, from those who have so much improved their temporal by settling among them.

It is most true, notwithstanding our present corruptions, that there are to be found in no country under the sun men of better inclinations, or greater abilities for doing good than in England. But it is as true, that success, in many cases, dependeth not upon zeal, industry, wealth, learning, or the like faculties, so much as on the method, wherein these are applied. We often see a small proportion of labour and expence in one way, bring that about, which in others a much greater share of both could never effect. It hath been my endeavour to discover this way or method in the present case. What hath been done, I submit to the judgment of all good and reasonable men; who, I am persuaded, will never reject or discourage a proposal of this nature on the score of slight objections, surmises, or difficulties, and thereby render themselves chargeable with the having prevented those good effects, which might otherwise have been produced by it.

For it is, after all, possible, that unforeseen difficulties may arise in the prosecution of this design, many things may retard, and many things may threaten to obstruct it; but there is hardly any enterprize or scheme whatsoever for the publick good, in which difficulties are not often shewing themselves, and as often overcome by the blessing of God, upon the prudence and resolution of the undertakers: though, for ought that appears, the present scheme is as likely to succeed, and attended with as few difficulties, as any of this kind can possibly be.

For to any man, who considers the divine power of religion, the innate force of reason and virtue, and the mighty effects often wrought by the constant regular operation even of a weak and small cause; it will seem natural and reasonable to suppose, that rivulets perpetually issuing forth from a fountain, or reservoir, of learning and religion, and streaming through all parts of America, must in due time have a great effect, in purging away the ill manners and irreligion of our colonies, as well as the blindness and barbarity of the nations round them: Especially, if the reservoir be in a clean and private place, where its waters, out of the way of any thing that may corrupt them, remain clear and pure; otherwise they are more likely to pollute than purify the places through which they flow.

The greatness of a benefaction is rather in proportion to the number and want of the receivers, than to the liberality of the giver. A wise and good man would therefore be frugal in the management of his charity; that is, contrive it so as that it might extend to the greatest wants of the greatest number of his fellow-creatures. Now the greatest wants are spiritual wants, and by all accounts these are no where greater than in our western plantations, in many parts whereof divine service is never performed for want of clergy-men; in others, after such a manner and by such hands as scandalize even the worst of their own parishioners: where many English, instead of gaining converts, are themselves degenerated into Heathen, being members of no church, without morals, without faith, without baptism. There can be therefore, in no part of the Christian world, a greater want of spiritual things than in our plantations.

And, on the other hand, no part of the Gentile world are so inhumane and barbarous as the savage Americans, whose chief employment and delight consisting in cruelty and revenge, their lives must of all others be most opposite as well to the light of nature, as to the spirit of the Gospel. Now to reclaim these poor wretches, to prevent the many torments and cruel deaths which they daily inflict on each other, to contribute in any sort to put a stop to the numberless horrid crimes which they commit without remorse, and instead thereof to introduce the practice of vertue and piety must surely be a work in the highest degree becoming every sincere and charitable Christian.

Those, who wish well to religion and mankind, will need no other motive to forward an undertaking calculated for the service of both: I shall, nevertheless, beg leave to observe, that whoever would be glad to cover a multitude of sins by an extensive and well judged charity, or whoever, from an excellent and godlike temper of mind, seeks opportunities of doing good in his generation, will be pleased to meet with a scheme that so peculiarly puts it in his power, with small trouble or expence to procure a great and lasting benefit to the world.

Ten pounds a year, would (if I mistake not) be sufficient to defray the expence of a young American in the college of Bermuda, as to dyet, lodging, clothes, books, and education: And if so, the interest of two hundred pounds may be a perpetual fund for maintaining one missionary at the college for ever; and in this succession, many, it is to be hoped, may become powerful instruments for converting to Christianity and civil life whole nations, who now sit in darkness and the shadow of death, and whose cruel brutal manners are a disgrace to humane nature.

A benefaction of this kind seems to enlarge the very being of a man, extending it to distant places and to future times; inasmuch as unseen countries, and after ages, may feel the effects of his bounty, while he himself reaps the reward in the blessed society of all those, who, having turned many to righteousness, shine as the stars for ever and ever .

 

 

P. S.

Since the foregoing proposal was first made publick, His Majesty hath been graciously pleased to grant a charter for erecting a college by the name of St. Paul’s college in Bermuda, for the uses abovementioned. Which college is to contain a president and nine fellows. The first president appointed by charter is George Berkeley, D.D. and Dean of Derry. The three fellows named in the charter, are William Thompson, Jonathan Rogers, and James King, Masters of Arts and Fellows of Trinity College near Dublin. The nomination of a president is reserved to the Crown. The election of fellows is vested in the president and the majority of the fellows; as is likewise the government of the society. The Lord Bishop of London for the time being is appointed visitor: and such of His Majesty’s principal Secretaries of State for the time being as hath America in his province, is appointed chancellor of the said college. The president and fellows have the power of making statutes to be approved by the visitor: they have also the power of conferring degrees in all faculties. They are obliged to maintain and educate Indian scholars at the rate of ten pounds per Annum for each. They are obliged to transmit annual accounts of the state of the college, number of students, their progress, &c. to the chancellor and visitor. The aforesaid president and fellows are licensed to hold their preferments in these kingdoms till one year and a half be expired after their arrival in Bermuda. This society is incorporated with the usual clauses, hath power to receive benefactions, purchase lands, keep a common seal, &c. Lastly, all in office under His Majesty, are required to be aiding and assisting to the protection and preservation thereof.

As this college is proposed to be built and endowed by charitable contributions and subscriptions, all well-disposed persons, whether of the laity or the clergy, are desired to assist, as opportunity shall offer, in forwarding and collecting the same without loss of time; to the end that the President and Fellows may be able to set out for Bermuda in next spring; which is proposed, in case provision can be made by that time of sixty pounds per Annum for each: And it is hoped that the charity and zeal of sincere Christians will not suffer a design of this nature to be disappointed for want of necessary provision. The contributions and subscriptions aforesaid, may be deposited in the hands of any of the persons hereafter named.

 

John

Arbuthnot M.D. in Corke-street.

Revd. Martin

Benson, arch-deacon of Berks, and prebendary of Durham, in Albemarle-street.

Francis

Child Esq; Banker in Fleet-street, and Alderman of the city of London.

Revd. Dr.

Cobden, chaplain to the L. Bp of London, at Fulham.

Sir Clement

Cotterel Bart. in Dover-street.

Sir Thomas

Crosse Kt. in Westminster.

Sir Daniel

Dolins Kt. at Hackney.

Thomas

Green Esq; in Westminster.

Revd. Mr.

Hargrave, chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Newcastle, and prebendary of Westminster.

Edward

Harley Esq; auditor of the Imprests in Lincoln’s-Inn.

Benj. & Henry

Hoare Esquires, Bankers in Fleet-street.

Archibald

Hutcheson Esq; in James-street, near Golden-square.

Revd. Dr.

King, master of the charter-house, and first chaplain to the Lord Chancellor.

Revd. Dr.

Lisle, rector of Bow, and chaplain to his Grace the A.B. of Canterbury.

Revd. Dr.

Lupton, prebendary of Durham, and preacher at Lincoln’s-Inn.

Revd. Dr.

Marshal, rector of Foster-lane, and prebendary of Windsor.

Revd. Dr.

Mayo, Treasurer to the Society for promoting Christian Knowledge, at St. Thomas’s Hospital in Southwark.

Revd. Dr.

Moss, Dean of Ely, and preacher at Gray’s-Inn.

Revd. Dr.

Pelling, rector of St. Ann’s Soho, and prebendary of Windsor.

Revd. Dr.

Pierce, vicar of St. Martin’s in the Fields.

Hon. Augustus

Schutz Esq; Master of the Wardrobe to his Royal Highness.

Revd. Dr.

Sherlock, Dean of Chichester, and Master of the Temple.

Sir William

Wentworth Bart. in Clarges-street, or in York.

 

The money received by these Gentlemen is to be laid out in purchasing lands or perpetual annuities for endowment of the College aforesaid, and in building and providing necessaries for the same, by order or with the approbation of

His Grace William Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury.

The Right Honourable Peter Lord King, High Chancellor of Great Britain.

His Grace Thomas Duke of Newcastle, Principal Secretary of State for the Plantations in America, &c.

The Right Reverend Edmund Lord Bishop of London.

Who have been pleased to accept the Office of Trustees or Overseers of so useful a charity.

N.B. Till such time as the contributions and subscriptions amount to a sum sufficient for providing five persons with the above-mentioned salaries of sixty pounds per Annum, the subscribers shall not be desired to pay in their money.

 

FINIS .

 A Sermon Preached before the Incorporated Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts (1732) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

 FIRST EDITION TEXT

February 18. 1732

AT THE ANNIVERSARY MEETING OF THE SOCIETY FOR THE PROPAGATION OF THE GOSPEL IN FOREIGN PARTS.

AGREED, That the Thanks of the SOCIETY be given to the Reverend Mr. Dean Berkeley, for his Sermon Preached this Day before the SOCIETY, and that He be desired to Print the same.

David Humphreys, Secretary.

JOHN XVII. v. 3.

This is Life Eternal, that they may know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.

THAT human kind were not designed merely to sojourn a few Days upon this Earth: that a Being of such Excellence as the Soul of Man, so capable of a nobler Life, and having such a high Sense of Things moral and intellectual, was not created in the sole View of being imprisoned in an earthly Tabernacle, and partaking a few Pains and Pleasures which chequer this mortal Life, without aspiring to any thing either above or beyond it, is a Fundamental Doctrine as well of Natural Religion as of the Christian. It comes at once recommended by the Authority of Philosophers and Evangelists. And that there actually is in the Mind of Man a strong instinct and desire, an appetite and tendency towards another and a better State, incomeparably superior to the present, both in point of Happiness and Duration, is no more than every one’s Experience and inward Feeling may inform him. The satiety and disrelish attending sensual Enjoyments, the relish for things of a more pure and spiritual kind, the restless Motion of the Mind, from one terrene Object of pursuit to another, and often a Flight or Endeavour above them all towards something unknown, and perfective of its Nature, are so many signs and tokens of this better State, which in the Style of the Gospel is termed Life Eternal.

AND as this is the greatest Good that can befal us, the very end of our Being, and that alone which can crown and satisfy our Wishes, and without which we shall be ever restless and uneasy; so every Man, who knows and acts up to his true Interest, must make it his principal Care and Study to obtain it: And in order to this, he must endeavour to live suitably to his Calling, and of consequence endeavour to make others obtain it too. For how can a Christian shew himself worthy of his Calling, otherwise than by performing the Duties of it? And what Christian Duty is more essentially so, than that of Charity? And what Object can be found upon Earth more deserving our Charity, than the Souls of Men? Or, how is it possible for the most beneficent Spirit to do them better Service, than by promoting their best and most lasting Interest, that is by putting them in the Way that leads to Eternal Life.

WHAT this Eternal Life was, or how to come at it, were Points unknown to the Heathen World. It must be owned, the wise Men of Old, who followed the Light of Nature, saw even by that Light, that the Soul of Man was debased, and born downwards, contrary to its natural Bent, by carnal and terrene Objects; and that, on the other hand, it was exalted, purged, and in some sort assimulated to the Deity, by the Contemplation of Truth and Practice of Virtue. Thus much in general they saw or surmised. But then about the Way and Means to know the one, or perform the other, they were much at a loss. They were not agreed concerning the true End of Mankind; which, as they saw, was mistaken in the vulgar Pursuits of Men; so they found it much more easy to confute the Errors of others, than to ascertain the Truth themselves. Hence so many Divisions and Disputes about a Point which it most imported them to know, insomuch as it was to give the Bias to human Life, and govern the whole Tenor of their Actions and Conduct.

BUT when Life and Immortality were brought to Light by the Gospel, there could remain no Dispute about the chief End and Felicity of Man, no more than there could about the Means of obtaining it, afer the express Declaration of our Blessed Lord in the Words of my Text; This is Life eternal, that they may know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent. For the right understanding of which Words we must observe, that by the Knowledge of God, is not meant a barren Speculation, either of Philosophers or Scholastic Divines, nor any notional Tenets fitted to produce Disputes and Dissentions among Men; but, on the contrary, an holy practical Knowledge, which is the Source, the Root, or Principle of Peace and Union, of Faith, Hope, Charity, and universal Obedience.

A Man may frame the most accurate Notions, and in one Sense attain the exactest Knowledge of God and Christ that human Faculties can reach, and yet, notwithstanding all this, be far from knowing them in that saving Sense. For St. John tells us, that whosoever sinneth, hath not seen Christ, nor known him. And again,He that loveth not, knoweth not God. To know God as we ought, we must love him; and love him so as withal to love our Brethren, his Creatures, and his Children. I say that Knowledge of God and Christ, which is Life eternal, implies universal Charity, with all the Duties ingrafted thereon, or ensuing from thence, that is to say, the Love of God and Man. And our Lord expresly saith,He that hath my Commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me. From all which it is evident, that this saving Knowledge of God is inseparable from the Knowledge and Practice of his Will; the explicit Declaration whereof, and of the Means to perform it, are contained in the Gospel, that divine Instrument of Grace and Mercy to the Sons of Men. The metaphysical Knowledge of God, considered in his absolute Nature of Essence, is one thing, and to know him as he stands related to us as Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, is another. The former kind of Knowledge (whatever it amounts to) hath been, and may be, in Gentiles as well as Christians, but not the latter, which is Life eternal.

FROM what hath been said, it is a plain Consequence, that whoever is a sincere Christian, cannot be indifferent about bringing over other Men to the Knowledge of God and Christ; but that every one of us, who hath any Claim to that Title, is indispensably obliged in Duty to God, and in Charity to his Neighbour, to desire and promote, so far as there is Opportunity, the Conversion of Heathen and Infidels, that so they may become Partakers of Life and Immortality. For, this is Life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.

IN my present Discourse upon which Words; I shall,

First, CONSIDER in general, the Obligation that Christians lie under, of bringing other Men to the Knowledge of the only true God, and of Jesus Christ. And,

Secondly, I shall consider it in Reference to this laudable Society, instituted for the Propagation of the Gospel. And under each Head, I propose to obviate such Difficulties as may seem to retard, and intermix such Remarks as shall appear proper to forward so good a Work.

NOW although it be very evident, that we can really have neither a just Zeal for the Glory of God, nor a beneficent Love of Man, without wishing and endeavouring, as occasion serves, to spread the glad Tidings of Salvation, and bring those who are benighted in the Shadow of Death, to Life eternal, by the Knowledge of the only true God, and of Jesus Christ whom he hath sent. Yet this Duty, plain and undoubted as it seems, happens to be too often overlooked, even by those, whose Attention to other Points would make one think their Neglect of this, not an Effect of lukewarm Indifference, so much as of certain mistaken Notions and Suppositions. Two principal Considerations occur, which, in this particular, seem to have slackened the Industry of some, otherwise zealous and serious Christians.

ONE I apprehend to be this, that it is surmised, the Christian Religion is in a declining State, which by many Symptoms seems likely to end either in Popery, or a general Infidelity. And that of Course a prudent Person has nothing to do, but to make sure of his own Salvation, and to acquiesce in the general Tendency of things, without being at any fruitless Pains to oppose what cannot be prevented, to steer against the Stream, or resist a Torrent, which as it flows, gathers Strength and Rapidity, and in the End, will be sure to overflow, and carry all before it. When a Man of a desponding and foreboding Spirit hath been led, by his observation of the Ways of the World, and the prevailing Humour of our Times, to think after this manner; he will be inclined to strengthen this his preconceived Opinion, as is usual in other the like Cases, by Misapplication of holy Scripture: For instance, by those Words of our Blessed Saviour,When the Son of Man cometh, shall he find Faith upon Earth? which have been applied to this very purpose, as importing that before the final Judgment, Christian Faith should be extinguished upon Earth; Although these Words do, from the Context, seem plainly to refer to the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the obstinate Blindness of the Jews, who even then when they felt the Hand of God, should not acknowledge it, or believe the Roman Army to be the Instrument of Divine Vengeance, in the Day of their Visitation, by him whom they had injuriously treated, rejected, and put to Death.

BUT, granting the former Sense might be supported by no absurd Hypothesis, or no improbable Guess; yet shall the Endeavours of Christian Men for propagating the Gospel of Christ be forestalled by any Suppositions or Conjectures whatsoever? admitting, I say, those Words regard the future Advent of Jesus Christ, yet can any one tell how near or how far off that Advent may be? Are not the Times and Seasons foreknown only to God? And shall we neglect a certain Duty to Day, upon an uncertain Surmise of what is to come hereafter? This way of thinking might furnish as strong Reasons against Preaching at home, as abroad, within, as without the Pale of the Church. It would be as specious an Argument against the one as the other, but in reality can conclude against neither. For, as we know not when that supposed Time of general Infidelity is to be, or whether it will be at all; so, if it were ever so sure, and ever so near, it would nevertheless become us to take Care, that it may not be an Effect of our own particular Indifference and Neglect.

   BUT if we take our Notions, not from the uncertain Interpretation of a particular Text, but from the whole Tenor of the divine Oracles, from the express Promise and reiterated Predictions of our Blessed Lord, and his Apostles, we shall believe, that Jesus Christ is highly exalted of God, to the End, that at his Name every Knee shall bow, and every Tongue confess that he is the Lord, to the Glory of God the Father. That he must Reign till he hath put all Enemies under his Feet. That He is with us alway, even unto the End of the World. And that, The Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of Truth, is so far from being destroy’d human Means, that the gates of Hell (all the infernal Powers) shall not prevail against it. Let us therefore banish all such Conceits as may seem to justifie our Indolence, as may reason us out of all courage and vigour in the Race that is set before us; let us not, I say, slacken our own Hands, nor enfeeble our own Knees, by preconceived Fancies and Suppositions, considering that as the Success of all Enterprises in great Measure depends on the Spirit of the Undertakers, so nothing is more apt to raise a Spirit than Hope; or to depress it, than Despondency. We ought therefore to shake off every vain Fear in our spiritual Warfare. The Number, the Presumption, and the Abilities of those, who take Counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed, should not dishearten, but rather excite and encourage us to stand in the Gap.

ANOTHER Consideration, that may possibly withhold divers sincere Believers from contributing their Endeavours for bringing Men to the Knowledge of God and Christ, and thereby to eternal Life, is the want of Miracles in the present Age. Men naturally cast about for Reasons to countenance the Part they take. And as the Gift of Miracles was of mighty Influence and Help to those, who were commissioned to spread abroad the Light of the Gospel in its first promulgation, so no Pretence offers it self more naturally to excuse a Man from executing any purpose, than the want of Authority, which, in the Opinion of Men, cannot be without a just Commission, nor this unless distinguished by those proper Means and Powers that have been known to attend it. Now, with regard to this defect of Miracles, I shall beg leave to make two Observations.

First, It is to be observed, that if we have not Miracles, we have other Advantages which make them less necessary now, than in the first spreading of the Gospel: Whole Nations have found the Benefit of Christ’s Religion, it is protected by Princes, established and encouraged by Laws, supported by Learning and Arts, recommended by the Experience of many Ages, as well as by the Authority and Example of the wisest and most knowing Men. Certainly, if the greater Part of Mankind are Gentiles or Mahometans, it cannot be denied that the most knowing, most learned, and most improved Nations, profess Christianity, and that even the Mahometans themselves bear Testimony to the Divine Mission of Jesus Christ. Whereas therefore, in the Beginning, a few illiterate Wanderers, of the meanest of the People, had the Prejudices, the Learning, and the Power of their own, as well as other Nations, in one Word, the whole World, to oppose and overcome: Those who at this Day engage in the Propagation of the Gospel, do it upon Terms in many Respects far more easy and advantageous. It is Power against Weakness, Civility against Barbarism, Knowledge against Ignorance, some or other, if not all these Advantages, in the present Times, attending the Progress of the Christian Religion, in whatever Part of the World Men shall attempt to plant it.

  IN the second Place we may reflect, that if we have not the Gift of Miracles, this is a good Reason why we should exert more strongly those human Means which God hath put in our Power; and make our ordinary Faculties, whether of the Head, or the Hand, or the Tongue, our Interest, our Credit, or our Fortune, subservient to the great Giver of them; and chearfully contribute our humble Mite towards hastening that Time, wherein all Nations whom thou hast made, shall come and worship before thee, O Lord, and shall glorifie thy Name. It is at least a plain Case, that the Want of Apostolical Gifts should not be pleaded as a Bar to our doing that, which in no Respect, either of Difficulty or Danger, equals, or approaches the Apostolical Office. What Pretence can this supply for Mens being quite unconcerned about the spreading of the Gospel, or the Salvation of Souls? For Mens forgetting that they are Christians, and related to human Kind? How can this justify their overlooking Opportunities which lie in their Way, their not contributing a small Part of their Fortune towards forwarding a Design, wherein they share neither Pains nor Peril; the not bestowing on it, even the cheap Assistance of their Speech, Attention, Counsel, or Countenance, as Occasion offers? How unlike is this worldly, selfish Indifference, to that Account which St. Paul gives of himself, that he sought not his own the Profit, but the Profit of many, that they may be saved. And yet herein he expected the Corinthians (and the same Reason will hold for us) should be like him; for he subjoins, Be ye Followers of me as I also am of Christ.

HAVING considered the Duty in general, I come now to treat of it with Reference to America, the peculiar Province of this Venerable Society; which I suppose well informed of the State and Progress of Religion in that part of the World, by their Correspondencies with the Clergy upon their Mission. It may nevertheless be expected that one who had been engaged in a Design in this very View, who hath been upon the Place, and resided a considerable Time in one of our Colonies, should have observed somewhat worth reporting. It is to be hoped, therefore, that one Part of my Audience will pardon, what the other may, perhaps, expect, while I detain them with the Narrative of a few Things I have observed, and such Reflections as thereupon suggested themselves; some part of which may possibly be found to extend to other Colonies.

Rhode-Island, with a Portion of the adjacent Continent, under the same Government, is inhabited by an English Colony, consisting chiefly of Sectaries of many different Denominations, who seem to have worn off part of that Prejudice, which they inherited from their Ancestors, against the National Church of this Land; though it must be acknowledged at the same Time, that too many of them have worn off a serious Sense of all Religion. Several indeed of the better Sort are accustomed to assemble themselves regularly on the Lord’s Day for the Performance of Divine Worship. But most of those, who are dispersed throughout this Colony, seem to rival some well-bred People of other Countries, in a thorough Indifference for all that is sacred, being equally careless of outward Worship, and of inward Principles, whether of Faith or Practice. Of the Bulk of them it may certainly be said, that they live without the Sacraments, not being so much as baptized: And as for their Morals, I apprehend there is nothing to be found in them that should tempt others to make an Experiment of their Principles, either in Religion or Government. But it must be owned, the general Behaviour of the Inhabitants in those Towns where Churches and Meetings have been long settled, and regularly attended, seems so much better, as sufficiently to shew the Difference, which a solemn regular Worship of God makes between Persons of the same Blood, Temper, and natural Faculties.

THE native Indians, who are said to have been formerly many Thousands, within the compass of this Colony, do not at present amount to one Thousand, including every Age and Sex. And these are all either Servants or Labourers for the English, who have contributed more to destroy their Bodies by the Use of strong Liquors, than by any Means to improve their Minds, or save their Souls. This slow Poison, jointly operating with the Small-Pox, and their Wars (but much more destructive than both) hath consumed the Indians, not only in our Colonies, but also far and wide upon our Confines. And having made Havock of them, is now doing the same Thing by those who taught them that odious Vice.

THE Negroes in the Government of Rhode-Island are about half as many more than the Indians; and both together scarce amount to a seventh Part of the whole Colony. The Religion of these People, as is natural to suppose, takes after that of their Masters. Some few are baptized; several frequent the different Assemblies: and far the greater Part none at all. An antient Antipathy to the Indians, whom, it seems, our first Planters (therein as in certain other Particulars affecting to imitate Jews rather than Christians) imagined they had a Right to treat on the Foot of Canaanites or Amalekites, together with an irrational Contempt of the Blacks, as Creatures of another Species, who had no Right to be instructed or admitted to the Sacraments, have proved a main Obstacle to the Conversion of these poor People.

TO this may be added, an erroneous Notion, that the being baptized, is inconsistent with a State of Slavery. To undeceive them in this Particular, which had too much Weight, it seemed a proper Step, if the Opinion of his Majesty’s Attorney and Sollicitor-General could be procured. This Opinion they charitably sent over, signed with their own Hands; which was accordingly printed in Rhode-Island, and dispersed throughout the Plantations. I heartily wish it may produce the intended Effect. It must be owned, our reformed Planters, with respect to the Natives and the Slaves, might learn from those of the Church of Rome, how it is their Interest and Duty to behave. Both French and Spaniards have intermarried with Indians, to the great Strength, Security and Increase of their Colonies. They take Care to instruct both them and their Negroes, in the Popish Religion, to the Reproach of those who profess a better. They have also Bishops and Seminaries for Clergy; and it is not found that their Colonies are worse Subjects, or depend less on their Mother Country, on that Account.

IT should seem, that the likeliest Step towards converting the Heathen, would be to begin with the English Planters; whose Influence will for ever be an Obstacle to propagating the Gospel, till they have a right Sense of it themselves, which would shew them how much it is their Duty to impart it to others. The Missionaries employed by this Venerable Society have done, and continue to do, good Service, in bringing those Planters to a serious Sense of Religion, which, it is hoped, will in time extend to others. I speak it knowingly, that the Ministers of the Gospel, in those Provinces which go by the Name of New-England, sent and supported at the Expence of this Society, have, by their Sobriety of Manners, discreet Behaviour, and a competent Degree of useful Knowledge, shewn themselves worthy the Choice of those who sent them; and particularly in living on a more friendly Foot with their Brethren of the Separation; who, on their Part, are also very much come off from that Narrowness of Spirit, which formerly kept them at such an unamicable Distance from us. And as there is reason to apprehend, that Part of America could not have been thus distinguished, and provided with such a Number of proper Persons, if one half of them had not been supplied out of the dissenting Seminaries of the Country, who, in Proportion as they attain to more liberal Improvements of Learning, are observed to quit their Prejudice towards an Episcopal Church; so I verily think it might increase the Number of such useful Men, if Provision were made to defray their Charges in coming hither to receive holy Orders; passing and repassing the Ocean, and tarrying the necessary Time in London, requiring an Expence that many are not able to bear. It would also be an Encouragement to the Missionaries in general, and probably produce good Effects, if the Allowance of certain Missionaries were augmented, in proportion to the Service they had done, and the Time they had spent in their Mission. These Hints I venture to suggest, as not unuseful in an Age, wherein all humane Encouragements are found more necessary, than at the first Propagation of the Gospel. But they are, with all due Deference and Respect, submitted to the Judgment of this Venerable Audience.

AFTER all, it is hardly to be expected, that so long as Infidelity prevails at home, the Christian Religion should thrive and flourish in our Colonies abroad. Mankind, it must be owned, left to themselves, are so much bewildered and benighted, with respect to the Origin of that Evil which they feel, and from which they are at a Loss about the Means of being freed; that the Doctrines of the lapsed State of Man, his Reconciliation by Christ, and Regeneration by the Spirit, may reasonably be hoped to find an easy Admission, as bringing with them Light and Comfort, into a Mind not hardened by Impenitency, nor fore-closed by Pride, nor bias’d by Prejudice. But, such is the Vanity of Man, that no Prejudice operates more powerfully than that in Favour of Fashion; and no Fashions are so much followed by our Colonies, as those of the Mother Country, which they often adopt in their Modes of living, to their great Inconvenience, without allowing for the Disparity of Circumstance or Climate. This same Humour hath made Infidelity (as I find it too credibly reported) spread in some of our wealthy Plantations; uneducated Men being more apt to tread in the Steps of Libertines and Men of Fashion, than to model themselves by the Laws and Institutions of their Mother Country, or the Lives and Professions of the virtuous and religious Part of it.

BUT this is not all; While those abroad are less disposed to receive, some at home are, perhaps, less disposed to propagate the Gospel, from the same Cause. It is to be feared, I say, that the prevailing Torrent of Infidelity, which staggers the Faith of some, may cool the Zeal, and damp the Spirit of others, who, judging from the Event and Success of those, who impugn the Church of Christ, may possibly entertain some Scruple or Surmise, whether it may not be, for the present at least, abandoned by Providence, and that human Care must ineffectually interpose, till it shall please God, yet once more to shake not the Earth only, but also the Heavens. This Point hath been touched before, but deserves farther Consideration: to the end, that the peculiar Impiety of a profane Age, may not be a Bar to those very Endeavours, which it self renders more necessary, and calls for more loudly now than ever.

WHATEVER Men may think, the Arm of the Lord is not shorten’d. In all this Prevalency of Atheism and Irreligion, there is no Advantage gained, by the Powers of Darkness, either against God, or godly Men, but only against their own wretched Partisans. The Christian Dispensation is a Dispensation of Grace and Favour. The Christian Church a Society of Men intitled to this Grace, on performing certain Conditions. If this Society is diminished, as those who remain true Members of it suffer no Loss to themselves, so God loseth no Right, suffereth no Detriment, foregoeth no Good; his Grace resisted or unfruitful, being no more lost to him, than the Light of the Sun shining on desart Places, or among People who shut their Eyes.

 BESIDES, this Excess, this unstemmed Torrent of Profaneness, may possibly, in the Conclusion, defeat itself, confirm what it meant to extirpate, and instead of destroying, prove a Means of preserving our Religion; the evil Fruits and Effects thereof being so notorious and flagrant, and so sensibly felt, as in all likelyhood to be able to open the Eyes, and rouse the Attention of those, who may be blind and deaf to every other Argument and Consideration. Or, who knows but the Christian Church corrupted by Prosperity, is to be restored and purified by Adversity? which may prove, for ought we can tell, as salutary in future, as it hath been in past Ages. Many insolent and presumptuous Foes have set themselves against the Church of God; whose Hook nevertheless may be in their Nostrils, and his Bridle in their Lips, managing and governing, even their Rage and Folly, to the fulfilling of his own wise Purposes; and who may not fail in the End, to deal by them as he did by the King of Assyria, when he had performed his Work upon Sin and upon Jerusalem, punishing their stout Heart and high Looks. This presumptuous Conqueror was, without knowing it, a Tool or Instrument in the Hands of that God whom he blasphemed. O Assyrian, the Rod of mine Anger! I will send him against an hypocritical Nation, and against the People of my Wrath will I give him a Charge to take the Spoil, and to take the Prey, and to tread them down like the Mire of the Streets. Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his Heart think so, but it is in his Heart to destroy and cut off Nations not a few.

 THUS much at least is evident: It is no new Thing, that great Enormities should produce great Humiliations, and these again noble Vertues, which have often recovered both single Men, and whole States, even in a natural and civil Sense. And if the Captivities, Distresses, and Desolations of the Jewish Church, have occasioned their Return to God, and reinstated them in his Favour; nay, if it was actually foretold, whenever they lay under the Curse of God, at the Mercy of their Enemies, peeled and scattered in a foreign Land, that nevertheless upon their calling his Covenant to Mind, and returning to him, the Lord their God would turn their Captivity, and have Compassion upon them. I say, if Things were so, why may we not in Reason hope for something analogous thereto, in behalf of the Christian Church. It cannot be denied, that there was a great Analogy between the Jewish Institutions, and the Doctrines of the Gospel; for instance, between the Paschal Lamb, and the Lamb of God slain from the Foundation of the World; between the Egyptian Bondage, and that of Sin; the earthly Canaan, and the heavenly; the fleshly Circumcision, and the spiritual. In these and many other Particulars, the Analogy seems so plain, that it can hardly be disputed. To be convinced that the Law of Moses, and the Jewish Oeconomy were Figures and Shadows of the Evangelical, we need only look into the Epistle to the Hebrews. May we not therefore, in pursuance of this same Analogy, suppose a similar Treatment of the Jewish and Christian Church?

   LET us then see, on what Terms the former stood with God, in order to discover what the latter may reasonably expect. The solemn Denunciation to the Jews was,If thou shalt kearken diligently to the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his Commandments, which I command thee this Day, the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all the Nations of the Earth. But in case of Disobedience, it is added among many other Threats and Maledictions:The Lord shall smite thee with Blasting and with Mildew: and the Heaven that is over thy Head shall be Brass, and the Earth that is under thy Feet shall be Iron. And again,The Lord shall smite thee with Madness, and Blindness, and Astonishment of Heart. Have not the People of this Land drawn down upon it, by more Ways than one, the just Judgments of Heaven? Surely we have felt in a Metaphor the first of the forementioned Judgments; and the last hath been literally fulfilled upon us. Is it not visible that we are less knowing, less vertuous, less reasonable, in proportion as we are less religious? Are we not grown drunk and giddy with Vice and Vanity and Presumption, and Free-thinking, and Extravagance of every kind? to a Degree that we may truly be said to be smitten with Madness, and Blindness, and Astonishment of Heart.

AS antiently most unchristian Schisms and Disputes, joined with great Corruption of Manners, made way for the Mahometan in the East, and the Papal Dominion in the West; even so here at home in the last Century, a weak Reliance upon human Politics and Power on the one hand, and enthusiastic Rage on the other, together with carnal Mindedness on both, gave occasion to introduce Atheism and Infidelity. If the temporal State, and outward Form of the Jewish Church was, upon their Defection, overturned by Invaders, in like manner, when Christians are no longer governed by the Light of Evangelical Truth, when we resist the Spirit of God, are we not to expect, that the Heaven above will be as Brass, that the Divine Grace will no longer shower down on our obdurate Hearts, that our Church and Profession will be blasted by licentious Scorners, those Madmen, who in Sport scatter Firebrands, Arrows and Death? As all this is no more than we may reasonably suppose will ensue upon our Backsliding, so we may, with equal Reason, hope it will be remedied upon our Return to God.

FROM what hath been said it follows, that in order to propagate the Gospel abroad, it is necessary we do it at home, and extend our Charity to domestic Infidels, if we would convert or prevent foreign ones. So that a View of the declining State of Religion here at home, of those things that produced this Declension, and of the proper Methods to repair it, is naturally connected with the Subject of this Discourse. I shall therefore beg your Patience, while I just mention a few Remarks or Hints, too obvious, perhaps, in themselves to be new or unknown to any present, but too little visible in their Effects, to make one think they are, by all, much attended to.

SOME, preferring Points notional or ritual to the Love of God and Man, consider the National Church only as it stands opposed to other Christian Societies. These generally have a Zeal without Knowledge, and the Effects are suitable to the Cause; they really hurt what they seem to espouse. Others more solicitous about the Discovery of Truth, than the Practice of Holiness, employ themselves, rather to spy out Errors in the Church, than enforce its Precepts. These, it is to be feared, postpone the great Interests of Religion to Points of less Concern, in any Eyes but their own. But surely they would do well to consider, that an humble, though confused or indistinct, Faith in the Bond of Charity, and productive of good Works, is much more Evangelical than an accurate disputing and conceited Knowledge.

 A Church which contains the Fundamentals, and nothing subversive of those Fundamentals, is not to be set at naught by any particular Member; because it may not, in every Point, perhaps, correspond with his Ideas, no not, though he is sure of being in the right. Probably there never was, or will be, an established Church in this World, without visible Marks of Humanity upon it. Saint Paul supposeth, that on the Foundation of Jesus Christ, there will be human Superstructures of Hay and Stubble, things light and trivial, wrong or superstitious, which indeed is a natural Consequence of the Weakness and Ignorance of Man. But where that living Foundation is rightly laid in the Mind, there will not fail to grow and spring from thence those Vertues and Graces, which are the genuine Effects and Tokens of true Faith, and which are by no means inconsistent with every Error in Theory, or every needless Rite in Worship.

 THE Christian Religion was calculated for the Bulk of Mankind, and therefore cannot reasonably be supposed to consist in subtle and nice Notions. From the time that Divinity was considered as a Science, and human Reason enthroned in the Sanctuary of God, the Hearts of its Professors seem to have been less under the Influence of Grace. From that time have grown many unchristian Dissentions and Controversies, of Men knowing nothing, but doating about Questions and Strife of Words, whereof cometh Envy, Strife, Railings, evil Surmises, perverse Disputings of Men of corrupt Minds, and destitute of Truth. Doubtless, the making Religion a notional Thing, hath been of infinite Disservice. And whereas its holy Mysteries are rather to be received with Humility of Faith, than defined and measured by the accuracy of human Reason; all Attempts of this kind, however well intended, have visibly failed in the Event; and instead of reconciling Infidels, have, by creating Disputes and Heats among the Professors of Christianity, given no small Advantage to its Enemies.

 TO conclude, if we proportioned our Zeal to the Importance of Things: If we could love Men whose Opinions we do not approve: If we knew the World more, and liked it less: If we had a due Sense of the Divine Perfection and our own Defects: If our chief Study was the Wisdom from above, described by St. Paul. And if, in order to all this, that were done in Places of Education, which cannot so well be done out of them: I say, if these Steps were taken at home, while proper Measures are carrying on abroad, the one would very much forward or facilitate the other. As it is not meant, so it must not be understood, that foreign Attempts should wait for domestic Success, but only that it is to be wished they may cooperate. Certainly if a just and rational, a genuine and sincere, a warm and vigorous Piety, animated the Mother-Country, the Influence thereof would soon reach our Foreign Plantations, and extend throughout their Borders. We should soon see Religion shine forth with new Lustre and Force, to the Conversion of Infidels, both at home and abroad, and to the casting down high Imaginations, and every Thing that exalteth it self against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ.

To whom with the FATHER, and the HOLY GHOST, be ascribed all Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, now and for ever.

FINIS .

 Alciphron (1732) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

OR, THE MINUTE PHILOSOPHER

FIRST EDITION TEXT

This philosophical dialogue places the arguments of free-thinkers such as Mandeville and Shaftesbury against the Christian religion. It features four primary characters: the free-thinkers Alciphron and Lysicles; Berkeley’s spokesman Euphranor; and Crito, who serves as a representative for traditional Christianity. The mostly-silent narrator of the dialogue is given the name Dion.

There are two especially notable sections in the dialogue. In the fourth dialogue, Berkeley presents a novel teleological argument for the existence of God based on his theory of visual language, defended in the Essay Toward a New Theory of Vision (1709). In Dialogue VII Berkeley presents a novel theory of language, similar to the theory advocated by Ludwig Wittgenstein in his Philosophical Investigations.

 [image "img76.jpg" file=Image00075.jpg] 

The second edition’s title page

CONTENTSADVERTISEMENT.

THE FIRST DIALOGUE.

THE SECOND DIALOGUE.

THE THIRD DIALOGUE.

THE FOURTH DIALOGUE.

THE FIFTH DIALOGUE.

THE SIXTH DIALOGUE.

 THE SEVENTH DIALOGUE.

 

 [image "img77.jpg" file=Image00076.jpg] 

Bernard Mandeville (1670-1733), was an Anglo-Dutch philosopher, political economist and satirist. He became famous for ‘The Fable of the Bees’, which provides many key principles of economic thought, including division of labour and the “invisible hand”, seventy years before these concepts were more thoroughly elucidated by Adam Smith.

ALCIPHRONOR, THE MINUTE PHILOSOPHER. IN SEVEN DIALOGUES. Containing an APOLOGY for the Christian Religion, against those who are called Free-thinkers.

VOLUME the FIRST.

They have forsaken me the Fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold no water.

Jerem. ii. 13.

Sin mortuus, ut quidam minuti Philosophi censent, nihil sentiam, non vereor ne hunc errorem meum mortui Philosophi irrideant.

Cicero.

DUBLIN: Printed for G. Risk, G. Ewing, and W. Smith, Booksellers in Dame-Street, M DCC XXXII.

 ADVERTISEMENT. [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

T HE A UTHOR ’ S D ESIGN being to consider the Free-thinker in the various Lights of Atheist, Libertine, Enthusiast, Scorner, Critic, Metaphysician, Fatalist, and Sceptic, it must not therefore be imagined, that every one of these Characters agrees with every individual Free-thinker, no more being implied, than that each Part agrees with some or other of the Sect. There may possibly be a Reader who shall think the Character of Atheist agrees with none: But though it hath been often said, there is no such thing as a Speculative Atheist; yet we must allow, there are several Atheists who pretend to Speculation. This the Author knows to be true; and is well assured, that one of the most noted Writers against Christianity in our Times, declared, he had found out a Demonstration against the Being of a God. And he doubts not, whoever will be at the pains to inform himself, by a general Conversation, as well as Books, of the Principles and Tenets of our modern Free-thinkers, will see too much Cause to be persuaded that nothing in the ensuing Characters is beyond the Life. As for the Treatise concerning VISION, why the Author annexed it to the MINUTE PHILOSOPHER, will appear upon Perusal of the Fourth Dialogue.

 THE FIRST DIALOGUE.I. Introduction. II. Aim and Endeavours of Free-thinkers. III. Opposed by the Clergy. IV. Liberty of Free-thinking. V. Farther Account of the Views of Free-thinkers. VI. The Progress of a Free-thinker towards Atheism. VII. Joint Imposture of the Priest and Magistrate. VIII. The Free-thinker’s Method in making Converts and Discoveries. IX. The Atheist alone Free. His Sense of natural Good and Evil. X. Modern Free-thinkers more properly named Minute Philosophers. XI. Minute Philosophers, what sort of Men, and how educated. XII. Their Numbers, Progress, and Tenets. XIII. Compared with other Philosophers. XIV. What Things and Notions to be esteemed natural. XV. Truth the same, notwithstanding Diversity of Opinions. XVI. Rule and Measure of moral Truths.

 [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

I.

I Flattered my self, Theages, that before this time I might have been able to have sent you an agreeable Account of the Success of the Affair, which brought me into this remote corner of the Country. But instead of this, I shou’d now give you the Detail of its Miscarriage, if I did not rather choose to entertain you with some amusing Incidents, which have helped to make me easy under a Circumstance I cou’d neither obviate nor foresee. Events are not in our power; but it always is, to make a good use even of the very worst. And I must needs own, the Course and Event of this Affair gave opportunity for Reflections, that make me some amends for a great loss of Time, Pains, and Expence. A Life of Action, which takes its Issue from the Counsels, Passions, and Views of other Men, if it doth not draw a Man to imitate, will at least teach him to observe. And a Mind at liberty to reflect on its own Observations, if it produce nothing useful to the World, seldom fails of Entertainment to it self. For several Months past I have enjoy’d such Liberty and Leisure in this distant Retreat, far beyond the Verge of that great Whirlpool of Business, Faction, and Pleasure, which is called the World. And a Retreat in it self agreeable, after a long Scene of Trouble and Disquiet, was made much more so by the Conversation and good Qualities of my Host Euphranor, who unites in his own Person the Philosopher and the Farmer, two Characters not so inconsistent in nature as by Custom they seem to be. Euphranor, from the time he left the University, hath lived in this small Town, where he is possessed of a convenient House with a hundred Acres of Land adjoining to it; which being improved by his own Labour, yield him a plentiful Subsistence. He hath a good Collection, chiefly of old Books, left him by a Clergyman his Uncle, under whose Care he was brought up. And the Business of his Farm doth not hinder him from making good use of it. He hath read much, and thought more; his Health and Strength of Body enabling him the better to bear Fatigue of Mind. He is of opinion that he cou’d not carry on his Studies with more Advantage in the Closet than the Field, where his Mind is seldom idle while he prunes the Trees, follows the Plough, or looks after his Flocks. In the House of this honest Friend I became acquainted with Crito, a neighbouring Gentleman of distinguished Merit and Estate, who lives in great Friendship with Euphranor. Last Summer, Crito, whose Parish-Church is in our Town, dining on a Sunday at Euphranor’s, I happened to inquire after his Guests, whom we had seen at Church with him the Sunday before. They are both well, said Crito, but, having once occasionally conformed, to see what sort of Assembly our Parish cou’d afford, they had no farther Curiosity to gratify at Church, and so chose to stay at home. How, said Euphranor, are they then Dissenters? No, replied Crito, they are Free-thinkers. Euphranor, who had never met with any of this Species or Sect of Men, and but little of their Writings, shew’d a great Desire to know their Principles or System. That is more, said Crito, than I will undertake to tell you. Their Writers are of different Opinions. Some go farther, and explain themselves more freely than others. But the current general Notions of the Sect are best learned from Conversation with those who profess themselves of it. Your Curiosity may now be satisfy’d, if you and Dion wou’d spend a Week at my House with these Gentlemen, who seem very ready to declare and propagate their Opinions. Alciphron is above Forty, and no stranger either to Men or Books. I knew him first at the Temple, which, upon an Estate’s falling to him, he quitted, to travel through the polite parts of Europe. Since his Return he hath lived in the Amusements of the Town, which being grown stale and tasteless to his Palate, have flung him into a sort of splenetic Indolence. The young Gentleman, Lysicles, is a near Kinsman of mine, one of lively Parts, and a general Insight into Letters, who, after having passed the Forms of Education, and seen a little of the World, fell into an Intimacy with Men of Pleasure, and Free-thinkers, I am afraid much to the damage of his Constitution and his Fortune. But what I most regret, is the Corruption of his Mind by a Set of pernicious Principles, which, having been observed to survive the Passions of Youth, forestal even the remote Hopes of Amendment. They are both Men of Fashion, and wou’d be agreeable enough, if they did not fancy themselves Free-thinkers. But this, to speak the Truth, has given them a certain Air and Manner, which a little too visibly declare they think themselves wiser than the rest of the World. I shou’d therefore be not at all displeased if my Guests met with their Match, where they least expected it, in a Country Farmer. I shall not, replied Euphranor, pretend to any more than barely to inform my self of their Principles and Opinions. For this end I propose tomorrow to set a Week’s Task to my Labourers, and accept your Invitation, if Dion thinks good. To which I give consent. Mean while, said Crito, I shall prepare my Guests, and let them know that an honest Neighbour hath a mind to discourse them on the Subject of their Free-thinking. And, if I am not much mistaken, they will please themselves with the Prospect of leaving a Convert behind them, even in a Country Village. Next Morning Euphanor rose early, and spent the Forenoon in ordering his Affairs. After Dinner we took our Walk to Crito’s, which lay through half a dozen pleasant Fields planted round with Plane-trees, that are very common in this part of the Country. We walked under the delicious Shade of these Trees for about an Hour before we came to Crito’s House, which stands in the middle of a small Park, beautify’d with two fine Groves of Oak and Walnut, and a winding Stream of sweet and clear Water. We met a Servant at the Door with a small Basket of Fruit which he was carrying into a Grove, where he said his Master was with the two Strangers, we found them all three sitting under a Shade. And after the usual Forms at first meeting, Euphranor and I sat down by them. Our Conversation began upon the Beauty of this rural Scene, the fine Season of the Year, and some late Improvements which had been made in the adjacent Country by new Methods of Agriculture. Whence Alciphron took occasion to observe, That the most valuable Improvements came latest. I should have small Temptation, said he, to live where Men have neither polished Manners, nor improved Minds, though the Face of the Country were ever so well improved. But I have long observed, that there is a gradual Progress in humane Affairs. The first Care of Mankind is to supply the Cravings of Nature; in the next place they study the Conveniencies and Comforts of Life. But the subduing Prejudices, and acquiring true Knowledge, that Herculean Labour is the last, being what demands the most perfect Abilities, and to which all other Advantages are preparative. Right, said Euphranor, Alciphron hath touched our true Defect. It was always my Opinion, That as soon as we had provided Subsistence for the Body, our next Care should be to improve the Mind. But the Desire of Wealth steps between and engrosseth Mens Thoughts.

II.

ALC. Thought is that which we are told distinguisheth Man from Beast; and Freedom of Thought makes as great a difference between Man and Man. It is to the noble Asserters of this Privilege and Perfection of humane Kind, the Free-thinkers I mean, who have sprung up and multiplied of late Years, that we are indebted for all those important Discoveries, that Ocean of Light which hath broke in and made its way, in spight of Slavery and Superstition. Euphranor, who is a sincere Enemy to both, testified a great Esteem for those Worthies who had preserved their Country from being ruined by them, having spread so much Light and Knowledge over the Land. He added, That he liked the Name and Character of a Free-thinker: but in his Sense of the Word, every honest Inquirer after Truth in any Age or Country was intitled to it. He therefore desired to know what this Sect was that Alciphron had spoken of as newly sprung up; what were their Tenets; what were their Discoveries; and wherein they employ’d themselves, for the benefit of Mankind? Of all which, he shou’d think himself obliged, if Alciphron wou’d inform him. That I shall very easily, replied Alciphron, for I profess my self one of the number, and my most intimate Friends are some of the most considerable among them. And perceiving that Euphranor heard him with respect, he proceeded very fluently. You must know, said he, that the mind of Man may be fitly compared to a piece of Land. What stubbing, plowing, digging and harrowing is to the one, that thinking, reflecting, examining is to the other. Each hath its proper culture; and as Land that is suffered to lie waste and wild for a long tract of time will be overspread with brush-wood, brambles, thorns and such vegetables which have neither use nor beauty; even so there will not fail to sprout up in a neglected uncultivated mind, a great number of prejudices and absurd opinions, which owe their origin partly to the Soil it self, the passions and imperfections of the mind of Man, and partly to those Seeds which chance to be scattered in it by every wind of Doctrine, which the cunning of Statesmen, the singularity of Pedants, the superstition of Fools or the imposture of Priests shall raise. Represent to your self the mind of Man or humane Nature in general, that for so many ages had lain obnoxious to the frauds of designing and the follies of weak Men. How it must be over-run with prejudices and errors, what firm and deep Roots they must have taken, and consequently how difficult a task it must be to extirpate them? And yet this work no less difficult than glorious is the employment of the modern Free-thinkers. Alciphron having said this made a pause, and looked round on the Company. Truly, said I, a very laudable undertaking! We think, said Euphranor, that it is praise-worthy to clear and subdue the earth, to tame brute Animals, to fashion the outsides of Men, provide sustenance for their Bodies, and cure their Maladies. But what is all this in comparison of that most excellent and useful undertaking to free Mankind from their errors, and to improve and adorn their minds? For things of less merit towards the world, Altars have been raised and Temples built in antient times. Too many in our days, replied Alciphron, are such Fools as not to know their best Benefactors from their worst Enemies. They have a blind respect for those who enslave them, and look upon their Deliverers as a dangerous sort of Men that wou’d undermine received Principles and Opinions. EUPH. It were a great pity such worthy ingenious Men shou’d meet with any discouragement. For my part I shou’d think, a Man who spent his time in such a painful impartial search after Truth a better friend to Mankind than the greatest Statesman or Hero, the advantage of whose Labours is confined to a little part of the world, and a short space of time, whereas a Ray of Truth may enlighten the whole world and extend to future ages. ALC. It will be some time I fear before the common herd think as you do. But the better sort, the Men of parts and polite Education pay a due regard to the Patrons of Light and Truth.

III.

EUPH. The Clergy no doubt are on all occasions ready to forward and applaud your worthy endeavours. Upon hearing this Lysicles cou’d hardly refrain from laughing. And Alciphron with an air of pity told Euphranor that he perceived he was unacquainted with the real character of those Men. For, saith he, you must know that of all Men living they are our greatest Enemies. If it were possible they wou’d extinguish the very light of nature, turn the world into a dungeon, and keep mankind for ever in Chains and darkness. EUPH. I never imagined any thing like this of our Protestant Clergy, particularly those of the established Church, whom, if I may be allowed to judge by what I have seen of them and their writings, I shou’d have thought lovers of learning and useful knowledge. ALC. Take my word for it, Priests of all Religions are the same, wherever there are Priests there will be Priestcraft, and whereever there is Priestcraft there will be a persecuting Spirit, which they never fail to exert to the utmost of their power against all those who have the courage to think for themselves, and will not submit to be hoodwinked and manacled by their Reverend Leaders. Those great Masters of Pedantry and Jargon have coined several Systems, which are all equally true and of equal importance to the world. The contending Sects are each alike fond of their own, and alike prone to discharge their fury upon all who dissent from them. Cruelty and Ambition being the darling vices of Priests and Churchmen all the world over, they endeavour in all Countries to get an ascendant over the rest of mankind, and the Magistrate having a joint interest with the Priest in subduing, amusing, and scaring the People, too often lends a hand to the Hierarchy, who never think their authority and possessions secure, so long as those who differ from them in opinion are allowed to partake even in the common rights belonging to their birth or species. To represent the matter in a true light, figure to your selves a monster or spectre made up of Superstition and Enthusiasm, the joint issue of Statecraft and Priestcraft, rattling chains in one hand and with the other brandishing a flaming Sword over the Land, and menacing destruction to all who shall dare to follow the dictates of Reason and common Sense. Do but consider this, and then say if there was not danger as well as difficulty in our undertaking. Yet, such is the generous ardour that Truth inspires, our Free-thinkers are neither overcome by the one nor daunted by the other. In spight of both we have already made so many Proselytes among the better sort, and their numbers increase so fast, that we hope we shall be able to carry all before us, beat down the Bulwarks of all Tyranny, Secular of Ecclesiastical, break the Fetters and Chains of our Countrymen, and restore the original inherent Rights, Liberties, and Prerogatives of Mankind. Euphranor heard this discourse with his mouth open and his eyes fixed upon Alciphron, who, having uttered it with no small emotion, stopt to draw breath and recover himself; But finding that no body made answer he resumed the thread of his discourse, and turning to Euphranor spoke in a lower note what follows. The more innocent and honest a Man is, the more liable is he to be imposed on by the specious pretences of other Men. You have probably met with certain writings of our Divines that treat of grace, virtue, goodness and such matters fit to amuse and deceive a simple honest mind. But believe me when I tell you they are all at bottom (however they may gild their designs) united by one common principle in the same Interest. I will not deny there may be here and there a poor half-witted Man that means no mischief; but this I will be bold to say that all the Men of Sense among them are true at bottom to these three pursuits of ambition, avarice and revenge.

IV.

While Alciphron was speaking, a Servant came to tell him and Lysicles, that some Men who were going to London waited to receive their orders. Whereupon they both rose up and went towards the house. They were no sooner gone, but Euphranor addressing himself to Crito said, he believed that poor Gentleman had been a great sufferer for his Free-thinking, for that he seemed to express himself with the passion and Resentment natural to Men who have received very bad usage. I believe no such thing, answered Crito, but have often observed those of his Sect run into two faults of conversation, declaiming and bantering, just as the tragic or the comic humour prevails. Sometimes they work themselves into high passions and are frightened at Spectres of their own raising. In those fits every Country Curate passes for an Inquisitor. At other times they affect a sly facetious manner, making use of hints and allusions, expressing little, insinuating much, and upon the whole seeming to divert themselves with the Subject and their Adversaries. But if you wou’d know their opinions you must make them speak out and keep close to the point. Persecution for Free-thinking is a topic they are apt to enlarge on though without any just cause, every one being at full liberty to think what he pleases, there being no such thing in England that I know as Persecution for opinion, sentiment, or thought. But in every Country, I suppose, some care is taken to restrain petulant Speech, and, whatever Mens inward thoughts may be, to discourage an outward contempt of what the public esteemeth Sacred. Whether this care in England hath of late been so excessive, as to distress the Subjects of this once free and easy Government, whether the Free-thinkers can truly complain of any hardship upon the score of conscience or opinion, you will better be able to judge, when you hear from themselves an account of the numbers, progress and notions of their Sect: which I doubt not they will communicate fully and freely, provided no body present seem shocked or offended. For in that case it is possible good manners may put them upon some reserve. Oh! said Euphranor, I am never angry with any Man for his opinion whether he be Jew, Turk or Idolater, he may speak his mind freely to me without fear of offending. I shou’d even be glad to hear what he hath to say, provided he saith it in an ingenuous candid manner. Whoever digs in the Mine of Truth I look on as my Fellow-labourer, but if, while I am taking true pains, he diverts himself with teizing me and flinging Dust in mine Eyes, I shall soon be tired of him.

V.

In the mean time Alciphron and Lysicles having dispatched what they went about returned to us. Lysicles sate down where he had been before. But Alciphron stood over-against us, with his arms folded across, and his head reclined on the left shoulder in the posture of a Man meditating. We sate silent not to disturb his thoughts; and after two or three Minutes he uttered these words, oh Truth! oh Liberty! after which he remained musing as before. Upon this Euphranor took the freedom to interrupt him. Alciphron, said he, it is not fair to spend your time in Soliloquies. The conversation of learned and knowing Men is rarely to be met with in this corner, and the opportunity you have put into my Hands I value too much, not to make the best use of it. ALC. Are you then in earnest a Votary of Truth, and is it possible you shou’d bear the liberty of a fair Inquiry? EUPH. It is what I desire of all things. ALC. What! upon every Subject? upon the notions you first sucked in with your Milk, and which have been ever since nursed by parents, pastors, tutors, religious assemblies, books of Devotion and such methods of pre-possessing Mens minds. EUPH. I love information upon all Subjects that come in my way, and especially upon those that are most important. ALC. If then you are in earnest hold fair and stand firm, while I probe your prejudices and extirpate your principles.

Dum veteres avias tibi de pulmone revello.

Having said thus, Alciphron knit his brows and made a short pause, after which he proceeded in the following manner. If we are at the pains to dive and penetrate into the bottom of things, and analyse Opinions into their first principles, we shall find that those Opinions which are thought of greatest consequence have the slightest original, being derived either from the casual customs of the Country where we live, or from early instruction instilled into our tender minds, before we are able to discern between right and wrong, true and false. The Vulgar (by whom I understand all those who do not make a free use of their Reason) are apt to take these prejudices for things sacred and unquestionable, believing them to be imprinted on the hearts of men by God himself, or convey’d by Revelation from Heaven, or to carry with them so great light and evidence as must force an assent without any inquiry or examination. Thus the shallow Vulgar have their heads furnished with sundry conceits, principles and doctrines, religious, moral and political, all which they maintain with a zeal proportionable to their want of Reason. On the other hand, those who duly employ their faculties in the search of Truth, take especial care to weed out of their minds and extirpate all such notions or prejudices as were planted in them before they arrived at the free and intire use of Reason. This difficult task hath been successfully performed by our modern Free-thinkers, who have not only dissected with great Sagacity the received Systems, and traced every established prejudice to the fountain-head, the true and genuine motives of assent: But also, having been able to embrace in one comprehensive view the several parts and ages of the World, they observed a wonderful variety of Customs and Rites, of Institutions Religious and Civil, of Notions and Opinions very unlike and even contrary one to another: A certain sign they cannot all be true. And yet they are all maintained by their several Partisans with the same positive air and warm zeal, and if examined will be found to bottom on one and the same Foundation, the strength of prejudice. By the help of these Remarks and Discoveries, they have broke through the bands of popular Custom, and having freed themselves from Imposture do now generously lend a hand to their Fellow Subjects, to lead them into the same paths of Light and Liberty. Thus, Gentlemen, I have given you a summary account of the views and endeavours of those Men who are called Free-thinkers. If in the course of what I have said or shall say hereafter, there be some things contrary to your pre-conceived Opinions, and therefore shocking and disagreeable, you will pardon the freedom and plainness of a Philosopher, and consider that, whatever displeasure I give you of that kind, I do it in strict regard to Truth and Obedience to your own commands. I am very sensible, that Eyes long kept in the dark cannot bear a sudden view of noon day light, but must be brought to it by degrees. It is for this Reason, the ingenious Gentlemen of our Profession are accustomed to proceed gradually, beginning with those prejudices to which Men have the least Attachment, and thence proceeding to undermine the rest by slow and insensible degrees, till they have demolished the whole Fabric of Human Folly and Superstition. But the little time I can propose to spend here obligeth me to take a shorter course, and be more direct and plain than possibly may be thought to suit with Prudence and good Manners. Upon this, we assured him he was at full liberty to speak his mind of Things, Persons and Opinions without the least reserve. It is a liberty, replied Alciphron, that we Free-thinkers are equally willing to give and take. We love to call things by their right Names, and cannot endure that Truth shou’d suffer through Complaisance. Let us therefore lay it down for a Preliminary, that no offence be taken at any thing whatsoever shall be said on either side. To which we all agreed.

VI.

In order then, said Alciphron, to find out the Truth, we will suppose that I am bred up, for instance in the Church of England. When I come to maturity of Judgment and reflect on the particular Worship and Opinions of this Church, I do not remember when or by what means they first took possession of my mind, but there I find them from time immemorial. Then casting an Eye on the Education of Children, from whence I can make a judgment of my own, I observe they are instructed in religious matters before they can reason about them, and consequently that all such instruction is nothing else but filling the tender mind of a Child with prejudices. I do therefore reject all those religious notions, which I consider as the other Follies of my Childhood. I am confirmed in this way of thinking, when I look abroad into the World, where I observe Papists and several Sects of Dissenters which do all agree in a general profession of Belief in Christ, but differ vastly one from another in the particulars of Faith and Worship. I then enlarge my View so as to take in Jews and Mahometans, between whom and the Christians I perceive indeed some small agreement in the Belief of one God; but then they have each their distinct Laws and Revelations, for which they express the same regard. But extending my view still further to Heathenish and Idolatrous Nations I discover an endless variety, not only in particular Opinions and Modes of Worship, but even in the very notion of a Deity, wherein they widely differ one from another, and from all the forementioned Sects. Upon the whole, instead of Truth simple and uniform I perceive nothing but Discord, Opposition and wild Pretensions, all springing from the same source to wit the prejudice of Education. From such reasonings and reflections as these, thinking Men have concluded that all Religions are alike false and fabulous. One is a Christian, another a Jew, a third a Mahometan, a fourth an Idolatrous Gentile, but all from one and the same reason, because they happen to be bred up each in his respective Sect. In the same manner, therefore, as each of these contending Parties condemns the rest, so an unprejudiced stander-by will condemn and reject them all together, observing that they all draw their origin from the same fallacious Principle, and are carried on by the same Artifice to answer the same ends of the Priest and the Magistrate.

VII.

EUPH. You hold then that the Magistrate concurs with the Priest in imposing on the People. ALC. I do, and so must every one who considers things in a true light. For you must know, the Magistrates principal aim is to keep the People under him in awe. Now the public Eye restrains Men from open Offences against the Laws and Government. But to prevent secret Transgressions a Magistrate finds it expedient, that Men shou’d believe there is an Eye of Providence watching over their private Actions and Designs. And, to intimidate those who might otherwise be drawn into Crimes by the prospect of Pleasure and Profit, he gives them to understand, that whoever escapes Punishment in this Life will be sure to find it in the next, and that so heavy and lasting as infinitely to over-balance the Pleasure and Profit accruing from his Crimes. Hence the Belief of a God, the Immortality of the Soul, and a future state of Rewards and Punishments have been esteemed useful Engines of Government. And to the end that these notional airy Doctrines might make a sensible impression, and be retained on the minds of Men, skilful Rulers have in the several civilized Nations of the Earth devised Temples, Sacrifices, Churches, Rites, Ceremonies, Habits, Music, Prayer, Preaching, and the like spiritual trumpery, whereby the Priest maketh temporal gains, and the Magistrate findeth his account in frightening and subduing the People. This is the original of the Combination between Church and State, of Religion by Law established, of rights, immunities and incomes of Priests all over the World: There being no Government but wou’d have you fear God that you may honour the King or civil Power. And you will ever observe that politic Princes keep up a good understanding with their Clergy, to the end that they in return, by inculcating Religion and Loyalty into the minds of the People, may render them tame, timorous and slavish. Crito and I heard this Discourse of Alciphron with the utmost attention, though without any appearance of surprize, there being indeed nothing in it to us new or unexpected. But Euphranor, who had never before been present at such Conversation, cou’d not help shewing some Astonishment, which Lysicles observing, asked him with a lively Air, how he liked Alciphron’s Lecture. It is, said he, the first I believe that you ever heard of the kind, and requireth a strong Stomach to digest it. EUPH. I will own to you that my Digestion is none of the quickest; but it hath sometimes, by degrees, been able to master things which at first appeared indigestible. At present I admire the free Spirit and Eloquence of Alciphron, but, to speak the Truth, I am rather astonished, than convinced of the Truth of his Opinions. How (said he turning to Alciphron) is it then possible you shou’d not believe the Being of a God? ALC. To be plain with you, I do not.

VIII.

But this is what I foresaw, a Flood of Light let in at once upon the Mind being apt to dazzle and disorder, rather than enlighten it. Was I not pinched in Time, the regular way would be to have begun with the Circumstantials of Religion, next to have attacked the Mysteries of Christianity, after that proceeded to the practical Doctrines, and in the last place to have extirpated that which of all other religious Prejudices, being the first taught, and Basis of the rest, hath taken the deepest root in our Minds, I mean the Belief of a God. I do not wonder it sticks with you, having known several very ingenious Men who found it difficult to free themselves from this Prejudice. EUPH. All Men have not the same Alacrity and Vigour in thinking: for my own part, I find it a hard matter to keep pace with you. ALC. To help you, I will go a little way back, and resume the Thread of my Reasoning. First I must acquaint you, That having applied my Mind to contemplate the Idea of Truth, I discovered it to be of a stable, permanent, and uniform nature; not various and changeable, like Modes or Fashions, and things depending on Fancy. In the next place, having observed several Sects and Subdivisions of Sects espousing very different and contrary Opinions, and yet all professing Christianity, I rejected those Points wherein they differed, retaining only that which was agreed to by all, and so became a Latitudinarian. Having afterwards, upon a more enlarged View of things, perceived that Christians, Jews, and Mahometans had each their different Systems of Faith, agreeing only in the Belief of one God, I became a Deist. Lastly, extending my View to all the other various Nations which inhabit this Globe, and finding they agreed in no one Point of Faith, but differed one from another, as well as from the forementioned Sects, even in the Notion of a God, in which there is as great Diversity as in the Methods of Worship, I thereupon became an Atheist: it being my Opinion that a Man of Courage and Sense shou’d follow his Argument wherever it leads him, and that nothing is more ridiculous than to be a Free-thinker by halves. I approve the Man who makes thorough Work, and not content with lopping off the Branches, extirpates the very Root from which they sprung.

IX.

Atheism therefore, that Bugbear of Women and Fools, is the very Top and Perfection of Free-thinking. It is the grand Arcanum to which a true Genius naturally riseth, by a certain Climax or Gradation of Thought, and without which he can never possess his Soul in absolute Liberty and Repose. For your thorough Conviction in this main Article, do but examine the Notion of a God with the same Freedom that you would other Prejudices. Trace it to the fountain-head, and you shall not find that you had it by any of your Senses, the only true means of discovering what is real and substantial in Nature: You will find it lying amongst other old Lumber in some obscure corner of the Imagination, the proper Receptacle of Visions, Fancies, and Prejudices of all kinds; and if you are more attached to this than the rest, it is only because it is the oldest. This is all, take my Word for it, and not mine only, but that of many more the most ingenious Men of the Age, who, I can assure you, think as I do on the Subject of a Deity. Though some of them hold it proper, to proceed with more Reserve in declaring to the World their Opinion in this Particular, than in most others. And it must be owned, there are still too many in England who retain a foolish Prejudice against the Name of Atheist. But it lessens every Day among the better sort: and when it is quite worn out, our Free-thinkers may then, (and not till then) be said to have given the finishing Stroke to Religion; it being evident that so long as the Existence of God is believed, Religion must subsist in some Shape or other. But the Root being once plucked up, the Scions which shot from it will of course wither and decay. Such are all those whimsical Notions of Conscience, Duty, Principle, and the like, which fill a Man’s Head with Scruples, awe him with Fears, and make him a more thorough Slave than the Horse he rides. A Man had better a thousand times be hunted by Bailiffs or Messengers than haunted by these Spectres, which embarass and embitter all his Pleasures, creating the most real and sore Servitude upon Earth. But the Free-thinker, with a vigorous flight of Thought breaks through those airy Springes, and asserts his original Independency. Others indeed may talk, and write, and fight about Liberty, and make an outward Pretence to it, but the Free-thinker alone is truly free. Alciphron having ended this Discourse with an Air of Triumph, Euphranor spoke to him in the following Manner. You make clear Work. The Gentlemen of your Profession are, it seems, admirable Weeders. You have rooted up a world of Notions, I shou’d be glad to see what fine things you have planted in their stead. ALC. Have Patience, good Euphranor. I will shew you in the first place, That whatever was sound and good we leave untouched, and encourage it to grow in the Mind of Man. And secondly, I will shew you what excellent things we have planted in it. You must know then, that pursuing our close and severe Scrutiny, we do at last arrive at something solid and real, in which all Mankind agree, to wit, the Appetites, Passions, and Senses: These are founded in Nature, are real, have real Objects, and are attended with real and substantial Pleasures; Food, Drink, Sleep, and the like animal Enjoyments being what all Men like and love. And if we extend our view to the other kinds of Animals, we shall find them all agree in this, that they have certain natural Appetites and Senses, in the gratifying and satisfying of which they are constantly employ’d. Now these real natural good things which include nothing of Notion or Fancy, we are so far from destroying, that we do all we can to cherish and improve them. According to us, every wise Man looks upon himself, or his own bodily Existence in this present World, as the Center and ultimate End of all his Actions and Regards. He considers his Appetites as natural Guides directing to his proper Good, his Passions and Senses as the natural true Means of enjoying this Good. Hence he endeavours to keep his Appetites in high Relish, his Passions and Senses strong and lively, and to provide the greatest Quantity and Variety of real Objects suited to them, which he studieth to enjoy by all possible means, and in the highest Perfection imaginable. And the Man who can do this without Restraint, Remorse, or Fear, is as happy as any other Animal whatsoever, or as his Nature is capable of being. Thus I have given you a succinct View of the Principles, Discoveries, and Tenets of the select Spirits of this enlightned Age.

X.

Crito remarked, that Alciphron had spoke his Mind with great Clearness. Yes, replied Euphranor, we are obliged to the Gentleman for letting us at once into the Tenets of his Sect. But, if I may be allowed to speak my Mind, Alciphron, though in compliance with my own Request, hath given me no small Uneasiness. You need, said Alciphron, make no Apology for speaking freely what you think to one who professeth himself a Free-thinker. I shou’d be sorry to make one, whom I meant to oblige, uneasy. Pray let me know wherein I have offended. I am half ashamed, replied Euphranor, to own that I who am no great Genius have a Weakness incidental to little ones. I wou’d say that I have favourite Opinions, which you represent to be Errors and Prejudices. For Instance, the Immortality of the Soul is a Notion I am fond of, as what supports the Mind with a very pleasing Prospect. And if it be an Error, I shou’d perhaps be of Tully’s Mind, who in that Case professed he shou’d be sorry to know the Truth, acknowledging no sort of Obligation to certain Philosophers in his Days, who taught the Soul of Man was mortal. They were, it seems, Predecessors to those who are now called Free-thinkers; which Name being too general and indefinite, inasmuch as it comprehends all those who think for themselves, whether they agree in Opinon with these Gentlemen or no, it shou’d not seem amiss to assign them a specific Appellation or peculiar Name, whereby to distinguish them from other Philosophers, at least in our present Conference. For I cannot bear to argue against Free-thinking and Free-thinkers. ALC. In the Eyes of a wise Man Words are of small moment. We do not think Truth attached to a Name. EUPH. If you please then, to avoid Confusion, let us call your Sect by the same Name that Tully (who understood the force of Language) bestow’d upon them. ALC. With all my heart. Pray what may that Name be? EUPH. Why, he calls them Minute Philosophers. Right, said Crito, the modern Free-thinkers are the very same with those Cicero called Minute Philosophers, which Name admirably suits them, they being a sort of Sect which diminish all the most valuable things, the thoughts, views, and hopes of Men; all the Knowledge, Notions, and Theories of the Mind they reduce to Sense; Humane Nature they contract and degrade to the narrow low Standard of Animal Life, and assign us only a small pittance of Time instead of Immortality. Alciphron very gravely remark’d, That the Gentlemen of his Sect had done no injury to Man, and that if he be a little, short-lived, contemptible Animal, it was not their saying it made him so: And they were no more to blame for whatever defects they discover, than a faithful Glass for making the wrinkles which it only shews. As to what you observe, said he, of those we now call Free-thinkers having been anciently termed Minute Philosophers, it is my opinion this Appellation might be derived from their considering things minutely, and not swallowing them in the gross, as other Men are used to do. Besides, we all know the best Eyes are necessary to discern the minutest Objects: It seems therefore, that Minute Philosophers might have been so called from their distinguished perspicacity. EUPH. O Alciphron! these Minute Philosophers (since that is their true Name) are a sort of Pirates who plunder all that come in their way. I consider my self as a Man left stript and desolate on a bleak Beach.

XI.

But who are these profound and learned Men that of late Years have demolished the whole Fabric which Law-givers, Philosophers and Divines had been erecting for so many Ages? Lysicles hearing these words, smiled, and said he believed Euphranor had figured to himself Philosophers in square caps and long gowns: but, thanks to these happy Times, the Reign of Pedantry was over. Our Philosophers, said he, are of a very different kind from those aukward Students, who think to come at Knowledge by poring on dead Languages, and old Authors, or by sequestring themselves from the Cares of the World to meditate in Solitude and Retirement. They are the best bred Men of the Age, Men who know the World, Men of pleasure, Men of fashion, and fine Gentlemen. EUPH. I have some small notion of the People you mention, but shou’d never have taken them for Philosophers. CRI. Nor wou’d any one else till of late. The World it seems was long under a mistake about the way to Knowledge, thinking it lay through a tedious course of Academical Education and Study. But among the Discoveries of the present Age, one of the principal is the finding out that such a Method doth rather retard and obstruct, than promote Knowledge. ALC. Academical Study may be comprised in two points, Reading and Meditation. Their Reading is chiefly employ’d on ancient Authors in dead Languages: so that a great part of their Time is spent in learning Words; which, when they have mastered with infinite pains, what do they get by it but old and obselete Notions, that are now quite exploded and out of use? Then, as to their Meditations, what can they possibly be good for? He that wants the proper Materials of Thought, may think and meditate for ever to no purpose: Those Cobwebs spun by Scholars out of their own Brains being alike unserviceable, either for Use or Ornament. Proper Ideas or Materials are only to be got by frequenting good Company. I know several Gentlemen, who, since their Appearance in the World, have spent as much time in rubbing off the rust and pedantry of a College Education, as they had done before in acquiring it. LYS. I’ll undertake, a Lad of fourteen, bred in the modern way, shall make a better Figure, and be more considered in any Drawing-Room or Assembly of polite People, than one of four and twenty, who hath lain by a long time at School and College. He shall say better things, in a better manner, and be more liked by good Judges. EUPH. Where doth he pick up all this Improvement? CRI. Where our grave Ancestors wou’d never have look’d for it, in a Drawing-Room, a Coffee-House, a Chocolate-House, at the Tavern, or Groom-Porter’s. In these and the like fashionable Places of Resort, it is the Custom for polite Persons to speak freely on all Subjects, religious, moral, or political. So that a young Gentleman who frequents them is in the way of hearing many instructive Lectures, seasoned with Wit and Raillery, and uttered with Spirit. Three or four Sentences from a Man of quality spoke with a good Air, make more Impression, and convey more Knowledge, than a dozen Dissertations in a dry Academical way. EUPH. There is then no Method or Course of Studies in those Places. LYS. None but an easy free Conversation, which takes in every thing that offers, without any Rule or Design. EUPH. I always thought that some Order was necessary to attain any useful degree of Knowledge, that Haste and Confusion begat a conceited Ignorance, that to make our Advances sure, they shou’d be gradual, and those Points first learned which might cast a light on what was to follow. ALC. So long as Learning was to be obtained only by that slow formal course of Study, few of the better sort knew much of it; but now it is grown an Amusement, our young Gentry and Nobility imbibe it insensibly amidst their Diversions, and make a considerable Progress. EUPH. Hence probably the great number of Minute Philosophers. CRI. It is to this that Sect is owing for so many ingenious Proficients of both Sexes. You may now commonly see (what no former Age ever saw) a young Lady, or a Petit Maitre nonplus a Divine or an old-fashioned Gentleman, who hath read many a Greek and Latin Author, and spent much Time in hard methodical Study. EUPH. It shou’d seem then that Method, Exactness, and Industry are a Disadvantage. Here Alciphron, turning to Lysicles, said he cou’d make the point very clear, if Euphranor had any notion of Painting. EUPH. I never saw a first-rate Picture in my Life, but have a tolerable Collection of Prints, and have seen some good Drawings. ALC. You know then the difference between the Dutch and the Italian manner. EUPH. I have some notion of it. ALC. Suppose now a Drawing finished by the nice and laborious Touches of a Dutch Pencil, and another off hand scratched out in the free manner of a great Italian Master. The Dutch Piece, which hath cost so much pains and time will be exact indeed, but without that Force, Spirit, or Grace, which appear in the other, and are the Effects of an easy free Pencil. Do but apply this, and the Point will be clear. EUPH. Pray inform me, did those great Italian Masters begin and proceed in their Art without any choice of Method or Subject, and always draw with the same ease and freedom? Or did they observe some Method, beginning with simple and elementary parts, an Eye, a Nose, a Finger, which they drew with great pains and care, often drawing the same thing, in order to draw it correctly, and so proceeding with Patience and Industry, till after a considerable length of Time they arrived at the free masterly manner you speak of. If this were the Case, I leave you to make the Application. ALC. You may dispute the Matter if you please. But a Man of parts is one thing, and a Pedant another. Pains and Method may do for some sort of People. A Man must be a long time kindling wet Straw into a vile smothering Flame, but Spirits blaze out at once. EUPH. The Minute Philosophers have, it seems, better Parts than other Men, which qualifies them for a different Education. ALC. Tell me, Euphranor, what is it that gives one Man a better Mien than another; more Politeness in Dress, Speech, and Motion? Nothing but frequenting good Company. By the same means Men get insensibly a delicate Taste, a refined Judgment, a certain Politeness in thinking and expressing one’s self. No wonder if you Countrymen are strangers to the Advantage of polite Conversation, which constantly keeps the Mind awake and active, exercising its Faculties, and calling forth all its Strength and Spirit on a thousand different Occasions and Subjects, that never came in the way of a Book-worm in a College, no more than of a Ploughman. CRI. Hence those lively Faculties, that quickness of Apprehension, that slyness of Ridicule, that egregious Talent of Wit and Humour which distinguish the Gentlemen of your Profession. EUPH. It shou’d seem then that your Sect is made up of what you call fine Gentlemen. LYS. Not altogether, for we have among us some contemplative Spirits of a coarser Education, who, from observing the Behaviour and Proceedings of Apprentices, Watermen, Porters, and the Assemblies of Rabble in the Streets, have arrived at a profound Knowledge of Humane Nature, and made great Discoveries about the Principles, Springs, and Motives of moral Actions. These have demolished the received Systems, and done a world of good in the City. ALC. I tell you we have Men of all Sorts and Professions, plodding Citizens, thriving Stockjobbers, skilful Men in Business, polite Courtiers, gallant Men of the Army; but our chief Strength and Flower of the Flock are those promising young Men who have the Advantage of a modern Education. These are the growing Hopes of our Sect, by whose Credit and Influence in a few Years we expect to see those great things accomplished that we have in view. EUPH. I cou’d never have imagined your Sect so considerable. ALC. There are in England many honest Folk as much in the dark about these matters as your selves.

XII.

To judge of the prevailing Opinion among People of fashion, by what a Senator saith in the House, a Judge upon the Bench, or a Priest in the Pulpit, who all speak according to Law, that is, to the reverend prejudices of our Fore-fathers, wou’d be wrong. You should go into good Company, and mind what Men of parts and breeding say, those who are best heard and most admired as well in public places of resort, as in private visits. He only who hath these opportunities, can know our real strength, our numbers and the figure that we make. EUPH. By your account there must be many Minute Philosophers among the Men of Rank and Fortune. ALC. Take my word for it, not a few, and they do much contribute to the spreading our notions. For he who knows the World must observe, that fashions constantly descend. It is therefore the right way to propagate an Opinion from the upper end. Not to say that the Patronage of such Men is an encouragement to our Authors. EUPH. It seems then you have Authors among you. LYS. That we have several, and those very great Men who have obliged the World with many useful and profound discoveries. CRI. Moschon for instance hath proved that Man and Beast are really of the same nature: That consequently a Man need only indulge his Senses and Appetites to be as happy as a Brute. Gorgias hath gone further, demonstrating Man to be a piece of Clockwork or Machine: and that Thought or Reason are the same thing as the impulse of one Ball against another. Cimon hath made noble use of these discoveries, proving as clearly as any proposition in Mathematics, that conscience is a whim and morality a prejudice: and that a Man is no more accountable for his actions than a Clock is for striking. Tryphon hath written irrefragably on the usefulness of vice. Thrasenor hath confuted the foolish prejudice Men had against Atheism, shewing that a republick of Atheists might live very happily together. Demylus hath made a jest of Loyalty, and convinced the World there is nothing in it: To him and another Philosopher of the same stamp this age is indebted for discovering, that public Spirit is an idle Enthusiasm which seizeth only on weak minds. It wou’d be endless to recount the Discoveries made by writers of this Sect. LYS. But the Master-piece and finishing Stroke is a learned Anecdote of our great Diagoras, containing a demonstration against the Being of God; which it is convinced the public is not yet ripe for. But I am assured by some judicious Friends who have seen it, that it is as clear as Day-light, and will do a world of good, at one blow demolishing the whole System of Religion. These discoveries are published by our Philosophers, sometimes in just Volumes, but often in Phamphlets and loose Papers for their readier conveyance through the Kingdom. And to them must be ascribed that absolute and independent freedom, which groweth so fast to the terrour of all Bigots. Even the dull and ignorant begin to open their Eyes, and be influenced by the example and authority of so many ingenious Men. EUPH. It shou’d seem by this account that your Sect extend their discoveries beyond Religion; and that Loyalty to his Prince or Reverence for the Laws are but mean things in the Eye of a Minute Philosopher. LYS. Very mean, we are too wise to think there is any thing Sacred either in King or Constitution, or indeed in any thing else. A Man of Sense may perhaps seem to pay an occasional regard to his Prince, but this is no more at bottom than what he pays to God when he kneels at the Sacrament to qualify himself himself for an Office. Fear God, and honour the King, are a pair of slavish maxims, which had for a long time crampt Human Nature, and awed not only weak minds but even Men of good Understanding, till their Eyes, as I observed before, were opened by our Philosophers. EUPH. Methinks I can easily comprehend that, when the fear of God is quite extinguished, the mind must be very easy with respect to other Duties, which become outward pretences and formalities, from the moment that they quit their hold upon the Conscience, and Conscience always supposeth the Being of a God. But I still thought that Englishmen of all denominations (how widely soever they differ as to some particular points) agreed in the Belief of a God, and of so much at least, as is called natural Religion. ALC. I have already told you my own Opinion of those matters, and what I know to be the Opinion of many more. CRI. Probably, Euphranor, by the title of Deists, which is sometimes given to Minute Philosophers, you have been mis-led to imagine they believe and worship a God according to the light of Nature: but by living among them, you may soon be convinced of the contrary. They have neither time nor place, nor form of Divine worship; they offer neither Prayers nor Praises to God in public; and in their private practice shew a contempt or dislike even of the Duties of natural Religion. For instance, the saying Grace before and after meals is a plain point of natural worship, and was once universally practised, but in proportion as this Sect prevailed it hath been laid aside, not only by the Minute Philosophers themselves, who wou’d be infinitely ashamed of such a weakness as to beg God’s blessing, or give God thanks for their daily Food; but also by others who are afraid of being thought Fools by the Minute Philosophers. EUPH. Is it possible that Men, who really believe a God, shou’d yet decline paying so easy and reasonable a Duty for fear of incurring the contempt of Atheists? CRI. I tell you there are many, who believing in their Hearts the truth of Religion, are yet afraid or ashamed to own it, lest they shou’d forfeit their Reputation with those who have the good luck to pass for great wits and Men of genius. ALC. O Euphranor, we must make allowance for Crito’s prejudice: he is a worthy Gentleman and means well. But doth it not look like prejudice to ascribe the respect that is paid our ingenious Free-thinkers rather to good luck than to merit? EUPH. I acknowledge their merit to be very wonderful, and that those Authors must needs be great Men who are able to prove such Paradoxes: for example, That so knowing a Man as a Minute Philosopher shou’d be a meer Machine, or at best no better than a Brute. ALC. It is a true maxim, that a Man shou’d think with the Learned and speak with the Vulgar. I shou’d be loth to place a Gentleman of merit in such a light, before prejudiced and ignorant Men. The tenets of our Philosophy have this in common with many other Truths, in Metaphysics, Geometry, Astronomy and natural Philosophy, that vulgar ears cannot bear them. All our discoveries and notions are in themselves true and certain; but they are at present known only to the better sort, and wou’d sound strange and odd among the Vulgar. But this, it is to be hoped, will wear off with time. EUPH. I do not wonder that vulgar minds shou’d be startled at the notions of your Philosophy. CRI. Truly a very curious sort of Philosophy, and much to be admired!

XIII.

The profound Thinkers of this way have taken a direct contrary course to all the great Philosophers of former ages, who made it their Endeavour to raise and refine Humane Kind, and remove it as far as possible from the Brute; to moderate and subdue Mens Appetites; to remind them of the dignity of their nature; to awaken and improve their superior Faculties and direct them to the noblest Objects; to possess Mens minds with a high Sense of the Divinity, of the supreme Good, and the Immortality of the Soul. They took great pains to strengthen the Obligations to Virtue, and upon all those Subjects have wrought out noble Theories, and treated with singular force of Reason. But it seems our Minute Philosophers act the reverse of all other wise and thinking Men; it being their end and aim to erase the Principles of all that is great and good from the mind of Man, to unhinge all order of civil Life, to undermine the foundations of morality, and, instead of improving and ennobling our natures, to bring us down to the maxims and way of thinking of the most uneducated and barbarous nations, and even to degrade Humane Kind to a level with Brute Beasts. And all the while they wou’d pass upon the World for Men of deep Knowledge. But in effect what is all this negative Knowledge better than downright savage Ignorance? That there is no Providence, no Spirit, no future State, no moral Duty: truly a fine System for an honest Man to own, or an ingenious Man to value himself upon! Alciphron who heard this discourse with some uneasiness very gravely replied. Disputes are not to be decided by the weight of Authority, but by the force of Reason. You may pass, indeed, general reflexions on our notions and call them brutal and barbarous if you please: But it is such brutality and such barbarism as few cou’d have attained to if Men of the greatest Genius had not broke the Ice, there being nothing more difficult than to get the better of Education, and conquer old prejudices. To remove and cast off a heap of Rubbish that has been gathering upon the Soul from our very infancy, requires great courage and great strength of Faculties. Our Philosophers therefore, do well deserve the name of Esprits forts, Men of strong heads, Free-thinkers and such like Appellations betokening great force and liberty of mind. It is very possible, the Heroic Labours of these Men may be represented (for what is not capable of misrepresentation?) as a piratical plundering and stripping the mind of its wealth and ornaments, when it is in truth the divesting it only of its prejudices, and reducing it to its untainted original State of Nature. Oh Nature! the genuine Beauty of pure Nature! EUPH. You seem very much taken with the Beauty of Nature. Be pleased to tell me, Alciphron, what those things are which you esteem natural, or by what mark I may know them.

XIV.

ALC. For a thing to be natural, for instance to the mind of Man, it must appear originally therein, it must be universally in all Men, it must be invariably the same in all Nations and Ages. These limitations of original, universal and invariable exclude all those notions found in the Humane Mind, which are the effect of Custom and Education. The case is the same with respect to all other Species of Beings. A Cat, for example, hath a natural inclination to pursue a Mouse, because it agrees with the forementioned marks. But if a Cat be taught to play tricks, you will not say those tricks are natural. For the same reason if upon a Plumbtree, Peaches and Apricots are engrafted, no body will say they are the natural growth of the Plumbtree. EUPH. But to return to Man: It seems you allow those things alone to be natural to him, which shew themselves upon his first entrance into the World; to wit the Senses and such Passions and Appetites as are discovered upon the first application of their respective objects. ALC. That is my opinion. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, if from a young Apple-tree after a certain period of time there shou’d shoot forth Leaves, Blossoms and Apples; wou’d you deny these things to be natural, because they did not discover and display themselves in the tender bud? ALC. I wou’d not. EUPH. And suppose that in a Man after a certain season, the Appetite of Lust or the Faculty of Reason shall shoot forth, open and display themselves as Leaves and Blossoms do in a Tree; wou’d you therefore deny them to be natural to him, because they did not appear in his original infancy? ALC. I acknowledge I wou’d not. EUPH. It seems therefore, that the first mark of a thing’s being natural to the mind was not warily laid down by you; to wit, that it shou’d appear originally in it. ALC. It seems so. EUPH. Again, inform me, Alciphron, whether you do not think it natural for an Orange-plant to produce Oranges? ALC. I do. EUPH. But plant it in the North end of Great Britain, and it shall with care produce, perhaps, a good Sallad; in the Southern parts of the same Island, it may with much pains and culture thrive and produce indifferent Fruit; but in Portugal or Naples it will produce much better with little or no pains. Is this true or not? ALC. It is true. EUPH. The Plant being the same in all places doth not produce the same Fruit, Sun, Soil, and Cultivation making a difference. ALC. I grant it. EUPH. And since the case is, you say the same with respect to all Species; why may we not conclude by a parity of reason that things may be natural to Human Kind, and yet neither found in all Men, nor invariably the same where they are found? ALC. Hold, Euphranor, you must explain yourself further. I shall not be over hasty in my concessions. LYS. You are in the right, Alciphron, to stand upon your guard. I do not like these ensnaring Questions. EUPH. I desire you to make no concessions in complaisance to me, but only to tell me your opinion upon each particular, that we may understand one another, know wherein we agree, and proceed jointly in finding out the Truth. But (added Euphranor turning to Crito and me) if the Gentlemen are against a free and fair inquiry, I shall give them no further trouble. ALC. Our Opinions will stand the test. We fear no trial, proceed as you please. EUPH. It seems then that from what you have granted it shou’d follow, Things may be natural to Men, although they do not actually shew themselves in all Men, nor in equal perfection; there being as great difference of culture and every other advantage with respect to Humane Nature, as is to be found with respect to the vegetable nature of Plants, to use your own similitude, Is it so or not? ALC. It is. EUPH. Answer me, Alciphron, do not Men in all times and places when they arrive at a certain Age express their Thoughts by Speech? ALC. They do. EUPH. Shou’d it not seem then that Language is natural? ALC. It shou’d. EUPH. And yet there is a great variety of Languages. ALC. I acknowledge there is. EUPH. From all this will it not follow a thing may be natural and yet admit of variety? ALC. I grant it will. EUPH. Shou’d it not seem therefore to follow, that a thing may be natural to Mankind, though it have not those marks or conditions assigned; though it be not original, universal and invariable? ALC. It shou’d. EUPH. And that consequently religious Worship and civil Government may be natural to Man, notwithstanding they admit of sundry forms and different degrees of Perfection? ALC. It seems so. EUPH. You have granted already that Reason is natural to Mankind. ALC. I have. EUPH. Whatever therefore is agreeable to Reason is agreeable to the nature of Man. ALC. It is. EUPH. Will it not follow from hence that Truth and Virtue are natural to Man? ALC. Whatever is reasonable I admit to be natural. EUPH. And as those Fruits which grow from the most generous and mature stock, in the choicest, soil, and with the best culture, are most esteemed; even so ought we not to think, those sublime Truths which are the Fruits of mature Thought, and have been rationally deduced by Men of the best and most improved understandings, to be the choicest productions of the rational nature of Man? And if so, being in fact reasonable, natural and true, they ought not to be esteemed unnatural whims, errors of education and groundless prejudices, because they are raised and forwarded by manuring and cultivating our tender minds, because they take early root and sprout forth betimes by the care and diligence of our Instructors. ALC. Agreed, provided still they may be rationally deduced: But to take this for granted, of what Men vulgarly call the Truths of Morality and Religion wou’d be begging the question. EUPH. You are in the right, I do not, therefore, take for granted that they are rationally deduced. I only suppose that, if they are, they must be allowed natural to Man, or in other words agreeable to, and growing from, the most excellent and peculiar part of Humane Nature. ALC. I have nothing to object to this. EUPH. What shall we think then of your former Assertions? That nothing is natural to Man but what may be found in all Men, in all Nations and Ages of the World: That to obtain a genuine view of Humane Nature, we must extirpate all the effects of Education and Instruction, and regard only the Senses, Appetites and Passions which are to be found originally in all Mankind: That, therefore, the notion of a God can have no foundation in nature, as not being originally in the mind, nor the same in all Men; Be pleased to reconcile these things with your late concessions, which the force of Truth seems to have extorted from you.

XV.

ALC. Tell me, Euphranor, whether Truth be not one and the same uniform invariable thing, and, if so, whether the many different and inconsistent notions which Men entertain of God and Duty be not a plain proof there is no Truth in them. EUPH. That Truth is constant and uniform I freely own, and that consequently Opinions repugnant to each other cannot be true; but I think it will not hence follow they are all alike false. If among various Opinions about the same thing, one be grounded on clear and evident Reasons, that is to be thought true, and others only so far as they consist with it. Reason is the same, and rightly applied will lead to the same conclusions in all times and places. Socrates two thousand years ago seems to have reasoned himself into the same notion of a God, which is entertained by the Philosophers of our days, if you will allow that name to any who are not Atheists. And the remark of Confucius, That a Man shou’d guard in his youth against Lust, in manhood against Faction, and in old age against Covetousness is as current morality in Europe as in China. ALC. But still it wou’d be a satisfaction if all Men thought the same way, difference of Opinions implying uncertainty. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, what you take to be the cause of a Lunar Eclipse. ALC. The shadow of the Earth interposing between the Sun and Moon. EUPH. Are you assured of this? ALC. Undoubtedly. EUPH. Are all Mankind agreed in this Truth? ALC. By no means. Ignorant and barbarous People assign different ridiculous causes of this appearance. EUPH. It seems then there are different Opinions about the nature of an Eclipse. ALC. There are. EUPH. And nevertheless one of these Opinions is true. ALC. It is. EUPH. Diversity therefore of Opinions about a thing doth not hinder, but that the thing may be, and one of the Opinions concerning it may be true. ALC. I acknowledge it. EUPH. It shou’d seem, therefore, that your Argument against the Belief of a God from the variety of Opinions about his nature is not conclusive. Nor do I see how you can conclude against the truth of any moral or religious tenet, from the various Opinions of Men upon the same Subject; might not a Man as well argue, that no historical account of a matter of fact can be true, when different relations are given of it? Or may we not as well infer, that because the several Sects of Philosophy maintain different opinions, none of them can be in the right, not even the Minute Philosophers themselves? During this conversation Lysicles seemed uneasy, like one that wished in his heart there was no God. Alciphron, said he, me-thinks you sit by very tamely, while Euphranor saps the foundation of our Tenets. Be of good courage, replied Alciphron, a skilful gamester has been known to ruin his adversary by yielding him some advantage at first. I am glad, said he turning to Euphranor, that you are drawn in to argue and make your appeals to Reason. For my part, wherever Reason leads I shall not be afraid to follow. Know then, Euphranor, that I freely give up what you now contend for. I do not value the success of a few crude notions thrown out in a loose discourse, any more than the Turks do the loss of that vile infantry they place in the front of their armies, for no other end but to waste the powder and blunt the swords of their enemies. Be assured I have in reserve a body of other-guess arguments, which I am ready to produce. I will undertake to prove — EUPH. O Alciphron! I do not doubt your faculty of proving. But before I put you to the trouble of any farther proofs, I shou’d be glad to know whether the notions of your Minute Philosophy are worth proving. I mean, whether they are of use and service to Mankind?

XV.

ALC. As to that, give me leave to tell you, a thing may be useful to one Man’s Views, and not to another’s: but Truth is Truth whether useful or not, and must not be measured by the Convenience of this or that Man, or Party of Men. EUPH. But is not the general Good of Mankind to be regarded as a rule and measure of moral Truths, of all such Truths as direct or influence the moral Actions of Men? ALC. That Point is not clear to me. I know, indeed, that Legislators, and Divines, and Politicians have always alledged, That it is necessary to the wellbeing of Mankind, that they shou’d be kept in awe by the slavish Notions of Religion and Morality. But granting all this, how will it prove these Notions to be true? Convenience is one thing, and Truth is another. A genuine Philosopher, therefore, will overlook all Advantages and consider only Truth it self as such. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, is your genuine Philosopher a wise Man, or a Fool? ALC. Without question, the wisest of Men. EUPH. Which is to be thought the wise Man, he who acts with design, or he who acts at random? ALC. He who acts with design. EUPH. Whoever acts with design, acts for some end. Doth he not? ALC. He doth. EUPH. And a wise Man for a good end? ALC. True. EUPH. And he sheweth his Wisdom in making choice of fit means to obtain his end. ALC. I acknowledge it. EUPH. By how much therefore the end proposed is more excellent, and by how much fitter the means employ’d are to obtain it, so much the wiser is the Agent to be esteemed. ALC. This seems to be true. EUPH. Can a rational Agent propose a more excellent end than Happiness? ALC. He cannot. EUPH. Of good things, the greater Good is most excellent. ALC. Doubtless. EUPH. Is not the general happiness of Mankind a greater Good, than the private happiness of one Man, or of some certain Men? ALC. It is. EUPH. Is it not therefore the most excellent end? ALC. It seems so. EUPH. Are not then those who pursue this end by the properest methods to be thought the wisest Men? ALC. I grant they are. EUPH. Which is a wise Man govern’d by, wise or foolish Notions? ALC. By wise, doubtless. EUPH. It seems then to follow, that he who promotes the general well-being of Mankind by the proper necessary means, is truly wise, and acts upon wise grounds. ALC. It shou’d seem so. EUPH. And is not Folly of an opposite nature to Wisdom? ALC. It is. EUPH. Might it not therefore be inferred, that those Men are foolish who go about to unhinge such Principles as have a necessary connexion with the general good of Mankind? ALC. Perhaps this might be granted: but at the same time I must observe, that it is in my power to deny it. EUPH. How! you will not surely deny the Conclusion, when you admit the Premises. ALC. I wou’d fain know upon what terms we argue; whether in this progress of Question and Answer, if a Man makes a slip it be utterly irretrievable? For if you are on the catch to lay hold of every advantage, without allowing for surprise or inattention, I must tell you this is not the way to convince my Judgment. EUPH. O Alciphron! I aim not at Triumph, but at Truth. You are therefore at full liberty to unravel all that hath been said, and to recover or correct any slip you have made. But then you must distinctly point it out: otherwise it will be impossible ever to arrive at any conclusion. ALC. I agree with you upon these terms jointly to proceed in search of Truth, for to that I am sincerely devoted. In the progress of our present Inquiry I was, it seems, guilty of an oversight, in acknowledging the general happiness of Mankind to be a greater Good than the particular happiness of one Man. For in fact, the individual happiness of every Man alone, constitutes his own entire Good. The happiness of other Men making no part of mine, is not with respect to me a Good: I mean a true natural Good. It cannot therefore be a reasonable end to be proposed by me in Truth and Nature, (for I do not speak of political pretences) since no wise Man will pursue an end which doth not concern him. This is the voice of Nature. Oh Nature! thou art the fountain, original, and pattern of all that is good and wise. EUPH. You wou’d like then to follow Nature, and propose her as a guide and pattern for your imitation. ALC. Of all things. EUPH. Whence do you gather this respect for Nature? ALC. From the excellency of her Productions. EUPH. In a Vegetable, for instance, you say there is use and excellency, because the several parts of it are so connected and fitted to each other, as to protect and nourish the whole, make the individual grow, and propagate the kind, and because in its fruits or qualities it is adapted to please the Sense, or contribute to the benefit of Man. ALC. Even so. EUPH. In like manner, do you not infer the excellency of Animal Bodies from observing the frame and fitness of their several parts, by which they mutually conspire to the well-being of each other as well as of the whole? Do you not also observe a natural union and consent between Animals of the same kind, and that even different kinds of Animals have certain qualities and instincts whereby they contribute to the exercise, nourishment, and delight of each other? Even the inanimate unorganized Elements seem to have an excellence relative to each other. Where was the excellency of Water if it did not cause Herbs and Vegetables to spring from the Earth, and put forth flowers and fruits? And what wou’d become of the beauty of the Earth, if it was not warmed by the Sun, moistened by Water, and fanned by Air? Throughout the whole System of the visible and natural World, do you not perceive a mutual connexion and correspondence of parts? And is it not from hence that you frame an Idea of the perfection, and order, and beauty of Nature? ALC. All this I grant. EUPH. And have not the Stoics heretofore said (who were no more Bigots than you are) and did you not your self say, this pattern of Order was worthy the imitation of rational Agents? ALC. I do not deny this to be true. EUPH. Ought we not therefore to infer the same Union, Order, and Regularity in the moral World that we perceive to be in the natural? ALC. We ought. EUPH. Shou’d it not therefore seem to follow that reasonable Creatures were, as the philosophical Emperor observes, made one for another; and consequently that Man ought not to consider himself as an independent Individual, whose happiness is not connected with that of other Men? but rather as the part of a whole, to the common good of which he ought to conspire, and order his Ways and Actions suitably, if he wou’d live according to Nature. ALC. Supposing this to be true, what then? EUPH. Will it not follow that a wise Man shou’d consider and pursue his private Good, with regard to, and in conjunction with, that of other Men? in granting of which, you thought your self guilty of an oversight. Though, indeed, the sympathy of pain and pleasure, and the mutual affections by which Mankind are knit together, have been always allowed a plain proof of this point: And though it was the constant Doctrine of those, who were esteemed the wisest and most thinking Men among the Ancients, as the Platonists, Peripatetics, and Stoics; to say nothing of Christians, whom you pronounce to be an unthinking prejudiced sort of people. ALC. I shall not dispute this point with you. EUPH. Since therefore we are so far agreed, shou’d it not seem to follow from the Premises; That the belief of a God, of a future State, and of moral Duties, are the only wise, right, and genuine Principles of Humane Conduct, in case they have a necessary connection with the well-being of Mankind? This Conclusion you have been led to by your own concessions and by the analogy of Nature. ALC. I have been drawn into it step by step through several Preliminaries, which I cannot well call to mind; but one thing I observe, that you build on the necessary connection those Principles have with the well-being of Mankind, which is a point neither proved nor granted. LYS. This I take to be a grand fundamental Prejudice, as I doubt not, if I had time I cou’d make appear. But it is now late, and we will, if you think fit, defer this Subject till to-morrow. Upon which Motion of Lysicles we put an end to our conversation for that Evening.

 THE SECOND DIALOGUE.I. Vulgar error, that Vice is hurtful. II. The benefit of Drunkenness, Gaming, and Whoring. III. Prejudice against Vice wearing off. IV. Its usefulness illustrated in the instances of Callicles and Telesilla. V. The reasoning of Lysicles in behalf of Vice examined. VI. Wrong to punish Actions when the Doctrines whence they flow are tolerated. VII. Hazardous experiment of the Minute Philosophers. VIII. Their Doctrine of Circulation and Revolution. IX. Their sense of a Reformation. X. Riches alone not the public weal. XI. Authority of Minute Philosophers: their Prejudice against Religion. XII. Effects of Luxury: Virtue whether notional? XIII. Pleasure of Sense. XIV. What sort of pleasure most natural to Man. XV. Dignity of Humane Nature. XVI. Pleasure mistaken. XVII. Amusements, Misery, and Cowardice of Minute Philosophers. XVIII. Rakes cannot reckon. XIX. Abilities and Success of Minute Philosophers. XX. Happy effects of the Minute Philosophy in particular instances. XXI. Their free notions about Government. XXII. England the proper soil for Minute Philosophy. XXIII. The policy and address of its Professors. XXIV. Merit of Minute Philosophers towards the Public. XXV. Their Notions and Character. XXVI. Their tendency towards Popery and Slavery.

 [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

I.

NEXT Morning, Alciphron and Lysicles said the Weather was so fine they had a mind to spend the Day abroad, and take a cold Dinner under a Shade in some pleasant part of the Country. Whereupon, after Breakfast, we went down to a Beach about half a mile off; where we walked on the smooth sand, with the Ocean on one hand, and on the other wild broken Rocks, intermixed with shady Trees and Springs of Water, till the Sun began to be uneasy. We then withdrew into a hollow Glade, between two Rocks, where we had no sooner seated our selves but Lysicles addressing himself to Euphranor, said: I am now ready to perform what I undertook last Evening, which was to shew, there is nothing in that necessary Connection which some Men imagine between those Principles you contend for, and the public Good. I freely own, that if this Question was to be decided by the authority of Legislators or Philosophers, it must go against us. For those Men generally take it for granted, that Vice is pernicious to the Public; and that Men cannot be kept from Vice but by the fear of God, and the sense of a future State; whence they are induced to think the belief of such things necessary to the well-being of humane Kind. This false notion hath prevailed for many ages in the World, and done an infinite deal of mischief, being in truth the cause of religious Establishments, and gaining the protection and encouragement of Laws and Magistrates to the Clergy and their Superstitions. Even some of the wisest among the Ancients, who agreed with our Sect in denying a Providence and the Immortality of the Soul, had nevertheless the weakness to lie under the common prejudice that Vice was hurtful to Societies of Men. But England hath of late produced great Philosophers who have undeceived the world, and proved to a demonstration that private Vices are public Benefits. This Discovery was reserved to our times, and our Sect hath the glory of it. CRI. It is possible some Men of fine Understanding might in former ages have had a glimpse of this important Truth; but it may be presumed they lived in ignorant times and bigotted countries, which were not ripe for such a discovery. LYS. Men of narrow capacities and short sight being able to see no further than one link in a chain of Consequences, are shocked at small evils which attend upon Vice. But those who can enlarge their view, and look through a long series of events, may behold Happiness resulting from Vice, and Good springing out of Evil in a thousand instances. To prove my point I shall not trouble you with Authorities or farfetched Arguments, but bring you to plain Matter of Fact. Do but take a view of each particular Vice, and trace it through its Effects and Consequences, and then you will clearly perceive the advantage it brings to the Public.

II.

Drunkenness, for instance, is by your sober Moralists thought a pernicious Vice; but it is for want of considering the good effects that flow from it. For in the first place it increases the Malt-Tax, a principal branch of his Majesty’s Revenue, and thereby promotes the safety, strength, and glory of the Nation. Secondly, it employs a great number of hands, the Brewer, the Malster, the Ploughman, the dealer in Hops, the Smith, the Carpenter, the Brasier, the Joiner, with all other artificers necessary to supply those enumerated, with their respective instruments and utensils. All which advantages are procured from Drunkenness in the vulgar way, by strong Beer. This point is so clear it will admit of no dispute. But while you are forced to allow thus much, I foresee you are ready to object against Drunkenness occasion’d by Wine and Spirits, as exporting wealth into foreign countries. But you do not reflect on the number of hands which even this sets on work at home: The Distillers, the Vintners, the Merchants, the Sailors, the Shipwrights, with all those who are employ’d towards victualling and fitting out Ships, which upon a nice computation will be found to include an incredible variety of Trades and Callings. Then for freighting our Ships to answer these foreign importations, all our manufactures throughout the Kingdom are employ’d, the Spinners, the Weavers, the Dyers, the Wool-combers, the the Carriers, the Packers. And the same may be said of many other manufactures, as well as the woollen. And if it be further considered, how many Men are enriched by all the forementioned ways of trade and business, and the expences of these Men, and their families, in all the several articles of convenient and fashionable living, whereby all sorts of trades and callings, not only at home, but throughout all parts wherever our commerce reaches, are kept in employment, you will be amazed at the wonderfully extended scene of benefits which arise from the single vice of Drunkenness, so much run down and declaimed against by all grave Reformers. With as much judgment your half-witted folk are accustomed to censure Gaming. And indeed (such is the ignorance and folly of Mankind) a Gamester and a Drunkard are thought no better than public nusances, when in truth, they do each in their way greatly conduce to the public benefit. If you look only on the furface and first appearance of things, you will no doubt think playing at Cards a very idle and fruitless occupation. But dive deeper, and you shall perceive this idle amusement employs the Card-maker, and he sets the Paper-mills at work, by which the poor Rag-man is supported; not to mention the Builders and Workers in wood and iron that are employ’d in erecting and furnishing those Mills. Look still deeper, and you shall find that Candles and Chair-hire employ the industrious and the poor, who by these means come to be relieved by Sharpers and Gentlemen, who wou’d not give one penny in charity. But you will say that many Gentlemen and Ladies are ruined by play, without considering that what one Man loses another gets, and that consequently as many are made as ruined; money changeth hands, and in this circulation the life of business and commerce consists. When money is spent, it is all one to the Public who spends it. Suppose a fool of quality becomes the dupe of a Man of mean birth and circumstance, who has more wit. In this case what harm doth the Public sustain? Poverty is relieved, Ingenuity is rewarded, the Money stays at home, and has a lively circulation, the ingenious Sharper being enabled to set up an equi-page and spend handsomely, which cannot be done without employing a world of people. But you will perhaps object, that a Man reduced by play may be put upon desperate courses hurtful to the Public. Suppose the worst, and that he turns Highwayman, such Men have a short life and a merry. While he lives, he spends, and for one that he robs makes twenty the better for his expence. And when his time is come, a poor Family may be relieved by fifty or a hundred Pounds set upon his Head. A vulgar eye looks on many a Man as an idle or mischievous fellow, whom a true Philosopher viewing in another light, considers as a Man of pleasant occupation who diverts himself, and benefits the Public: And that with so much ease, that he employs a multitude of Men, and sets an infinite Machine in motion, without knowing the good he does, or even intending to do any; which is peculiar to that Gentleman-like way of doing good by Vice. I was considering Play, and that insensibly led me to the advantages, which attend robbing on the high-way. Oh the beautiful and never enough admired connection of Vices! It wou’d take too much time to shew how they all hang together, and what an infinite deal of good takes its rise from every one of them. One word for a favourite Vice, and I shall leave you to make out the rest your self, by applying the same way of reasoning to all other vices. A poor Girl, who might not have the spending of half a Crown a week in what you call an honest way, no sooner hath the good fortune to be a kept Mistress, but she employs Milliners, Laundresses, Tire-women, Mercers, and a number of other trades to the benefit of her Country. It wou’d be endless to trace and pursue every particular Vice through its consequences and effects, and shew the vast advantage they all are of to the Public. The true Springs that actuate the great Machine of Commerce, and make a flourishing State have been hitherto little understood. Your Moralists and Divines have for so many ages been corrupting the genuine Sense of mankind, and filling their heads with such absurd principles, that it is in the power of few Men to contemplate real life with an unprejudiced Eye. And fewer still have sufficient Parts and Sagacity to pursue a long train of consequences, relations and dependences, which must be done in order to form a just and entire notion of the public weal. But, as I said before, our Sect hath produced Men capable of these discoveries, who have displayed them in a full light, and made them public for the benefit of their Country.

III.

Oh! Said Euphranor, who heard this discourse with great attention, you Lysicles are the very Man I wanted, eloquent and ingenious, knowing in the principles of your Sect, and willing to impart them. Pray tell me, do these principles find an easy admission in the World? LYS. They do among ingenious Men and People of fashion, though you will sometimes meet with strong prejudices against them in the middle sort, an effect of ordinary Talents and mean Breeding. EUPH. I shou’d wonder if Men were not shocked at notions of such a surprising nature, so contrary to all Laws, Education, and Religion. LYS. They wou’d be shocked much more if it had not been for the skilful address of our Philosophers, who, considering that most Men are influenced by names rather than things, have introduced a certain polite way of speaking, which lessens much of the abhorrence and prejudice towards Vice. EUPH. Explain me this. LYS. Thus in our Dialect a vicious Man is a Man of pleasure, a Sharper is one that plays the whole game, a Lady is said to have an affair, a Gentleman to be a gallant, a Rogue in business to be one that knows the World. By this means we have no such things as Sots, Debauchees, Whores, Rogues, or the like in the beau monde, who may enjoy their vices without incurring disagreeable Appellations. EUPH. Vice then is, it seems, a fine thing with an ugly name. LYS. Be assured it is. EUPH. It shou’d seem then, that Plato’s fearing lest youth might be corrupted, by those Fables which represented the Gods vicious, was an effect of his weakness and ignorance. LYS. It was, take my word for it. EUPH. And yet Plato had kept good Company and lived in a Court. And Cicero who knew the World well had a profound esteem for him. CRI. I tell you, Euphranor, that Plato and Tully might perhaps make a figure in Athens or Rome: But were they to revive in our days, they wou’d pass but for underbred Pedants, there being at most Coffeehouses in London, several able Men who cou’d convince them they knew nothing in, what they are valued so much for, Morals and Politics. LYS. How many long-headed Men do I know both in the Courtend and the City with five times Plato’s Sense, who care not one straw what notions their Sons have of God or Virtue.

IV.

CRI. I can illustrate this Doctrine of Lysicles by examples that will make you perceive its force. Cleophon, a Minute Philosopher, took strict care of his Son’s Education and entered him betimes in the principles of his Sect. Callicles (that was his Son’s name) being a Youth of parts made a notable progress; insomuch that before he became of age he killed his old covetous Father with vexation, and ruined the Estate he left behind him; or, in other words, made a present of it to the Public, spreading the Dung-hill collected by his Ancestors over the face of the Nation, and making out of the overgrown Estate several pretty fortunes for ingenious Men, who live by the vices of the Great. Telesilla, though a Woman of Quality and Spirit, made no figure in the World, till she was instructed by her Husband in the tenets of the Minute Philosophy, which he wisely thought wou’d prevent her giving any thing in Charity. From that time she took a turn towards expensive Diversions, particularly deep Play, by which means she soon transferred a considerable share of his fortune to several acute Men skilled in that Mystery, who wanted it more, and circulate it quicker than her Husband wou’d have done, who in return hath got an Heir to his Estate, having never had a Child before. That same Telesilla, who was good for nothing as long as she believed her Catechism, now shines in all public places, is a Lady of gallantry and fashion, and has by her extravagant parade in Lace and fine Clothes raised a Spirit of expence in other Ladies, very much to the public benefit, though it must be owned to the mortification of many frugal Husbands. While Crito related these facts with a grave face, I cou’d not forbear smiling, which Lysicles observing, superficial minds, said he, may perhaps find something to ridicule in these accounts; but all who are Masters of a just way of thinking must needs see that those maxims, the benefit whereof is universal, and the damage only particular to private Persons or Families, ought to be encouraged in a wise Commonwealth. For my part, said Euphranor, I confess my self to be rather dazzled and confounded than convinced by your reasoning; which, as you observed you self, taking in the connection of many distant points requires great extent of thought to comprehend it. I must therefore intreat you to bear with my defects, suffer me to take to pieces what is too big to be received at once; and where I cannot keep pace with you, permit me to follow you step by step, as fast as I can. LYS. There is reason in what you say. Every one cannot suddenly take a long concatenation of Arguments.

V.

EUPH. Your several Arguments seem to center in this, that vice circulates money and promotes industry, which causeth a People to flourish: Is it not so? LYS. It is. EUPH. And the reason that vice produceth this effect is, because it causeth an extravagant consumption which is the most beneficial to the Manufactures, their encouragement consisting in a quick demand and high price. LYS. True. EUPH. Hence you think a Drunkard most beneficial to the Brewer and the Vintner, as causing a quick consumption of Liquor, inasmuch as he drinks more than other Men. LYS. Without doubt. EUPH. Says, Lysicles, who drinks most a sick Man or a healthy? LYS. A healthy. EUPH. And which is healthiest a sober Man or a Drunkard? LYS. A Sober Man. EUPH. A Sober Man therefore in health may drink more than a Drunkard when he is sick. LYS. He may. EUPH. What think you, will a Man consume more Meat and Drink in a long life or a short one? LYS. In a long. EUPH. A Sober healthy Man, therefore, in a long life may circulate more Money by eating and drinking, than a Glutton or Drunkard in a short one. LYS. What then? EUPH. Why then it shou’d seem, that he may be more beneficial to the Public even in this way of eating and drinking. LYS. I shall never own that temperance is the way to promote drinking. EUPH. But you will own that sickness lessens, and death puts an end to all drinking. The same Argument will hold, for ought I can see, with respect to all other vices that impair Mens health and shorten their lives. And if we admit this, it will not be so clear a point that vice hath merit towards the public. LYS. But admitting that some Artificers or Traders might be as well encouraged by the sober Men as the vicious; what shall we say of those who subsist altogether by Vice and Vanity? EUPH. It such there are, may they not be otherwise employ’d without loss to the Public? Tell me, Lysicles, is there any thing in the nature of Vice, as such that renders it a public blessing, or is it only the consumption it occasions? LYS. I have already shewn how it benefits the nation by the consumption of its Manufactures. EUPH. And you have granted that a long and healthy life consumes more than a short and sickly one; and you will not deny that many consume more than one. Upon the whole then compute and say, which is most likely to promote the industry of his Countrymen, a virtuous married Man with a healthy numerous Offspring, and who feeds and cloaths the Orphans in his Neighbourhood, or a fashionable Rake about Town. I wou’d fain know whether Money spent innocently, doth not circulate as well as that spent upon Vice. And if so, whether by your own rule it doth not benefit the Publick as much? LYS. What I have proved, I proved plainly, and there is no need of more words about it. EUPH. You seem to me, to have proved nothing, unless you can make it out that it is impossible to spend a fortune innocently. I shou’d think the publick weal of a Nation consists in the number and good condition of its Inhabitants; have you any thing to object to this? LYS. I think not. EUPH. To this end which would most conduce, the employing Men in open air and manly exercise, or in sedentary business within doors? LYS. The former I suppose. EUPH. Shou’d it not seem therefore, that building, gardening, and agriculture would employ Men more usefully to the Public, than if Tailors, Barbers, Perfumers, Distillers and such arts were multiplied. LYS. All this I grant; but it makes against you. For what moves Men to build and plant but vanity, and what is vanity but vice? EUPH. But if a Man shou’d do those things for his convenience or pleasure, and in proportion to his fortune, without a foolish ostentation or over-rating them beyond their due value, they would not then be the effect of vice; and how do you know but this may be the case? CRI. One thing I know that the readiest way to quicken that sort of industry, and employ Carpenters, Masons, Smiths, and all such trades wou’d be to put in practice the happy hint of a celebrated Minute Philosopher, who by profound thinking has discovered, that burning the City of London wou’d be no such bad action, as silly prejudiced People might possibly imagine; inasmuch as it wou’d produce a quick circulation of property, transferring it from the rich to the poor, and employing a great number of Artificers of all kinds. This at least cannot be denied that it hath opened a new way of thinking to our Incendiaries, of which the Public hath of late begun to reap the benefit. EUPH. I cannot sufficiently admire this ingenious thought.

VI.

But methinks it wou’d be dangerous to make it public. CRI. Dangerous to whom? EUPH. In the first place to the publisher. CRI. That is a mistake; for the notion hath been published and met with due applause, in this most wise and happy age of Free-thinking, Free-speaking, Free-writing, and Free-acting. EUPH. How! may a Man then publish and practise such things with impunity? CRI. To speak the truth, I am not so clear as to the practic part. An unlucky accident now and then befals an ingenious Man. The Minute Philosopher Magirus, being desirous to benefit the Public, by circulating an Estate possessed by a near Relation who had not the heart to spend it, soon convinced himself upon these principles, that it wou’d be a very worthy action to dispatch out of the way such a useless fellow, to whom he was next heir. But for this laudable attempt, he had the misfortune to be hanged by an under-bred Judge and Jury. Could any thing be more unjust? EUPH. Why unjust? CRI. Is it not unjust to punish actions, when the principles from which they directly follow are tolerated and applauded by the Public? Can any thing be more inconsistent than to condemn in practice what is approved in speculation. Truth is one and the same, it being impossible a thing should be practically wrong and speculatively right. Thus much is certain, Magirus was perfect Master of all this Theory, and argued most acutely about it with a Friend of mine, a little before he did the fact for which he died. LYS. The best on’t is the World every day grows wiser. CRI. You mistake, Euphranor, if you think the Minute Philosophers idle Theorists; They are Men of practical views. EUPH. As much as I love Liberty, I shou’d be afraid to live among such People; it would be, as Seneca somewhere expresseth it, in libertate bellis ac tyrannis saeviore. LYS. What do you mean by quoting Plato and Seneca? Can you imagine a Free-thinker is to be influenced by the Authority of such old fashioned Writers? EUPH. You, Lysicles, and your Friend have often quoted to me ingenious Moderns, profound fine Gentlemen, with new names of Authors in the Minute Philosophy, to whose merits I am a perfect stranger. Suffer me in my turn to cite such Authorities as I know, and have passed for many ages upon the World.

VII.

But, Authority apart, what do you say to Experience? My Observation can reach as far as a private Family; and some wise Men have thought, a Family may be considered as a small Kingdom, or a Kingdom as a great Family. Do you admit this to be true? LYS. If I say yes, you’ll make an inference, and if I say no, you’ll demand a reason. The best way is to say nothing at all. There is, I see, no end of answering. EUPH. If you give up the point you undertook to prove, there is an end at once: But if you hope to convince me you must answer my questions, and allow me the liberty to argue and infer. LYS. Well, suppose I admit that a Kingdom may be considered as a great Family. EUPH. I shall ask you then, whether ever you knew private Families thrive by those vices, you think so beneficial to the Public? LYS. Suppose I have not. EUPH. Might not a Man therefore by a parity of reason suspect their being of that benefit to the Public? LYS. Fear not; the next age will thrive and flourish. EUPH. Pray tell me, Lysicles; suppose you saw a fruit of a new untried kind; would you recommend it to your own Family to make a full meal of? LYS. I would not. EUPH. Why then would you try upon your own Country these maxims which were never admitted in any other? LYS. The experiment must begin somewhere; and we are resolved our own Country shall have the honour and advantage of it. EUPH. O Lysicles, hath not old England subsisted for many ages without the help of your notions? LYS. She has. EUPH. And made some figure? LYS. I grant it. EUPH. Why then shou’d you make her run the risque of a new experiment, when it is certain she may do without it? LYS. But we would make her do better. We wou’d produce a change in her that never was seen in any Nation. EUPH. Sallust observes, that a little before the downfal of the Roman Empire, avarice (the effect of Luxury) had erased the good old principles of probity and justice, had produced a contempt for Religion, and made every thing venal, while ambition bred dissimulation, and caused Men to unite in clubs, and parties, not from honourable motives, but narrow and interested views. The same Historian observes of that great Free-thinker Catiline, that he made it his business to insinuate himself into the acquaintance of young Men, whose minds unimproved by years and experience were more easily seduced. I know not how it happens, but these passages have occurred to my Thoughts more than once during this Conversation. LYS. Sallust was a sententious Pedant. EUPH. But consult any Historian, look into any Writer. See, for instance, what Xenophon and Livy say of Sparta and Rome, and then tell me if Vice be not the likeliest way to ruin and enslave a People. LYS. When a point is clear by its own evidence, I never think it worth while to consult old Authors about it. CRI. It requires much thought and delicate observation to go to the bottom of things. But one who hath come at Truth with difficulty can impart it with ease. I will therefore, Euphranor, explain to you in three words (what none of your old Writers ever dreamt of) the true cause of ruin to those States. You must know that Vice and Virtue, being opposite and contradictory Principles, both working at once in a state, will produce contrary effects, which intestine discord must needs tend to the dissolution and ruin of the whole. But it is the design of our Minute Philosophers, by making Men wicked upon principle, a thing unknown to the Ancients, so to weaken and destroy the force of virtue, that its effects shall not be felt in the Public. In which case Vice being uncontrolled without let or impediment of principle, pure and genuine without allay of virtue, the Nation must doubtless be very flourishing and triumphant. EUPH. Truly, a noble Scheme! CRI. And in a fair way to take effect. For our young proficients in the Minute Philosophy, having, by a rare felicity of Education, no tincture of bigotry or prejudice, do far outgo the old standers and professors of the Sect; who, though Men of admirable parts, yet, having had the misfortune to be imbued in their Childhood with some religious Notions, cou’d never after get intirely rid of them; but still retain some small grains of conscience and superstition, which are a check upon the noblest Genius. In proof of this, I remember that the famous Minute Philosopher old Demodicus came one day, from conversation upon business with Timander, a young Gentleman of the same Sect, full of astonishment. I am surprised, said he, to see so young, and withal so compleat a Villain, and, such was the force of prejudice, spoke of Timander with abhorrence, not considering that he was only the more egregious and profound Philosopher of the two.

VIII.

EUPH. Though much may be hoped from the unprejudiced education of young Gentlemen, yet it seems we are not to expect a settled and intire Happiness, before Vice reigns pure and unmixed: till then, much is to be feared from the dangerous struggle between Vice and Virtue, which may perchance overturn and dissolve this Government, as it hath done others. LYS. No matter for that, if a better comes in its place. We have cleared the land of all Prejudices towards Government or Constitution, and made them fly like other Phantasms before the light of Reason and good Sense. Men who think deeply cannot see any reason, why Power shou’d not change hands as well as Property; or why the fashion of a Government shou’d not be changed as easy as that of a Garment. The perpetual circulating and revolving of Wealth and Power, no matter through what or whose hands, is that which keeps up Life and Spirit in a State. Those who are even slightly read in our Philosophy, know that of all Prejudices the silliest is an attachment to forms. CRI. To say no more upon so clear a point, the overturning a Government may be justified upon the same Principles as the burning a Town, wou’d produce parallel effects, and equally contribute to the public good. In both cases, the natural springs of Action are forcibly exerted: and in this general Industry what one loses another gets, a quick circulation of Wealth and Power making the Sum Total to flourish. EUPH. And do the Minute Philosophers publish these things to the World? LYS. It must be confessed our Writers proceed in Politics with greater caution than they think necessary with regard to Religion. CRI. But those things plainly follow from their Principles, and are to be admitted for the genuine Doctrine of the Sect, expressed perhaps with more freedom and perspicuity, than might be thought prudent by those who wou’d manage the Public, or not offend weak brethren. EUPH. And pray, is there not need of caution, a Rebel, or Incendiary being Characters that many Men have a prejudice against? LYS. Weak People of all ranks have a world of absurd Prejudices. EUPH. But the better sort, such as Statesmen and Legislators; do you think they have not the same Indisposition towards admitting your Principles? LYS. Perhaps they may; but the reason is plain. CRI. This puts me in mind of that ingenious Philosopher, the Gamester Glaucus, who used to say, that Statesmen and Lawgivers may keep a stir about right and wrong, just and unjust, but that, in truth, Property of every kind had so often passed from the right owners by fraud and violence, that it was now to be considered as lying on the common, and with equal right belonged to every one that cou’d seize it. EUPH. What are we to think then of Laws and Regulations relating to Right and Wrong, Crimes and Duties? LYS. They serve to bind weak minds, and keep the Vulgar in awe: But no sooner doth a true Genius arise, but he breaks his way to Greatness through all the trammels of Duty, Conscience, Religion, Law; to all which he sheweth himself infinitely superior.

IX.

EUPH. You are, it seems, for bringing about a thorough Reformation. LYS. As to what is commonly called the Reformation, I cou’d never see how or wherein the World was the better for it. It is much the same as Popery, with this difference, that it is the more prude-like and disagreeable thing of the two. A noted Writer of ours makes it too great a compliment, when he computes the benefit of Hooped-petticoats to be nearly equal to that of the Reformation. Thorough Reformation is thorough Liberty. Leave Nature at full freedom to work her own way, and all will be well. This is what we aim at, and nothing short of this can come up to our Principles. Crito, who is a zealous Protestant, hearing these words, cou’d not refrain. The worst effect of the Reformation, said he, was the rescuing wicked Men from a darkness which kept them in awe. This, as it hath proved, was holding out Light to Robbers and Murderers. Light in it self is good, and the same Light which shews a Man the folly of Superstition, might shew him the truth of Religion, and the madness of Atheism. But to make use of Light, only to see the Evils on one side, and never to see, but to run blindly upon the worse extreme, this is to make the best of things produce Evil, in the same sense that you prove the worst of things to produce Good, to wit, accidentally or indirectly: and by the same method of arguing, you may prove that even Diseases are useful: but whatever benefit seems to accrue to the Public, either from disease of Mind or Body, is not their genuine offspring, and may be obtained without them. Lysicles was a little disconcerted by the affirmative air of Crito; but after a short pause replied briskly, That to contemplate the public good was not every one’s talent. True, said Euphranor, I question whether every one can frame a notion of the public good, much less judge of the means to promote it.

X.

But you, Lysicles, who are master of this subject, will be pleased to inform me, whether the public good of a Nation doth not imply the particular good of its Individuals? LYS. It doth. EUPH. And doth not the good or happiness of a Man consist, in having both Soul and Body sound and in good condition, enjoying those things which their respective Natures require, and free from those things which are odious or hurtful to them. LYS. I do not deny all this to be true. EUPH. Now it shou’d seem worth while to consider, whether the regular decent life of a virtuous Man may not as much conduce to this end, as the mad sallies of Intemperance and Debauchery. LYS. I will acknowledge that a Nation may meerly subsist, or be kept alive, but it is impossible it shou’d flourish without the aid of Vice. To produce a quick circulation of traffick and wealth in a State, there must be exorbitant and irregular motions in the Appetites and Passions. EUPH. The more people a Nation contains, and the happier those people are, the more that Nation may be said to flourish. I think we are agreed in this point. LYS. We are. EUPH. You allow then that Riches are not an ultimate end, but shou’d only be considered as the means to procure Happiness. LYS. I do. EUPH. It seems, that means cannot be of use without our knowing the end, and how to apply them to it. LYS. It seems so. EUPH. Will it not follow, that in order to make a Nation flourish, it is not sufficient to make it wealthy, without knowing the true end and happiness of Mankind, and how to apply wealth towards attaining that end? In proportion as these points are known and practised, I think the Nation shou’d be likely to flourish. But for a people who neither know nor practise them, to gain riches, seems to me the same advantage that it wou’d be for a sick Man to come at plenty of meat and drink, which he cou’d not use but to his hurt. LYS. This is meer sophistry; it is arguing without persuading. Look into common Life; examine the pursuits of Men; have a due respect for the consent of the World; and you will soon be convinced, that Riches alone are sufficient to make a Nation flourishing and happy. Give them Riches and they will make themselves happy, without that political Invention, that Trick of Stasemen and Philosophers, called Virtue.

XI.

EUPH. Virtue then, in your account, is a Trick of Statesmen. LYS. It is. EUPH. Why then do your sagacious Sect betray and divulge that Trick or Secret of State, which wise Men have judged necessary for the good Government of the World? Lysicles hesitating, Crito made answer, That he presumed it was because their Sect, being wiser than all other wise Men, disdained to see the World governed by wrong Maxims, and wou’d set all things on a right bottom. EUPH. Thus much is certain. If we look into all institutions of Government, and the political Writings of such as have heretofore passed for wise Men, we shall find a great regard for Virtue. LYS. You shall find a strong tincture of Prejudice: But, as I said before, consult the Multitude if you wou’d find Nature and Truth. EUPH. But among Country Gentlemen, and Farmers, and the better sort of Tradesmen, is not Virtue a reputable thing? LYS. You pick up Authorities among Men of low life and vile education. EUPH. Perhaps we ought to pay a decent respect to the Authority of Minute Philosophers. LYS. And I wou’d fain know whose Authority shou’d be more considered, than that of those Gentlemen who are alone above Prejudice, and think for themselves. EUPH. How doth it appear that you are the only unprejudiced part of Mankind? May not a Minute Philosopher, as well as another Man, be prejudiced in favour of the leaders of his Sect? May not an atheistical Education prejudice towards Atheism? What shou’d hinder a Man’s being prejudiced against Religion, as well as for it? Or can you assign any reason why an attachment to Pleasure, Interest, Vice, or Vanity, may not be supposed to prejudice Men against Virtue? LYS. This is pleasant? What! Suppose those very Men influenced by Prejudice, who are always disputing against it, whose constant aim it is to detect and demolish Prejudices of all kinds! Except their own, replied Crito, for you must pardon me, if I cannot help thinking they have some small Prejudice, though not in favour of Virtue.

XII.

I observe, Lysicles, that you allowed to Euphranor, the greater number of happy People are in a State, the more that State may be said to flourish; it follows therefore, That such methods as multiply Inhabitants are good, and such as diminish them are bad for the Public. And one wou’d think no body need be told, that the strength of a State consists more in the number and sort of People, than in any thing else. But in proportion as Vice and Luxury, those public blessings encouraged by this Minute Philosophy, prevail among us, fewer are disposed to marry, too many being diverted by Pleasure, disabled by Disease, or frightned by Expence. Nor doth Vice only thin a Nation, but also debaseth it by a puny degenerate Race. I might add, that it is ruinous to our Manufactures, both as it makes labour dear, and thereby enables our more frugal Neighbours to undersel us; and also as it diverts the lower sort of People from honest Callings to wicked Projects. If these and such considerations were taken into the account, I believe it wou’d be evident to any Man in his senses, that the imaginary benefits of Vice bear no proportion to the solid real woes that attend it. Lysicles, upon this, shook his head, and smiled at Crito, without vouchsafing any other answer. After which, addressing himself to Euphranor, There cannot, said he, be a stronger instance of Prejudice, than that a Man shou’d at this time of day preserve a reverence for that idol Virtue, a thing so effectually exposed and exploded by the most knowing Men of the age, who have shewn, that a Man is a meer engine, play’d upon and driven about by sensible objects; and that moral Virtue is only a Name, a Notion, a Chimaera, an Enthusiasm, or at best a Fashion, uncertain and changeable, like all other Fashions. EUPH. What do you think, Lysicles, of Health; doth it depend on Fancy and Caprice, or is it something real in the bodily composition of a Man? LYS. Health is something real, which results from the right Constitution and Temperature of the Organs and the Fluids circulating through them. EUPH. This you say is health of Body. LYS. It is. EUPH. And may we not suppose an healthy constitution of Soul, when the Notions are right, the Judgments true, the Will regular, the Passions and Appetites directed to their proper objects, and confined within due bounds? This, in regard to the Soul, seems what Health is to the Body. And the Man whose mind is so constituted, is he not properly called virtuous? And to produce this healthy disposition in the minds of his Countrymen, shou’d not every good Man employ his endeavours? If these things have any appearance of Truth, as to me they seem to have, it will not then be so clear a point that Virtue is a meer whim or fashion, as you are pleased to represent it: I must own something unexpectedly, after what had been discoursed in last Evening’s Conference, which if you wou’d call to mind, it might perhaps save both of us some trouble. LYS. Wou’d you know the truth, Euphranor? I must own I have quite forgot all your discourse about Virtue, Duty, and all such Points, which, being of an airy notional nature, are apt to vanish, and leave no trace on a mind accustomed only to receive Impression from Realities.

XIII.

Having heard these words, Euphranor looked at Crito and me, and said smiling, I have mistaken my part; it was mine to learn, and his to instruct. Then addressing himself to Lysicles, Deal faithfully, said he, and let me know whether the public Benefit of Vice be in truth that which makes you plead for it? LYS. I love to speak frankly what I think. Know then, that private Interest is the first and principal consideration with Philosophers of our Sect. Now of all Interests Pleasure is that which hath the strongest charms, and no Pleasures like those which are heightened and enlivened by licence. Herein consists the peculiar excellency of our Principles, that they shew People how to serve their Country by diverting themselves, causing the two streams of public Spirit and Self-love to unite and run in the same channel. I have told you already, that I admit a Nation might subsist by the rules of Virtue. But give me leave to say, it will barely subsist, in a dull joyless insipid state, whereas the sprightly excesses of Vice inspire Men with joy: And where Particulars rejoice, the Public, which is made up of Particulars, must do so too; that is, the Public must be happy. This I take to be an irrefragable argument. But to give you its full force, and make it as plain as possible, I will trace things from their original. Happiness is the end to which created beings naturally tend, but we find that all Animals, whether Men or Brutes, do naturally and principally pursue real Pleasure of Sense, which is therefore to be thought their supreme Good, their true End and Happiness. It is for this Men live, and whoever understands Life must allow that Man to enjoy the top and flower of it, who hath a quick sense of Pleasure, and withal Spirit, Skill, and Fortune sufficient to gratify every appetite and every taste. Niggards and Fools will envy or traduce such a one because they cannot equal him. Hence, all that sober trifling in disparagement of what every one wou’d be master of if he cou’d, a full freedom and unlimited scope of Pleasure. EUPH. Let me see whether I understand you. Pleasure of Sense, you say, is the chief Pleasure. LYS. I do. EUPH. And this wou’d be crampt and diminished by Virtue. LYS. It wou’d. EUPH. Tell me, Lysicles, is Pleasure then at the height when the Appetites are satisfied? LYS. There is then only an Indolence, the lively sense of Pleasure being past. EUPH. It shou’d seem therefore, that the appetites must be always craving to preserve Pleasure alive. LYS. That is our sense of the matter. EUPH. The Greek Philosopher therefore was in the right, who considered the body of a Man of pleasure as a leaky Vessel, always filling and never full. LYS. You may divert your self with Allegories, if you please. But all the while ours is literally the true taste of Nature. Look throughout the Universe, and you shall find Birds and Fishes, Beasts and Insects, all kinds of Animals, with which the Creation swarms, constantly engaged by instinct in the pursuit of sensible Pleasure. And shall Man alone be the grave fool who thwarts, and crosses, and subdues his appetites, while his fellow-creatures do all most joyfully and freely indulge them? EUPH. How! Lysicles! I thought that being governed by the Senses, Appetites, and Passions, was the most grievous Slavery; and that the proper business of Free-thinkers, or Philosophers, had been to set Men free from the power of Ambition, Avarice, and Sensuality. LYS. You mistake the point. We make Men relish the World, attentive to their Interests, lively and luxurious in their Pleasures, without fear or restraint either from God or Man. We despise those preaching Writers, who used to disturb or cramp the pleasures and amusements of Human Life. We hold, that a wise Man who meddles with business, doth it altogether for his interest, and refers his interest to his pleasure. With us it is a maxim, that a Man shou’d seize the moments as they fly. Without Love, and Wine, and Play, and late hours, we hold Life not to be worth living. I grant, indeed, that there is something gross and ill-bred in the vices of mean Men, which the genteel Philosopher abhors. CRI. But to cheat, whore, betray, get drunk, do all these things decently, this is true wisdom, and elegance of taste.

XIV.

EUPH. To me, who have been us’d to another way of thinking, this new Philosophy seems difficult to digest. I must therefore beg leave to examine its Principles, with the same freedom that you do those of other Sects. LYS. Agreed. EUPH. You say, if I mistake not, that a wise Man pursues only his private interest, and that this consists in sensual pleasure, for proof whereof you appeal to Nature. Is not this what you advance? LYS. It is. EUPH. You conclude therefore, that as other Animals are guided by natural instinct, Man too ought to follow the dictates of sense and appetite. LYS. I do. EUPH. But in this, do you not argue as if Man had only sense and appetite for his guides, on which supposition there might be truth in what you say? But what if he hath intellect, reason, a higher instinct and a nobler life? If this be the case, and you being Man, live like a Brute, is it not the way to be defrauded of your true happiness? to be mortified and disappointed? Consider most sorts of Brutes; you shall perhaps find them have a greater share of sensual happiness than Man. LYS. To our sorrow we do. This hath made several Gentlemen of our Sect envy Brutes, and lament the lot of Humane Kind. CRI. It was a consideration of this sort which inspired Erotylus, with the laudable ambition of wishing himself a snail, upon hearing of certain particularities discovered in that animal by a modern Virtuoso. EUPH. Tell me, Lysicles, if you had an inexhaustible fund of gold and silver, shou’d you envy another for having a little more copper than you? LYS. I shou’d not. EUPH. Are not Reason, Imagination, and Sense, Faculties differing in kind, and in rank higher one than another. LYS. I do not deny it. EUPH. Their acts therefore differ in kind. LYS. They do. EUPH. Consequently the pleasures perfective of those acts are also different. LYS. They are. EUPH. You admit therefore three sorts of pleasure; pleasure of Reason, pleasure of imagination, and pleasure of Sense. LYS. I do. EUPH. And, as it is reasonable to think, the operation of the highest and noblest faculty to be attended with the highest pleasure, may we not suppose the two former to be as gold or silver, and the latter only as copper? Whence it shou’d seem to follow, that Man need not envy or imitate a Brute. LYS. And nevertheless there are very ingenious Men who do. And surely every one may be allowed to know what he wants, and wherein his true happiness consists. EUPH. Is it not plain that different Animals have different pleasures? Take a Hog from his ditch or dunghil, lay him on a rich bed, treat him with sweet-meats, and music, and perfumes. All these things will be no entertainment to him. Do not a Bird, a Beast, a Fish, amuse themselves in various manners, insomuch that what is pleasing to one may be death to another? Is it ever seen that one of these Animals quits its own element or way of living, to adopt that of another? And shall Man quit his own Nature to imitate a Brute? LYS. But Sense is not only natural to Brutes; is it not also natural to Man? EUPH. It is, but with this difference, it maketh the Whole of a Brute, but is the lowest part or faculty of a Humane Soul. The nature of any thing is peculiarly that which doth distinguish it from other things, not what it hath in common with them. Do you allow this to be true? LYS. I do. EUPH. And is not Reason that which makes the principal difference between Man and other Animals? LYS. It is. EUPH. Reason therefore being the principal part of our Nature, whatever is most reasonable shou’d seem most natural to Man. Must we not therefore think rational Pleasures more agreeable to Human Kind, than those of Sense? Man and Beast having different Natures, seem to have different Faculties, different Enjoyments, and different sorts of Happiness. You can easily conceive, that the sort of Life which makes the happiness of a Mole or a Bat, wou’d be a very wretched one for an Eagle. And may you not as well conceive that the happiness of a Brute can never constitute the true happiness of a Man? A Beast, without Reflection or Remorse, without Foresight or Appetite of Immortality, without notion of Vice or Virtue, or Order, or Reason, or Knowledge! What motive, what grounds can there be for bringing down Man, in whom are all these things, to a level with such a creature? What merit, what ambition in the Minute Philosopher to make such an Animal a guide or rule for Humane Life?

XV.

LYS. It is strange, Euphranor, that one who admits freedom of thought as you do, shou’d yet be such a slave to prejudice. You still talk of order and virtue, as of real things, as if our Philosophers had never demonstrated, that they have no foundation in Nature, and are only the effects of Education. I know, said Crito, how the Minute Philosophers are accustomed to demonstrate this point. They consider the animal nature of Man, or Man so far forth as he is animal; and it must be owned that considered in that light, he hath no sense of Duty, no notion of Virtue. He therefore, who shou’d look for Virtue among meer animals, or Human Kind as such, wou’d look in the wrong place. But that Philosopher who is attentive only to the animal part of his Being, and raiseth his Theorys from the very dregs of our Species, might probably upon second thoughts find himself mistaken. Look you, Crito, said Lysicles, my argument is with Euphranor to whom addressing his discourse; I observe, said he, that you stand much upon the dignity of Humane Nature. This thing of dignity is an old worn-out notion, which depends on other notions old and stale, and worn-out, such as an immaterial Spirit, and a Ray derived from the Divinity. But in these days Men of Sense make a jest of all this Grandeur and Dignity; and many there are wou’d gladly exchange their share of it for the repose and freedom, and sensuality of a Brute. But comparisons are odious: waving therefore all inquiry concerning the respective excellencies of Man and Beast, and whether it is beneath a Man to follow or imitate Brute Animals, in judging of the chief good and conduct of Life and Manners, I shall be content to appeal to the Authority of Men themselves, for the truth of my notions. Do but look abroad into the World, and ask the common run of Men, whether pleasure of Sense be not the only true, solid, substantial good of their kind? EUPH. But might not the same vulgar sort of Men prefer a piece of Sign-post Painting to one of Raphael’s, or a Grubstreet Ballad to an Ode of Horace? Is there not a real difference between good and bad Writing? LYS. There is. EUPH. And yet you will allow there must be a maturity and improvement of understanding to discern this difference, which doth not make it therefore less real. LYS. I will. EUPH. In the same manner what shou’d hinder, but there may be in nature a true difference between Vice and Virtue, although it require some degree of reflexion and judgment to observe it? In order to know whether a thing be agreeable to the rational nature of Man, it seems one shou’d rather observe and consult those who have most employ’d or improved their Reason. LYS. Well, I shall not insist on consulting the common herd of mankind. From the ignorant and gross Vulgar, I might my self appeal in many cases to Men of rank and fashion. EUPH. They are a sort of Men I have not the honour to know much of by my own Observation. But I remember a remark of Aristotle, who was himself a Courtier and knew them well.

Virtue, saith he, and good Sense are not the property of high Birth or a great Estate. Nor if they who posess these advantages, wanting a taste for rational pleasures, betake themselves to those of Sense; ought we therefore to esteem them eligible, any more than we shou’d the toys and pastimes of Children, because they seem so to them?

And indeed one may be allowed to question, whether the truest estimate of things was to be expected from a mind intoxicated with Luxury, and dazzled with the splendor of high living.

Cùm stupet insanis acies fulgoribus, & cùm

Acclinis falsis animus meliora recusat.

Hor. Crito upon this observed, that he knew an English Nobleman who in the prime of Life professeth a liberal art, and is the first Man of his profession in the World; and that he was very sure, he had more pleasure from the exercise of that elegant art, than from any sensual enjoyment within the power of one of the largest fortunes, and most bountiful Spirits in Great Britain.

XVI.

LYS. But why need we have recourse to the judgment of other Men in so plain a case? I appeal to your own breast, consult that, and then say if sensible pleasure be not the chief good of Man. EUPH. I, for my part, have often thought those pleasures which are highest in the esteem of sensualists, so far from being the chiefest good, that it seemed doubtful upon the whole, whether they were any good at all, any more than the meer removal of pain. Are not our wants and appetites uneasy? LYS. They are. EUPH. Doth not sensual pleasure consist in satisfying them? LYS. It doth. EUPH. But the cravings are tedious, the satisfaction momentary. Is it not so? LYS. It is, but what then? EUPH. Why then it shou’d seem that sensual pleasure is but a short deliverance from long pain. A long avenue of uneasiness leads to a point of pleasure, which ends in disgust or remorse. CRI. And he who pursues this ignis fatuus imagines himself a Philosopher and Free-thinker. LYS. Pedants are governed by words and notions, while the wiser Men of pleasure follow Fact, Nature and Sense. CRI. But what if notional pleasures should in fact prove the most real and lasting? Pure pleasures of Reason and Imagination neither hurt the health, nor waste the fortune, nor gall the conscience. By them the mind is long entertained without loathing or satiety. On the other hand a notion (which with you it seems passeth for nothing) often embitters the most lively sensual pleasures, which at bottom will be found also to depend upon notion more than perhaps you imagine, it being a vulgar remark, that those things are more enjoyed by hope and foretaste of the Soul than by possession. Thus much is yielded, that the actual enjoyment is very short, and the alternative of Appetite and Disgust long as well as uneasy. So that, upon the whole, it should seem those Gentlemen, who are called Men of pleasure from their eager pursuit of it, do in reality with great expence of fortune, ease, and health purchase pain. LYS. You may spin out plausible Arguments, but will after all find it a difficult matter to convince me that so many ingenious Men shou’d not be able to distinguish between things so directly opposite as pain and pleasure. How is it possible to account for this? CRI. I believe a reason may be assigned for it, but to Men of pleasure no truth is so palatable as a fable. Jove once upon a time having ordered, that pleasure and pain shou’d be mixed in equal proportions in every dose of Humane Life, upon a complaint, that some Men endeavoured to separate what he had joined, and taking more than their share of the sweet, wou’d leave all the sour for others, commanded Mercury to put a stop to this evil, by fixing on each Delinquent a pair of invisible Spectacles, which shou’d change the appearance of things, making pain look like pleasure, and pleasure like pain, labour like recreation, and recreation like labour. From that time the Men of Pleasure are eternally mistaking and repenting. LYS. If your Doctrine takes place I wou’d fain know what can be the advantage of a great fortune, which all mankind so eagerly pursue? CRI. It is a common saying with Eucrates, That a great fortune is an edged tool, which a hundred may come at, for one who knows how to use it, so much easier is the art of getting than that of spending. What its advantage is I will not say, but I will venture to declare what it is not. I am sure that where abundance excludes want, and enjoyment prevents appetite, there is not the quickest sense of those pleasures we have been speaking of, in which the Footman hath often a greater share than his Lord, who cannot enlarge his Stomach in proportion to his Estate.

XVII.

Reasonable and well-educated Men of all Ranks have, I believe, pretty much the same amusements, notwithstanding the difference of their fortunes: But those who are particularly distinguished as Men of pleasure seem to possess it in a very small degree. EUPH. I have heard that among Persons of that character, a game of Cards is esteemed a chief diversion. LYS. Without Cards there cou’d be no living for People of fashion. It is the most delightful way of passing an Evening when Gentlemen and Ladies are got together, who wou’d otherwise be at a loss what to say or do with themselves. But a pack of Cards is so engaging, that it doth not only employ them when they are met, but serves to draw them together. Quadrille gives them pleasure in prospect during the dull hours of the day, they reflect on it with delight, and it furnishes discourse when it is over. CRI. One wou’d be apt to suspect these People of condition pass their time but heavily, and are but little the better for their fortunes, whose chief amusement is a thing in the power of every Porter or Footman, who is as well qualified to receive pleasure from Cards as a Peer. I can easily conceive that when People of a certain turn are got together, they shou’d prefer doing any thing to the ennui of their own conversation; but it is not easily to conceive there is any great pleasure in this. What a Card-table can afford requires neither parts nor fortune to judge of. LYS. Play is a serious amusement that comes to the relief of a Man of pleasure, after the more lively and affecting enjoyments of Sense. It kills time beyond any thing, and is a most admirable Anodyne to divert or prevent thought, which might otherwise prey upon the mind. CRI. I can easily comprehend, that no Man upon Earth ought to prize Anodynes for the Spleen, more than a Man of fashion and pleasure. An ancient Sage speaking of one of that character, saith he is made wretched by disappointments and appetites, [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] . And if this was true of the Greeks who lived in the Sun, and had so much Spirit, I am apt to think it is still more so of our modern English. Something there is in our climate and complexion, that makes idleness no where so much its own punishment as in England, where an uneducated fine Gentleman pays for his momentary pleasures, with long and cruel intervals of Spleen; for relief of which he is driven into sensual excesses, that produce a proportionable depression of Spirits, which, as it createth a greater want of pleasures, so it lessens the ability to enjoy them. There is a cast of Thought in the Complexion of an Englishman, which renders him the most unsuccessful Rake in the World. He is (as Aristotle expresseth it) at variance with himself. He is neither Brute enough to enjoy his appetites, nor Man enough to govern them. He knows and feels that what he pursues is not his true good, his reflexion serving only to shew him that misery which his habitual sloth and indolence will not suffer him to remedy. At length being grown odious to himself, and abhorring his own Company, he runs into every idle Assembly, not from the hopes of pleasure, but meerly to respite the pain of his own mind. Listless and uneasy at the present, he hath no delight in reflecting on what is past, or in the prospect of any thing to come. This Man of pleasure, when after a wretched Scene of vanity and woe his animal nature is worn to the Stumps, wishes and dreads Death by turns, and is sick of living, without having ever tried or known the true life of Man. EUPH. It is well this sort of Life, which is of so little benefit to the owner, conduceth so much to that of the Public. But pray tell me, do these Gentlemen set up for Minute Philosophers? CRI. That Sect you must know contains two sorts of Philosophers, the wet and the dry. Those I have been describing are of the former kind. They differ rather in Practice than in Theory. As an older, graver or duller Man from one that is younger, and more capable or fond of pleasure. The dry Philosopher passeth his time but drily. He has the honour of pimping for the Vices of more sprightly Men, who in return offer some small incense to his Vanity. Upon this encouragement, and to make his own mind easy when it is past being pleased, he employs himself in justifying those excesses he cannot partake in. But to return to your question, those miserable Folk are mighty Men for the Minute Philosophy. EUPH. What hinders them then from putting an end to their lives? CRI. Their not being persuaded of the Truth of what they profess. Some indeed in a fit of despair do now and then lay violent hands on themselves. And as the Minute Philosophy prevails, we daily see more examples of Suicide. But they bear no proportion to those who wou’d put an end to their lives if they durst. My friend Clinias, who had been one of them, and a Philosopher of rank, let me into the secret History of their doubts and fears and irresolute resolutions of making away with themselves, which last he assures me is a frequent topic with Men of pleasure, when they have drunk themselves into a little Spirit. It was by virtue of this mechanical valour, the renowned Philosopher Hermocrates shot himself through the head. The same thing hath since been practised by several others to the great relief of their friends. Splenetic, worried, and frightened out of their wits, they run upon their doom, with the same courage as a Bird runs into the mouth of a Rattle Snake, not because they are bold to die, but because they are afraid to live. Clinias endeavoured to fortify his irreligion, by the discourse and opinion of other Minute Philosophers, who were mutually strengthened in their own unbelief by his. After this manner, authority working in a circle, they endeavoured to atheize one another. But though he pretended even to a demonstration against the Being of a God, yet he cou’d not inwardly conquer his own Belief. He fell sick, and acknowledged this truth, is now a sober Man and a good Christian; owns he was never so happy as since he became such, nor so wretched as while he was a Minute Philosopher. And he who has tried both conditions may be allowed a proper judge of both. LYS. Truly a fine account of the brightest and bravest Men of the Age. CRI. Bright and brave are fine attributes. But our Curate is of opinion, that all your Free-thinking Rakes are either Fools or Cowards. Thus he argues; if such a Man doth not see his true Interest, he wants Sense, if he doth but dare not pursue it, he wants Courage. In this manner from the defect of Sense and Courage, he deduceth that whole Species of Men, who are so apt to value themselves upon both those qualities. LYS. As for their Courage they are at all times ready to give proof of it; and for their understanding, thanks to nature, it is of a size not to be measured by Country Parsons.

XVIII.

EUPH. But Socrates, who was no Country Parson, suspected your Men of pleasure were such through ignorance. LYS. Ignorance of what? EUPH. Of the art of computing. It was his opinion that Rakes cannot reckon . And that for want of this skill they make wrong judgments about pleasure, on the right choice of which their happiness depends. LYS. I do not understand you. EUPH. Do you grant that Sense perceiveth only sensible things? LYS. I do. EUPH. Sense perceiveth only things present. LYS. This too I grant. EUPH. Future pleasures, therefore, and pleasures of the understanding, are not to be judged of by actual Sense. LYS. They are not. EUPH. Those therefore who judge of pleasure by Sense, may find themselves mistaken at the foot of the account.

Cùm lapidosa chiragra

Contudit articulos veteris ramalia fagi,

Tum crassos transîsse dies lucemque palustrem,

Et sibi jam seri vitam ingemuere relictam.

To make a right computation, shou’d you not consider all the faculties and all the kinds of Pleasure, taking into your account the future as well as the present, and rating them all according to their true value? CRI. The Epicureans themselves allowed, that Pleasure which procures a greater Pain, or hinders a greater Pleasure, shou’d be regarded as a Pain; and, that Pain which procures a greater Pleasure, or prevents a greater Pain, is to be accounted a Pleasure. In order therefore to make a true estimate of Pleasure, the great spring of action, and that from whence the conduct of Life takes its bias, we ought to compute intellectual Pleasures and future Pleasures, as well as present and sensible: We ought to make allowance in the valuation of each particular Pleasure, for all the Pains and Evils, for all the Disgust, Remorse, and Shame that attend it: We ought to regard both kind and quantity, the sincerity, the intenseness, and the duration of Pleasures. EUPH. And all these points duly considered, will not Socrates seem to have had reason of his side, when he thought ignorance made Rakes, and particularly their being ignorant of what he calls the Science of more and less, greater and smaller, equality and comparison, that is to say of the art of Computing? LYS. All this discourse seems notional. For real abilities of every kind it is well known we have the brightest Men of the age among us. But all those who know the World do calculate that what you call a good Christian, who hath neither a large Conscience, nor unprejudiced Mind, must be unfit for the affairs of it. Thus you see, while you compute your selves out of pleasure, others compute you out of business. What then are you good for with all your computation? EUPH. I have all imaginable respect for the abilities of Free-thinkers. My only fear was, their parts might be too lively for such slow talents as Forecast and Computation, the gifts of ordinary Men.

XIX.

CRI. I cannot make them the same compliment that Euphranor does. For though I shall not pretend to characterize the whole Sect, yet thus much I may truly affirm, That those who have fallen in my way have been mostly raw Men of pleasure, old Sharpers in business, or a third sort of lazy Sciolists, who are neither Men of business, nor Men of speculation, but set up for judges or critics in all kinds, without having made a progress in any. These, among Men of the World pass for profound Theorists, and among speculative Men wou’d seem to know the World; a conceited race, equally useless to the affairs and studies of Mankind. Such as these, for the most part, seem to be Sectaries of the Minute Philosophy. I will not deny that now and then you may meet with a Man of easy manners, that, without those faults and affectations, is carried into the party by the meer stream of Education, Fashion, or Company; all which do in this age prejudice Men against Religion, even those who mechanically rail at Prejudice. I must not forget that the Minute Philosophers have also a strong party among the Beaux and fine Ladies, and, as affectations out of character are often the strongest, there is nothing so dogmatical and inconvincible as one of these fine things, when it sets up for Free-thinking. But, be these professors of the Sect never so dogmatical, their authority must needs be small with Men of sense: For who wou’d choose for his guide in the search for Truth, a Man whose Thoughts and Time are taken up with Dress, Visits, and Diversions? Or whose Education hath been behind a Counter, or in an Office? Or whose Speculations have been employed on the forms of business, who are only well read in the ways and commerce of Mankind, in stock-jobbing, purloining, supplanting, bribing? Or wou’d any Man in his senses give a fig for Meditations and Discoveries made over a bottle? And yet it is certain, that instead of Thought, Books, and Study, most Free-thinkers are the Proselytes of a drinking Club. Their Principles are often settled, and decisions on the deepest Points made, when they are not fit to make a bargain. LYS. You forget our Writers, Crito. They make a world of Proselytes. CRI. So wou’d worse Writers in such a cause. Alas! how few read! and of these, how few are able to judge? How many wish your notions true? How many had rather be diverted than instructed? How many are convinced by a title? I may allow your reasons to be effectual, without allowing them to be good. Arguments, in themselves of small weight, have great effect, when they are recommended by a mistaken interest, when they are pleaded for by passion, when they are countenanced by the humour of the age; and above all, with some sort of Men, when they are against Law, Government, and established Opinions, things which, as a wise or good Man wou’d not depart from without clear evidence, a weak or a bad Man will affect to disparage on the slightest Grounds. LYS. And yet the arguments of our Philosophers alarm. CRI. The force of their reasoning is not what alarms, their contempt of Laws and Government is alarming, their application to the young and ignorant is dangerous. EUPH. But without disputing or disparaging their talent at Ratiocination, it seems very possible their success might not be owing to that alone. May it not in some measure be ascribed to the defects of others, as well as to their own perfections? My friend Eucrates used to say, that the Church wou’d thrive and flourish beyond all opposition, if some certain persons minded Piety more than Politics, Practics than Polemics, Fundamentals than Consectaries, Substance than Circumstance, Things than Notions, and Notions than Words. LYS. Whatever may be the cause, the effects are too plain to be denied. And when a considering Man observes that our Notions do, in this most learned and knowing age, spread and multiply, in opposition to established Laws, and every day gain ground against a body so numerous, so learned, so well supported, protected, encouraged for the service and defence of Religion: I say, when a Man observes and considers all this, he will be apt to ascribe it to the force of Truth, and the merits of our cause; which, had it been supported with the revenues and establishments of the Church and Universities, you may guess what a figure it wou’d make, by the figure that it makes without them. EUPH. It is much to be pitied, that the learned professors of your Sect do not meet with the encouragement they deserve. LYS. All in due time. People begin to open their eyes. It is not impossible but those revenues that in ignorant times were applied to a wrong use, may hereafter in a more enlightned age, be applied to a better. CRI. But why professors and encouragement for what needs no teaching? An acquaintance of mine has a most ingenious Footman that can neither write nor read, who learned your whole System in half an hour, he knows when and how to nod, shake his head, smile, and give a hint as well as the ablest Sceptic, and is in fact a very Minute Philosopher. LYS. Pardon me, it takes time to unlearn religious Prejudices, and requires a strong head. CRI. I do not know how it might have been once upon a time. But in the present laudable education, I know several who have been imbued with no religious notions at all; and others who have had them so very slight, that they rubbed off without the least pains.

XX.

Panope, young and beautiful, under the care of her Aunt, an admirer of the Minute Philosophy, was kept from learning the Principles of Religion, that she might not be accustomed to believe without a reason, nor assent to what she did not comprehend. Panope was not indeed prejudiced with religious notions, but got a notion of Intriguing, and a notion of Play, which ruined her reputation by fourteen, and her fortune by four and twenty. I have often reflected on the different fate of two Brothers in my neighbourhood. Cleon the elder being designed an accomplish’d Gentleman, was sent to town, had the first part of his education in a great School: What Religion he learned there was soon unlearned in a certain celebrated Society, which, till we have a better, may pass for a nursery of Minute Philosophers. Cleon dressed well, cou’d cheat at cards, had a nice palate, understood the mystery of the Die, was a mighty Man in the Minute Philosophy. And having shined a few years in these accomplishments, he died before thirty, childless, and rotten, expressing the utmost indignation that he cou’d not out-live that old dog his Father; who, having a great notion of polite manners, and knowledge of the World, had purchased them to his favourite Son, with much expence, but had been more frugal in the education of Chaerephon, the younger Son, who was brought up at a Country-School, and entered a Commoner in the University, where he qualified himself for a Parsonage in his Father’s gift, which he is now possessed of, together with the Estate of the Family, and a numerous Offspring. LYS. A pack of unpolish’d cubbs, I warrant. CRI. Less polished, perhaps, but more sound, more honest, and more useful than many who pass for fine Gentlemen. Crates, a worthy Justice of the Peace in this County, having had a Son miscarry at London, by the conversation of a Minute Philosopher, used to say with a great air of complaint, If a Man spoils my Corn, or hurts my Cattle, I have a remedy against him; but if he spoils my Children, I have none. LYS. I warrant you, he was for penal methods; he wou’d have had a Law to persecute tender Consciences. CRI. The tender Conscience of a Minute Philosopher! He who tutored the Son of Crates, soon after did justice on himself. For he taught Lycidas, a modest young Man, the Principles of his Sect. Lycidas, in return, debauched his Daughter, an only child, upon which, Charmides that was the Minute Philosopher’s Name) hanged himself. Old Bubalion in the City is carking, and starving, and cheating, that his Son may drink and game, keep Mistresses, Hounds, and Horses, and die in a Jail. Bubalion nevertheless thinks himself wise, and passeth for one that minds the main chance. He is a Minute Philosopher, which learning he acquired behind the counter, from the works of Prodicus and Tryphon. This same Bubalion was one night at supper, talking against the Immortality of the Soul, with two or three grave Citizens, one of whom the next day declared himself bankrupt, with five thousand Pound of Bubalion’s in his hands, and the night following he received a note from a Servant, who had during his lecture waited at table, demanding the sum of fifty guineas to be laid under a stone, and concluding with most terrible threats and imprecations. LYS. Not to repeat what hath been already demonstrated, That the Public is at bottom no suffer by such accidents, which in truth are inconvenient only to private persons, who in their turn too may reap the benefit of them; I say, not to repeat all that hath been demonstrated on that head, I shall only ask you whether there wou’d not be Rakes and Rogues, although we did not make them? Believe me, the World always was, and always will be the same, as long as Men are Men. CRI. I deny that the World is always the same. Humane Nature, to use Alciphron’s comparison, is like Land, better or worse, as it is improved, and according to the Seeds or Principles sown in it. Though no body held your Tenets, I grant there might be bad Men by the force of corrupt appetites and irregular passions: But where Men, to the force of appetite and passion, add that of opinion, and are wicked from Principle, there will be more Men wicked, and those more incurably and outrageously so. The error of a lively Rake lies in his passions, and may be reformed: But the dry Rogue who sets up for judgment, is incorrigible. It is an observation of Aristotle’s, That there are two sorts of Debauchees, the [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , and the [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , of which the one is so against his judgment, the other with it, and that there may be hopes of the former, but none of the latter. And in fact I have always observed, that a Rake who is a Minute Philosopher, when grown old becomes a sharper in business. LYS. I cou’d name you several such who have grown most noted Patriots. CRI. Patriots! such Patriots as Catiline and Marc Antony. LYS. And what then? Those famous Romans were brave though unsuccessful. They wanted neither Sense nor Courage, and if their Schemes had taken effect, the brisker part of their Countrymen had been much the better for them.

XXI.

The wheels of Government go on, though wound up by different hands; if not in the same form, yet in some other, perhaps a better. There is an endless variety in nature, weak Men, indeed, are prejudiced towards Rules and Systems in Life and Government; and think if these are gone all is gone: But a Man of a great Soul and free Spirit delights in the noble experiment of blowing up Systems and dissolving Governments, to mold them anew upon other principles and in another shape. Take my word for it; there is a plastic nature in things that seeks its own end. Pull a State to pieces, jumble, confound, and shake together the particles of Humane Society, and then let them stand a while, and you shall soon see them settle of themselves in some convenient order, where heavy heads are lowest and Men of genius uppermost. EUPH. Lysicles, speaks his mind freely. LYS. Where was the advantage of Free-thinking if it were not attended with Free-speaking, or of Free-speaking if it did not produce Free-acting? We are for absolute, independent, original freedom in thought, word, and deed. Inward freedom without outward, is good for nothing but to set a Man’s judgment at variance with his practice. CRI. This free way of Lysicles may seem new to you; it is not so to me. As the Minute Philosophers lay it down for a maxim, that there is nothing sacred of any kind, nothing but what may be made a jest of, exploded, and changed like the fashion of their Clothes, so nothing is more frequent than for them to utter their schemes and principles, not only in select Companies, but even in public. In a certain part of the World, where ingenious Men are wont to retail their Speculations, I remember to have seen a Valetundinarian in a long Wig and a Cloak sitting at the upper end of a Table, with half a dozen of Disciples about him. After he had talked about Religion in a manner, and with an air that wou’d make one think, Atheism established by Law, and Religion only tolerated, he entered upon Civil Government, and observed to his Audience, that the natural World was in a perpetual circulation: Animals, said he, who draw their sustenance from the Earth, mix with that same Earth, and in their turn become Food for Vegetables, which again nourish the Animal kind: The Vapours that ascend from this Globe descend back upon it in showers: The Elements alternately prey upon each other: That which one part of nature loseth another gains, the sum total remaining always the same, being neither bigger nor lesser, better nor worse for all these intestine changes. Even so, said this learned Professor, the revolutions in the civil World are no detriment to Human Kind, one part whereof rises as the other fails, and wins by another’s loss. A Man therefore who thinks deeply, and hath an eye on the whole System, is no more a Bigot to Government than to Religion. He knows how to suit himself to occasions, and make the best of every event: For the rest, he looks on all translations of power and property from one hand to another with a philosophic indifference. Our Lecturer concluded his discourse with a most ingenious Analysis of all political and moral Virtues into their first principles and causes, shewing them to be meer fashions, tricks of State, and illusions on the Vulgar. LYS. We have been often told of the good effects of Religion and Learning, Churches and Universities: But I dare affirm, that a dozen or two ingenious Men of our Sect have done more towards advancing real knowledge, by extemporaneous Lectures in the compass of a few years, than all the Ecclesiastics put together for as many Centuries. EUPH. And the Nation no doubt thrives accordingly: But, it seems, Crito, you have heard them discourse. CRI. Upon hearing this and other Lectures of the same tendency, methought it was needless to establish Professors for the Minute Philosophy in either University, while there are so many spontaneous Lecturers in every corner of the Streets, ready to open Mens Eyes, and rub off their prejudices about Religion, Loyalty, and public Spirit. LYS. If wishing was to any purpose, I cou’d wish for a Telescope that might draw into my view things future in time, as well as distant in place. Oh! that I cou’d but look into the next age, and behold what it is that we are preparing to be, the glorious harvest of our Principles, the spreading of which hath produced a visible tendency, in the Nation towards something great and new. CRI. One thing I dare say you wou’d expect to see, be the changes and agitations of the Public what they will, that is, every Free-thinker upon his legs. You are all Sons of Nature, who chearfully follow the fortunes of the common Mass. LYS. And it must be owned we have a maxim, that each shou’d take care of one. CRI. Alas, Lysicles, you wrong your own Character. You wou’d fain pass upon the World and upon your selves for interested cunning Men: But can any thing be more disinterested than to sacrifice all regards to the abstracted Speculation of Truth? Or can any thing be more void of all cunning than to publish your discoveries to the World, teach others to play the whole game, and arm Mankind against your selves?

XXII.

If a Man may venture to suggest so mean a thought as the love of their Country, to Souls fired with the love of Truth, and the love of Liberty, and grasping the whole extent of Nature, I wou’d humbly propose it to you, Gentlemen, to observe the caution practised by all other discoverers, projectors, and makers of experiments, who never hazard all on the first trial. Wou’d it not be prudent to try the success of your principles on a small model in some remote corner? For instance set up a Colony of Atheists in Monomotapa, and see how it prospers before you proceed any further at home: Half a dozen Ship-load of Minute Philosophers might easily be spread upon so good a design. In the mean time, you Gentlemen, who have found out that there is nothing to be hoped or feared in another Life, that Conscience is a Bugbear, that the bands of Government, and the cement of Human Society are rotten things, to be dissolved and crumbled into nothing, by the argumentation of every Minute Philosopher, be so good as to keep these sublime discoveries to your selves: Suffer us, our Wives, our Children, our Servants and our Neighbours to continue in the Belief and way of Thinking established by the Laws of our Country. In good earnest, I wish you wou’d go try your experiments among the Hottentots or Turks. LYS. The Hottentots we think well of, believing them to be an unprejudiced People; but it is to be feared their diet and customs wou’d not agree with our Philosophers: As for the Turks they are Bigots who have a notion of God and a respect for Jesus Christ. I question whether it might be safe to venture among them. CRI. Make your experiment then in some other part of Christendom. LYS. We hold all other Christian Nations to be much under the power of prejudice; even our Neighbours the Dutch are too much prejudiced in favour of their Religion by Law established, for a prudent Man to attempt innovations under their Government. Upon the whole it seems, we can execute our Schemes no where with so much security and such prospect of success as at home. Not to say that we have already made a good progress. Oh! That we cou’d but once see a Parliament of true, staunch, libertine Free-thinkers! CRI. God forbid. I shou’d be sorry to have such Men for my Servants, not to say, for my Masters. LYS. In that we differ.

XXIII.

But you will agree with me that the right way to come at this, was to begin with extirpating the prejudices of particular Persons. We have carried on this work for many years with much art and industry, and at first with secrecy, working like Moles under ground, concealing our progress from the Public, and our ultimate views from many, even of our own Proselytes, blowing the Coals between polemical Divines, laying hold on and improving every incident, which the passions and folly of Churchmen afforded, to the advantage of our Sect. As our principles obtained, we still proceeded to farther inferences; and as our numbers multiplied, we gradually disclosed our selves and our Opinions; where we are now I need not say. We have stubbed and weeded and cleared Humane Nature to that degree, that in a little time, leaving it alone without any labouring or teaching, you shall see natural and just Ideas sprout forth of themselves. CRI. But I have heard a man, who had lived long and observed much, remark that the worst and most unwholesom weed was this same Minute Philosophy. We have had, said he, divers epidemical distempers in the State, but this hath produced of all others the most destructive Plague. Enthusiasm had its day, its effects were violent and soon over: This infects more quietly but spreads widely: The former bred a fever in the State, this breeds a consumption and final decay. A Rebellion or an Invasion alarms and puts the Public upon its defence, but a corruption of principles works its ruin more slowly perhaps, but more surely. This may be illustrated by a Fable I somewhere met with in the writings of a Swiss Philosopher, setting forth the original of Brandy and Gun-powder. The Government of the North being once upon a time vacant, the Prince of the power of the air convened a Council in Hell, wherein upon competition between two Daemons of rank, it was determined they shou’d both make trial of their abilities, and he shou’d succeed who did most mischief. One made his appearance in the shape of Gunpowder, the other in that of Brandy: The former was a declared Enemy and roared with a terrible noise, which made folks afraid, and put them on their guard: The other passed as a Friend and a Physician through the World, disguised himself with Sweets and Perfumes and Drugs, made his way into the Ladies Cabinets, and the Apothecaries Shops, and under the notion of helping digestion, comforting the Spirits, and checring the Heart, produced direct contrary effects; and having insensibly thrown great numbers of Humane Kind into a lingring but fatal decay, was found to people Hell and the Grave so fast as to merit the Governemnt which he still possesses.

XXIV.

LYS. Those who please may amuse themselves with Fables and Allegories. This is plain English: Liberty is a good thing, and we are the support of Liberty. CRI. To me it seems that Liberty and Virtue were made for each other. If any Man wish to enslave his Country, nothing is a fitter preparative than Vice; and nothing leads to Vice so surely as Irreligion. For my part I cannot comprehend or find out, after having considered it in all lights, how this crying down Religion shou’d be the effect of honest views towards a just and legal Liberty. Some seem to propose an indulgence in Vice. Others may have in prospect the advantages which needy and ambitious Men are used to make in the ruin of a State: One may indulge a pert petulant Spirit; another hope to be esteemed among Libertines, when he wants wit to please or abilities to be useful. But, be Mens views what they will, let us examine what good your principles have done; who has been the better for the instructions of these Minute Philosophers? Let us compare what we are in respect of Learning, Loyalty, Honesty, Wealth, Power and Public Spirit with what we have been. Free-thinking (as it is called) hath wonderfully grown of late years. Let us see what hath grown up with it, or what effects it hath produced. To make a catalogue of ills is disagreeable; and the only blessing it can pretend to is Luxury: That same blessing which revenged the World upon old Rome: That same Luxury that makes a Nation like a diseased pampered body, look full and fat with one foot in the Grave. LYS. You mistake the matter. There are no People who think and argue better about the public good of a State than our Sect; who have also invented many things tending to that end, which we cannot as yet conveniently put in practice. CRI. But one point there is from which it must be owned the Public hath already received some advantage, which is the effect of your principles flowing from them, and spreading as they do; I mean that old Roman practice of Self-murder which at once puts an end to all distress, ridding the World and themselves of the miserable. LYS. You were pleased before to make some reflexions on this Custom, and laugh at the irresolution of our Free-thinkers: But I can aver for matter of fact, that they have often recommended it by their example as well as arguments, and that it is soley owing to them that a practice, so useful and magnanimous, hath been taken out of the hands of Lunatics, and restored to that credit among Men of sense, which it anciently had. In whatever light you may consider it, this is in fact a solid Benefit: But the best effect of our principles is that light and truth so visibly shed abroad in the World. From how many prejudices, errors, perplexities and contradictions have we freed the minds of our Fellow-Subjects? How many hard words and intricate absurd notions had possessed the minds of Men before our Philosophers appeared in the World? But now even Women and Children have right and sound notions of things. What say you to this, Crito? CRI. I say, with respect to these great advantages of destroying Men and Notions, that I question whether the Public gains as much by the latter as it loseth by the former. For my own part I had rather my Wife and Children all believed what they had no notion of and daily pronounced words without a meaning, than that any one of them shou’d cut his Throat, or leap out of a Window. Errors and nonsense as such are of small concern in the eye of the Public, which consider not the metaphysical Truth of notions, so much as the tendency they have to produce good or evil. Truth it self is valued by the Public, as it hath an influence, and is felt in the course of Life. You may confute a whole shelf of Schoolmen, and discover many speculative Truths, without any great merit towards your Country. But if I am not mistaken, the Minute Philosophers are not the Men to whom we are most beholden for discoveries of that kind: This I say must be allowed supposing, what I by no means grant, your notions to be true. For, to say plainly what I think, the tendency of your opinions is so bad, that no good Man can endure them, and your arguments for them so weak that no wise Man will admit them. LYS. Has it not been proved as clear as the Meridian Sun, that the politer sort of Men lead much happier lives, and swim in pleasure since the spreading of our Principles? But, not to repeat or insist further on what has been so amply deduced, I shall only add that the advantages flowing from them, extend to the tenderest Age and the softer Sex: Our principles deliver Children from terrors by night, and Ladies from splenetic hours by day. Instead of these old fashioned things, Prayers and the Bible, the grateful amusements of Drams, Dice, and Billets-doux have succeeded. The fair Sex have now nothing to do but dress and paint, drink and game, adorn and divert themselves, and enter into all the sweet Society of Life. CRI. I thought, Lysicles, the argument from pleasure had been exhausted; but since you have not done with that point, let us once more by Euphranor’s rule cast up the account of pleasure and pain, as credit and debt under distinct Articles. We will set down in the life of your fine Lady, rich clothes, dice, cordials, scandal, late hours against vapours, distaste, remorse, losses at play, and the terrible distress of ill spent age increasing every day; suppose no cruel accident of jealousy, no madness or infamy of love, yet at the foot of the account you shall find that empty, giddy, gaudy, fluttering thing, not half so happy as a butterfly, or a grashopper on a Summer’s day: And for a Rake or Man of pleasure, the reckoning will be much the same, if you place listlesness, ignorance, rottenness, loathing, craving, quarrelling, and such qualities or accomplishments over against his little circle of fleeting amusements, long woe against momentary pleasure; and if it be considered that, when Sense and Appetite go off, though he seek refuge from his Conscience in the Minute Philosophy, yet in this you will find, if you sift him to the bottom, that he affects much, believes little, knows nothing. Upon which Lysicles turning to me, observed, that Crito might dispute against fact if he pleased, but that every one must see the Nation was the merrier for their principles. True, answered Crito, we are a merry Nation indeed: Young Men laugh at the old; Children despise their Parents; and Subjects make a jest of the Government; happy effects of the Minute Philosophy!

XXV.

LYS. Infer what effects you please that will not make our principles less true. CRI. Their truth is not what I am now considering. The point at present is the usefulness of your principles; and to decide this point we need only take a short view of them fairly proposed and laid together: That there is no God or Providence; that Man is as the Beasts that perish; that his Happiness as theirs consists in obeying animal instincts, appetites and passions; that all stings of conscience and sense of guilt are prejudices and errors of Education; that Religion is a State trick; that Vice is beneficial to the Public; that the Soul of Man is corporeal and dissolveth like a flame or vapour; that Man is a Machine actuated according to the Laws of motion; that consequently he is no agent or subject of guilt; that a wise Man will make his own particular individual interest in this present life, the rule and measure of all his actions: These and such Opinions are, it seems, the Tenets of a Minute Philosopher, who is himself according to his own principles an Organ play’d on by sensible objects, a Ball bandied about by appetites, and passions; so subtle is he as to be able to maintain all this by artful reasonings; so sharpsighted and penetrating to the very bottom of things as to find out, that the most interested occult cunning is the only true wisdom. To compleat his Character, this curious piece of Clockwork, having no principle of Action within it self, and denying that it hath or can have any one Free Thought or Motion, sets up for the Patron of Liberty, and earnestly contends for Free-thinking. Crito had no sooner made an end, but Lysicles addressed himself to Euphranor and me; Crito, said he, has taken a world of pains, but convinced me only of one single point, to wit, That I must despair of Convincing him. Never did I in the whole course of my life meet with a Man so deeply immersed in Prejudice; let who will pull him out for me. But I entertain better hopes of you. I can answer, said I, for my self, that my eyes and ears are always open to Conviction: I am attentive to all that passes, and upon the whole shall form, whether right or wrong, a very impartial judgment. Crito, said Euphranor, is a more enterprising Man than I, thus to rate and lecture a Philosopher. For my part, I always find it easier to learn than to teach. I shall therefore beg your assistance to rid me of some scruples about the tendency of your Opinions; which I find my self unable to master, though never so willing. This done, though we shou’d not tread exactly in the same steps, nor perhaps go the same road; yet we shall not run in all points diametrically opposite one to another.

XXVI.

Tell me now, Lysicles, you who are a minute observer of things, whether a shade be more agreeable at morning or evening or noon-day. LYS. Doubtless at noon-day. EUPH. And what disposeth Men to rest? LYS. Exercise. EUPH. When do Men make the greatest fires? LYS. In the coldest weather. EUPH. And what creates a love for icid Liquors? LYS. Excessive heat. EUPH. What if you raise a Pendulum to a great height on one side? LYS. It will, when left to it self, ascend so much the higher on the other. EUPH. It shou’d seem, therefore, that Darkness ensues from Light, Rest from Motion, Heat from Cold, and in general that one Extreme is the consequence of another. LYS. It shou’d seem so. EUPH. And doth not this observation hold in the civil as well as natural World? Doth not Power produce Licence, and Licence Power? Do not Whigs make Tories, and Tories Whigs? Bigots make Atheists, and Atheists Bigots? LYS. Granting this to be true. EUPH. Will it not hence follow, that as we abhor Slavish Principles, we shou’d avoid running into Licentious ones? I am and always was a sincere lover of Liberty, Legal English Liberty; which I esteem a chief blessing, ornament, and comfort of Life, and the great Prerogative of an Englishman. But is it not to be feared, that upon the Nation’s running into a Licentiousness which hath never been endured in any civilized Country, Men feeling the intolerable evils of one extreme may naturally fall into the other? You must allow, the bulk of Mankind are not Philosophers like you and Alciphron. LYS. This I readily acknowledge. EUPH. I have another scruple about the tendency of your Opinions. Suppose you shou’d prevail and destroy this Protestant Church and Clergy: How cou’d you come at the Popish? I am credibly informed there is a great number of Emissaries of the Church of Rome disguised in England: who can tell what harvest a Clergy so numerous, so subtle, and so well furnished with arguments to work on vulgar and uneducated minds, may be able to make in a Country despoiled of all Religion, and feeling the want of it? Who can tell whether the Spirit of Free-thinking ending with the Opposition, and the Vanity with the Distinction, when the whole Nation are alike Infidels, who can tell, I say, whether in such a juncture the Men of Genius themselves may not affect a new Distinction, and be the first converts to Popery? LYS. And suppose they shou’d. Between friends it wou’d be no great matter. These are our maxims. In the first place we hold it wou’d be best to have no Religion at all. Secondly, we hold that all Religions are indifferent. If therefore upon trial we find the Country cannot do without a Religion, why not Popery as well as another? I know several ingenious Men of our Sect, who, if we had a Popish Prince on the Throne, wou’d turn Papists to-morrow. This is a Paradox, but I shall explain it. A Prince whom we compliment with our Religion, to be sure must be grateful. EUPH. I understand you. But what becomes of Free-thinking all the while? LYS. Oh! we shou’d have more than ever of that, for we shou’d keep it all to our selves. As for the amusement of retailing it, the want of this wou’d be largely compensated by solid advantages of another kind. EUPH. It seems then, by this account, the Tendency you observed in the Nation towards something great and New proves a Tendency towards Popery and Slavery. LYS. Mistake us not, good Euphranor. The thing first in our intention is Consummate Liberty: But if this will not do, and there must after all be such things tolerated as Religion and Government, we are wisely willing to make the best of both. CRI. This puts me in mind of a thought I have often had, That Minute Philosophers are Dupes of the Jesuits. The two most avowed, professed, busy, propagators of Infidelity in all companies, and upon all occasions, that I ever met with were both Bigotted Papists, and being both Men of considerable estates, suffered considerably on that score; which, it is wonderful their Thinking Disciples shou’d never reflect upon. Hegemon, a most distinguished Writer among the Minute Philosophers, and Hero of the Sect, I am well assured, was once a Papist, and never heard that he professed any other Religion. I know that many of the Church of Rome abroad, are pleased with the growth of Infidelity among us, as hoping it may make way for them. The Emissaries of Rome are known to have personated several other Sects, which from time to time have sprung up amongst us, and why not this of the Minute Philosophers, of all others the best calculated to ruin both Church and State? I my self have known a Jesuit abroad talk among English Gentlemen like a Free-thinker. I am credibly informed, that Jesuits, known to be such by the Minute Philosophers at home, are admitted into their Clubs: And I have observed them to approve, and speak better of the Jesuits, than of any other Clergy whatsoever. Those who are not acquainted with the subtle Spirit, the refined Politics, and wonderful Occonomy of that renowned Society, need only read the account given of them by the Jesuit Inchofer, in his Book De Monarchia Solipsorum; and those who are, will not be surprized they shou’d be able to make Dupes of our Minute Philosophers: Dupes, I say, for I can never think they suspect they are only tools to serve the ends of cunninger Men than themselves. They seem to me drunk and giddy with a false notion of Liberty, and spur’d on by this principle to make mad Experiments on their Country, they agree only in pulling down all that stands in their way; without any concerted Scheme, and without caring or knowing what to erect in its stead. To hear them, as I have often done, descant on the moral Virtues, resolve them into Shame, then laugh at Shame as a weakness, admire the unconfined lives of Savages, despise all order and decency of Education, one wou’d think the intention of these Philosophers was, when they had pruned and weeded the notions of their fellow-subjects, and divested them of their Prejudices, to strip them of their Clothes, and fill the country with naked Followers of Nature, enjoying all the Privileges of Brutality. Here Crito made a pause, and fixed his eyes on Alciphron, who during this whole coversation had sate thoughtful and attentive, without saying a word, and with an air, one while dissatisfied at what Lysicles advanced, another, serene and pleased, seeming to approve some better thought of his own. But the day being now far spent, Alciphron proposed to adjourn the Argument till the following; when, said he, I shall set matters on a new Foundation, and in so full and clear a Light, as, I doubt not, will give intire Satisfaction. So we changed the discourse, and after a repast upon cold provisions, took a walk on the Strand, and in the cool of the evening returned to Crito’s.

 THE THIRD DIALOGUE.I. Alciphron’s account of Honour. II. Character and conduct of Men of Honour. III. Sense of moral Beauty. IV. The Honestum or [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] of the ancients. V. Taste for moral Beauty whether a sure guide or rule. VI. Minute Philosophers ravished with the abstract Beauty of Virtue. VII. Their Virtue alone disinterested and heroic. VIII. Beauty of sensible objects what and how perceived? IX. The idea of Beauty explained by Painting and Architecture. X. Beauty of the moral System wherein it consists. XI. It supposeth a Providence. XII. Influence of [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] and [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] . XIII. Enthusiasm of Cratylus compared with the sentiments of Aristotle. XIV. Compared with the Stoical principles. XV. Minute Philosophers, their talent for Raillery and Ridicule. XVI. The wisdom of those who make virtue alone its own reward.

 [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

I.

THE following day as we sate round the Teatable, in a Summer-Parlour which looks into the Garden, Alciphron after the first dish turned down his cup, and reclining back in his Chair proceeded as follows. Above all the Sects upon earth it is the peculiar Privilege of ours, not to be tied down by any Principles. While other Philosophers profess a servile adherence to certain Tenets, ours assert a noble freedom, differing not only one from another, but very often the same Man from himself. Which method of proceeding, beside other advantages, hath this annexed to it, that we are of all Men the hardest to confute. You may, perhaps, confute a particular Tenet, but then this affects only him who maintains it, and so long only as he maintains it. Some of our Sect dogmatize more than others, and in some more than other points. The Doctrine of the usefulness of Vice is a point wherein we are not all agreed. Some of us are great admirers of Virtue. With others the points of Vice and Virtue are problematical. For my own part, though I think the Doctrine maintained yesterday by Lysicles an ingenious speculation; yet, upon the whole, there are divers Reasons which incline me to depart from it, and rather to espouse the Virtuous side of the question; with the smallest, perhaps, but the most contemplative and laudable part of our Sect. It seemeth, I say, after a nice inquiry and balancing on both sides, that we ought to prefer Virtue to Vice; and that such preference wou’d contribute both to the public Weal, and the reputation of our Philosophers. You are to know then, we have among us several that, without one grain of Religion, are Men of the nicest Honour, and therefore Men of Virtue because Men of Honour. Honour is a noble unpolluted Source of Virtue, without the least mixture of Fear, Interest or Superstition. It hath all the advantages without the evils which attend Religion. It is the mark of a great and fine soul, and is to be found among Persons of Rank and Breeding. It affects the Court, the Senate, and the Camp, and in general every Rendezvous of people of fashion. EUPH. You say then that honour is the Source of Virtue. ALC. I do. EUPH. Can a thing be the source of it self? ALC. It cannot. EUPH. The Source, therefore, is distinguished from that of which it is the Source. ALC. Doubtless. EUPH. Honour then is one thing and Virtue another. ALC. I grant it. Virtuous actions are the effect, and Honour is the Source or Cause of that effect. EUPH. Tell me. Is Honour the Will producing those actions, or the final Cause for which they are produced, or right Reason which is their rule and limit, or the Object about which they are conversant? Or do you by the word Honour understand a Faculty or Appetite? All which are supposed, in one sense or other, to be the Source of humane actions. ALC. Nothing of all this. EUPH. Be pleased then to give me some notion or definition of it. Alciphron having mused a while answered, that he defined Honour to be a Principle of virtuous Actions. To which Euphranor replied; if I understand it rightly the word Principle is variously taken. Sometimes by Principles we mean the parts of which a whole is composed, and into which it may be resolved. Thus the Elements are said to be principles of compound bodies. And thus words, syllables, and letters are the principles of Speech. Sometimes by Principle we mean a small particular seed, the growth or gradual unfolding of which doth produce an Organized Body, animal or vegetable, in its proper size and shape. Principles at other times are supposed to be certain fundamental Theorems in Arts and Sciences, in Religion and Politics. Let me know in which of these senses, or whether it be in some other sense that you understand this word, when you say, Honour is a Principle of Virtue. To this Alciphron replied, that for his part he meant it in none of those senses, but defined Honour to be a certain Ardour or Enthusiasm that glowed in the breast of a gallant Man. Upon this, Euphranor observed, it was always admitted to put the Definition in place of the thing defined. Is this allowed, said he, or not? ALC. It is. EUPH. May we not therefore say, that a Man of Honour is a warm Man, or an Enthusiast? Alciphron hearing this declared that such exactness was to no purpose; that Pedants, indeed, may dispute and define, but cou’d never reach that high sense of Honour which distinguished the fine Gentleman, and was a thing rather to be felt than explained.

II.

Crito, perceiving that Alciphron cou’d not bear being pressed any farther on that article, and willing to give some satisfaction to Euphranor, said that of himself indeed he should not undertake to explain so nice a point, but he wou’d retail to them part of a conversation he once heard between Nicander a Minute Philosopher and Menecles a Christian, upon the same subject, which was for substance as follows. M. From what principle are you Gentlemen virtuous? N. From Honour. We are Men of Honour. M. May not a Man of Honour debauch another’s wife, or get drunk, or sell a vote, or refuse to pay his debts, without lessening or tainting his Honour? N. He may have the vices and faults of a Gentleman: But is obliged to pay debts of Honour, that is, all such as are contracted by Play. M. Is not your Man of Honour always ready to resent Affronts and engage in Duels? N. He is ready to demand and give Gentleman’s satisfaction upon all proper occasions. M. It shou’d seem by this account, that to Ruin tradesmen, Break faith to one’s own wife, Corrupt another Man’s, Take bribes, Cheat the Public, Cut a Man’s throat for a word, are all points consistent with your principle of Honour. N. It cannot be denied that we are Men of gallantry, Men of fire, Men who know the world, and all that. M. It seems therefore that Honour among Infidels is like Honesty among Pirates: something confined to themselves, and which the Fraternity perhaps may find their account in, but every one else shou’d be constantly on his guard against. By this Dialogue, continued Crito, a Man, who lives out of the grand Monde, may be enabled to form some notion of what the world calls Honour and men of Honour. EUPH. I must intreat you not to put me off with Nicander’s opinion, whom I know nothing of, but rather give me your own judgment, drawn from your own observation upon Men of Honour. CRI. If I must pronounce, I can very sincerely assure you that by all I have heard or seen, I cou’d never find, that Honour, considered as a principle distinct from Conscience, Religion, Reason, and Virtue, was more than an empty name. And I do verily believe, that those who build upon that notion have less Virtue than other Men; and that what they have or seem to have is owing to Fashion, (being of the reputable kind) if not to a Conscience early imbued with religious principles, and afterwards retaining a Tincture from them without knowing it. These two principles seem to account for all that looks like Virtue in those Gentlemen. Your Men of Fashion in whom animal life abounds, a sort of Bullies in Morality, who disdain to have it thought they are afraid of Conscience; these descant much upon Honour, and affect to be called Men of Honour, rather than conscientious or honest Men. But, by all that I cou’d ever observe, this specious Character, where there is nothing of Conscience or Religion underneath, to give it life and substance, is no better than a meteor or painted cloud. EUPH. I had a confused notion that Honour was something nearly connected with truth, and that Men of Honour were the greatest enemies to all Hypocrisy, Fallacy, and Disguise. CRI. So far from that, an Infidel who sets up for the nicest Honour shall, without the least grain of Faith or Religion, pretend himself a Christian, take any test, join in any act of worship, kneel, pray, receive the Sacrament to serve an interest. The same person, without any impeachment of his Honour, shall most solemnly declare and promise in the face of God and the World, that he will love his Wife, and forsaking all others keep only to her, when at the same time it is certain, he intends never to perform one tittle of his vow; and convinceth the whole world of this as soon as he gets her in his power, and her fortune, for the sake of which this Man of untainted Honour makes no scruple to cheat and lye. EUPH. We have a notion here in the Country, that it was of all things most odious, and a matter of much risque and hazard, to give the Lye to a Man of Honour. CRI. It is very true. He abhors to take the Lye but not to tell it.

III.

Alciphron, having heard all this with great composure of mind and countenance, spake as follows. You are not to think, that our greatest strength lies in our greatest Number, Libertines and meer Men of Honour. No: we have among us Philosophers of a very different character, Men of curious contemplation, not governed by such gross things as Sense and Custom, but of an abstracted Virtue and sublime Morals: and the less religious the more virtuous. For Virtue of the high and disinterested kind no Man is so well qualified as an Infidel, it being a mean and selfish thing to be virtuous through fear or hope. The notion of a Providence and future State of Rewards and Punishments, may indeed tempt or scare Men of abject spirit into practices contrary to the natural bent of their Souls, but will never produce a true and genuine Virtue. To go to the bottom of things, to analyse Virtue into its first principles, and fix a scheme of Duty on its true basis, you must understand, that there is an idea of Beauty natural to the mind of Man. This all Men desire, this they are pleased and delighted with for its own sake, purely from an Instinct of Nature. A Man needs no arguments to make him discern and approve what is beautiful; it strikes at first sight and attracts without a reason. And as this Beauty is found in the shape and form of corporeal things; so also is there analogous to it a Beauty of another kind, an order, a symmetry, and comeliness in the moral world. And as the Eye perceiveth the one, so the Mind doth by a certain interior sense perceive the other, which sense, talent, or faculty is ever quickest and purest in the noblest Minds. Thus as by sight I discern the Beauty of a Plant or an Animal, even so the mind apprehends the moral Excellence, the Beauty, and Decorum of Justice and Temperance. And as we readily pronounce a Dress becoming or an Attitude graceful, we can, with the same free untutored judgment, at once declare, whether this or that Conduct or Action be comely and beautiful. To relish this kind of Beauty, there must be a delicate and fine Taste: But where there is this natural Taste, nothing further is wanting, either as a principle to convince, or as a motive to induce Men to the love of Virtue. And more or less there is of this Taste or Sense in every creature that hath Reason. All Rational Beings are by nature social. They are drawn one towards another by natural affections: they unite and incorporate into families, clubs, parties, and commonwealths by mutual Sympathy. As by means of the sensitive Soul, our several distinct parts and members do consent towards the animal Functions, and are connected in one Whole: even so, the several parts of these Rational Systems or Bodies Politic, by virtue of this moral or interior Sense, are held together, have a fellow-feeling, do succour and protect each other, and jointly cooperate towards the same end. Hence that joy in Society, that propension towards doing good to our Kind, that gratulation and delight in beholding the virtuous deeds of other Men, or in reflecting on our own. By contemplation of the fitness and order of the parts of a moral System, regularly operating, and knit together by benevolent affections, the Mind of Man attaineth to the highest notion of Beauty, Excellence, and Perfection: Seized and rapt with this sublime idea, our Philosophers do infinitely despise and pity, whoever shall propose or accept any other motive to Virtue. Interest is a mean ungenerous thing, destroying the merit of Virtue, and Falshood of every kind is inconsistent with the genuine spirit of Philosophy. CRI. The Love therefore that you bear to moral Beauty, and your passion for abstracted Truth, will not suffer you to think with patience of those fraudulent Impositions upon Mankind, Providence, the Immortality of the Soul, and a future Retribution of rewards and punishments; which under the notion of promoting do, it seems, destroy all true Virtue, and at the same time contradict and disparage your noble Theories, manifestly tending to the perturbation and disquiet of Mens minds, and filling them with fruitless hopes and vain terrors. ALC. Mens first Thoughts and natural Notions are the best in moral matters. And there is no need, that Mankind shou’d be preached, or reasoned, or frightened into Virtue, a thing so natural and congenial to every Human Soul. Now if this be the case, as it certainly is, it follows that all the ends of Society are secured without Religion, and that an Infidel bids fair to be the most virtuous Man, in a true, sublime and heroic Sense.

IV.

EUPH. O Alciphron, while you talk, I feel an affection in my soul like the trembling of one lute, upon striking the unison strings of another. Doubtless there is a Beauty of the mind, a Charm in Virtue, a Symmetry and Proportion in the moral world. This moral Beauty was known to the ancients by the name of Honestum or [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] . And in order to know its force and influence, it may not be amiss to inquire, what it was understood to be, and what light it was placed in by those who first considered it, and gave it a name: [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] according to Aristotle is the [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] or laudable, according to Plato it is the [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] or [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , pleasant or profitable, which is meant with respect to a reasonable mind and its true interest. Now I wou’d fain know whether a mind, which considers an action as laudable, be not carried beyond the bare action it self, to regard the opinion of others concerning it? ALC. It is. EUPH. And whether this be a sufficient ground or principle of Virtue, for a Man to act upon, when he thinks himself removed from the eye and observation of every other intelligent Being? ALC. It seems not. EUPH. Again, I ask whether a Man who doth a thing pleasant or profitable as such, might not be supposed to forbear doing it, or even to do the contrary, upon the prospect of greater pleasure or profit? ALC. He might. EUPH. Doth it not follow from hence, that the Beauty of Virtue or [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , in either Aristotle’s or Plato’s sense, is not a sufficient principle or ground, to engage sensual and worldly-minded Men in the practice of it? ALC. What then? EUPH. Why then, it will follow that Hope of reward and Fear of punishment are highly expedient, to cast the balance of pleasant and profitable on the side of virtue, and thereby very much conduce to the benefit of Human Society. Alciphron upon this appealed; Gentlemen, said he, you are witnesses of this unfair proceeding of Euphranor, who argues against us, from explications given by Plato and Aristotle of the Beauty of Virtue, which are things we have nothing to say to; the Philosophers of our Sect abstracting from all Praise, Pleasure, and Interest, when they are enamoured and transported with that sublime Idea. I beg pardon, replied Euphranor, for supposing the Minute Philosophers of our days think like those ancient Sages. But you must tell me, Alciphron, since you do not think fit, to adopt the sense of Plato or Aristotle, what sense it is in which you understand the Beauty of Virtue? Define it, explain it, make me to understand your meaning, that so we may argue about the same thing, without which we can never come to a conclusion.

V.

ALC. Some things are better understood by definitions and descriptions, but I have always observed that those who wou’d define, explain, and dispute about this point, make the least of it. Moral Beauty is of so peculiar and abstracted a nature, something so subtile, fine, and fugacious, that it will not bear being handled and inspected, like every gross and common subject. You will, therefore, pardon me, if I stand upon my Philosophic liberty; and choose rather to intrench my self, within the general and indefinite sense, rather than, by entering into a precise and particular explication of this Beauty, perchance lose sight of it, or give you some hold whereon to cavil, and infer, and raise doubts, queries, and difficulties about a point as clear as the Sun when no body reasons upon it. EUPH. How say you, Alciphron, is that notion clearest when it is not considered? ALC. I say it is rather to be felt than understood, a certain je ne sçay quoy. An object, not of the discursive faculty, but of a peculiar sense which is properly called the moral sense, being adapted to the preception of moral Beauty, as the Eye to colours, or the Ear to sounds. EUPH. That Men have certain instinctive Sensations or Passions from nature, which make them amiable and useful to each other, I am clearly convinced. Such are a Fellow-feeling with the distressed, a Tenderness for our offspring, an Affection towards our friends, our neighbours, and our country, an Indignation against things base, cruel, or unjust. These Passions are implanted in the Human Soul, with several other fears and appetites, aversions and desires, some of which are strongest and uppermost in one mind, others in another. Shou’d it not therefore seem a very uncertain guide in morals, for a Man to follow his passion or inward feeling? and wou’d not this rule infallibly lead different Men different ways, according to the prevalency of this or that appetite or passion? ALC. I do not deny it. EUPH. And will it not follow from hence, that Duty and Virtue are in a fairer way of being practised, if Men are led by Reason and Judgment, balancing low and sensual pleasures with those of a higher kind, comparing present losses with future gains, and the uneasiness and disgust of every Vice with the delightful practice of the opposite Virtue, and the pleasing reflexions and hopes which attend it? Or can there be a stronger motive to Virtue, than the shewing that considered in all lights it is every Man’s true interest?

VI.

ALC. I tell you, Euphranor, we contemn the Virtue of that Man, who computes and deliberates, and must have a reason for being virtuous. The refined Moralists of our Sect are ravished and transported with the abstract Beauty of Virtue. They disdain all forinsecal motives to it; and love Virtue only for Virtue’s sake. Oh Rapture! Oh Enthusiasm! Oh the Quintessence of Beauty! Methinks I cou’d dwell for ever on this Contemplation: But rather than entertain my self, I must endeavour to convince you. Make an experiment on the first Man you meet. Propose a villanous or unjust action. Take his first sense of the matter, and you shall find he detests it. He may, indeed, be afterwards misled by Arguments or overpowered by Temptation, but his original unpremeditated and genuine thoughts are just and orthodox. How can we account for this but by a moral sense, which, left to it self, hath as quick and true a perception of the Beauty and Deformity of Human Actions, as the Eye hath of Colours? EUPH. May not this be sufficiently accounted for, by Conscience, Affection, Passion, Education, Reason, Custom, Religion, which principles and habits, for ought I know, may be what you metaphorically call a Moral Sense. ALC. What I call a moral sense is strictly, properly, and truly such, and in kind different from all those things you enumerate. It is what all men have though all may not observe it. Upon this Euphranor smiled and said, Alciphron has made discoveries where I least expected it. For, said, he, in regard to every other point, I shou’d hope to learn from him, but for the knowledge of my self, or the faculties and powers of my own mind, I shou’d have looked at home. And there I might have looked long enough, without finding this new talent, which even now after being tutored I cannot comprehend. For Alciphron, I must needs say, is too Sublime and Aenigmatical upon a point, which of all others ought to be most clearly understood. I have often heard that your deepest adepts and oldest professors in science are the obscurest. Lysicles is young and speaks plain. Wou’d he but favour us with his sense of this point, it might perhaps prove more upon a level with my apprehension.

VII.

Lysicles shook his head, and in a grave and earnest manner addressed the Company. Gentlemen, said he, Alciphron stands upon his own legs. I have no part in these refined notions he is at present engaged to defend. If I must subdue my passions, abstract, contemplate, be enamoured of Virtue; in a word, if I must be an Enthusiast, I owe so much deference to the laws of my Country, as to choose being an Enthusiast in their way. Besides, it is better being so for some end than for none. This Doctrine hath all the solid inconveniences, without the amusing hopes and prospects of the Christian. ALC. I never counted on Lysicles for my Second in this point; which after all doth not need his assistance or explication. All subjects ought not to be treated in the same manner. The way of Definition and Division is dry and pedantic. Besides, the subject is sometimes too obscure, sometimes too simple for this method. One while we know too little of a point, another too much, to make it plainer by discourse. CRI. To hear Alciphron talk, puts me in mind of that Ingenious Greek, who having wrapt a man’s brother up in a cloak, asked him whether he knew that person? being ready, either by keeping on, or pulling off the cloak, to confute his answer whatever it shou’d be. For my part I believe, if matters were fairly stated, that rational satisfaction, that peace of mind, that inward comfort, and conscientious joy, which a good Christian finds in good actions, wou’d not be found to fall short of all the Ecstasy, Rapture, and Enthusiasm supposed to be the effect of that high and undescribed principle. In earnest can any Ecstasy be higher, any Rapture more affecting, than that which springs from the love of God and Man, from a Conscience void of offence, and an inward discharge of Duty, with the secret delight, trust, and hope that attends it? ALC. O Euphranor, we Votaries of Truth do not envy, but pity, the groundless joys and mistaken hopes of a Christian. And, as for Conscience and rational Pleasure, how can we allow a Conscience without allowing a vindictive Providence? Or how can we suppose, the charm of Virtue consists in any pleasure, or benefit attending virtuous actions, without giving great advantages to the Christian Religion, which, it seems excites its believers to Virtue by the highest Interests and Pleasures in reversion. Alas! shou’d we grant this, there wou’d be a door opened to all those rusty Declaimers upon the necessity and usefulness of the great points of Faith, the Immortality of the Soul, a Future State, Rewards and Punishments, and the like exploded Conceits; which, according to our system and principles, may perhaps produce a low, popular, interested kind of Virtue, but must absolutely destroy and extinguish it in the sublime and heroic sense.

VIII.

EUPH. What you now say is very intellible: I wish I understood your main principle as well. ALC. And are you then in earnest at a loss? Is it possible you shou’d have no notion of Beauty, or that having it you shou’d not know it to be amiable, amiable I say, in it self, and for it self? EUPH. Pray tell me, Alciphron, are all mankind agreed in the notion of a beauteous face? ALC. Beauty in Human Kind seems to be of a more mixt and various nature; forasmuch as the passions, sentiments, and qualities of the Soul being seen through and blending with the features, work differently on different minds, as the sympathy is more or less. But with regard to other things is there no steady principle of Beauty? Is there upon earth a Human mind without the idea of order, harmony, and proportion? EUPH. O Alciphron, it is my weakness that I am apt to be lost and bewildered in abstractions and generalities, but a particular thing is better suited to my faculties. I find it easy to consider and keep in view the objects of sense, let us therefore try to discover what their Beauty is, or wherein it consists; and so, by the help of these sensible things, as a scale or ladder, ascend to moral and intellectual Beauty. Be pleased then to inform me, what it is we call Beauty in the objects of sense? ALC. Every one knows Beauty is that which pleases. EUPH. There is then Beauty in the smell of a Rose, or the taste of an Apple. ALC. By no means. Beauty is, to speak properly, perceived only by the eye. EUPH. It cannot therefore be defined in general that which pleaseth. ALC. I grant it cannot EUPH. How then shall we limit or define it? Alciphron, after a short pause, said, that Beauty consisted in a certain symmetry or proportion pleasing to the eye. EUPH. Is this proportion one and the same in all things, or is it different in different kinds of things? ALC. Different doubtless: The proportions of an Ox wou’d not be beautiful in a Horse. And we may observe also in things inanimate, that the Beauty of a Table, a Chair, a Door, consists in different proportions. EUPH. Doth not this proportion imply the relation of one thing to another? ALC. It doth. EUPH. And are not these relations founded in size and shape? ALC. They are. EUPH. And to make the proportions just, must not those mutual relations of size and shape in the parts be such, as shall make the whole compleat and perfect in its kind? ALC. I grant they must. EUPH. Is not a thing said to be perfect in its kind, when it answers the end for which it was made? ALC. It is. EUPH. The parts, therefore, in true proportions must be so related, and adjusted to one another, as that they may best conspire to the use and operation of the whole. ALC. It seems so. EUPH. But the comparing Parts one with another, the considering them as belonging to one Whole, and the referring this whole to its use or end, shou’d seem the work of Reason: Shou’d it not? ALC. It shou’d. EUPH. Proportions therefore are not, strictly speaking, perceived by the sense of Sight, but only by Reason through the means of Sight. ALC. This I grant. EUPH. Consequently Beauty, in your sense of it, is an object, not of the eye, but of the mind. ALC. It is. EUPH. The Eye, therefore, alone cannot see that a Chair is handsom, or a Door well proportioned. ALC. It seems to follow; but I am not clear as to this point. EUPH. Let us see if there be any difficulty in it. Cou’d the Chair you sit on, think you, be reckon’d well proportioned or handsom, if it had not such a height, breadth, wideness, and was not so far reclinedas to afford a convenient seat? ALC. It cou’d not. EUPH. The Beauty, therefore, or Symmetry of a Chair cannot be apprehended but by knowing its use, and comparing its figure with that use, which cannot be done by the Eye alone, but is the effect of Judgment. It is therefore, one thing to see an Object, and another to discern its Beauty. ALC. I admit this to be true.

IX.

EUPH. The Architects judge a Door to be of a beautiful Proportion, when its height is double of the breadth. But if you shou’d invert a well-proportion’d Door making its breadth become the height, and its height the breadth, the figure would still be the same, but without that Beauty in one Situation, which it had in another. What can be the cause of this, but that in the forementioned Supposition, the Door wou’d not yield a convenient entrance to Creatures of a Human Figure? But, if in any other part of the Universe, there shou’d be supposed rational animals of an inverted Stature, they must be supposed to invert the Rule for Proportion of Doors; and to them that wou’d appear beautiful, which to us was disagreeable. ALC. Against this I have no Objection. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, is there not something truly decent and beautiful in Dress? ALC. Doubtless there is. EUPH. Are any likelier to give us an Idea of this Beauty in Dress, than Painters and Sculptors, whose proper business and study it is, to aim at graceful Representations? ALC. I believe not. EUPH. Let us then examine the Draperies of the great Masters in these Arts: How, for instance, they use to clothe a Matron or a Man of Rank. Cast an eye on those Figures (said he, pointing to some Prints after Raphael and Guido, that hung upon the Wall) what appearance, do you think, an English Courtier or Magistrate, with his Gothic, succinct, plaited Garment, and his full-bottom’d Wig, or one of our Ladies in her unnatural Dress pinched, and stiffened, and enlarged with Hoops and Whale-bone and Buckram, must make, among those Figures so decently clad in Draperies that fall into such a variety of natural, easy, and ample Folds, that appear with so much dignity and simplicity, that cover the Body without encumbering it, and adorn without altering the Shape? ALC. Truly I think they must make a very ridiculous appearance. EUPH. And what do you think this proceeds from? Whence is it that the Eastern Nations, the Greeks, and the Romans, naturally ran into the most becoming Dresses, while our Gothic Gentry, after so many Centuries racking their Inventions, mending, and altering, and improving, and whirling, about in a perpetual rotation of Fashions, have never yet had the luck to stumble on any that was not absurd and ridiculous? It is not from hence, that instead of consulting Use, Reason, and Convenience, they abandon themselves to irregular Fancy, the unnatural Parent of Monsters? Whereas the Ancients, considering the use and end of Dress, made it subservient to the Freedom, Ease, and Convenience of the Body, and, having no Notion of mending or changing the natural Shape, they aimed only at shewing it with decency and advantage. And, if this be so, are we not to conclude that the Beauty of Dress depends on its subserviency to certain Ends and Uses? ALC. This appears to be true. EUPH. This subordinate relative nature of Beauty, perhaps will be yet plainer, if we examine the respective Beauties of a Horse and a Pillar. Virgil’s Description of the former is,

 — Illi ardua cervix,

Argutumque caput, brevis alvus, obesaque terga,

Luxuriatque toris animosum pectus.

Now I wou’d fain know, whether the perfections and uses of a Horse may not be reduced to these three points, Courage, Strength, and Speed; and whether each of the Beauties enumerated doth not occasion, or betoken, one of these Perfections? After the same manner, if we inquire into the Parts and Proportions of a beautiful Pillar, we shall perhaps find them answer to this same Idea. Those who have considered the Theory of Architecture, tell us , the Proportions of the three Grecian Orders were taken from the Human Body, as the most beautiful and perfect Production of Nature. Hence were derived those graceful Ideas of Columns, which had a Character of Strength without clumsiness, or of Delicacy without weakness. Those beautiful Proportions were, I say, taken originally from Nature, which, in her Creatures, as hath been already observed, referreth them to some end, use, or design. The Gonsiezza also, or swelling, and the diminution of a Pillar, is it not in such proportion as to make it appear strong and light at the same time? In the same manner must not the whole Entablature, with its Projections be so proportioned, as to seem great but not heavy, light but not little, inasmuch as a Deviation into either extreme wou’d thwart that reason and use of Things, wherein their Beauty is founded, and to which it is subordinate? The Entablature and all its Parts and Ornaments, Architrave, Freeze, Cornice, Triglyphs, Metopes, Modiglions, and the rest, have each an use or appearance of use, in giving firmness and union to the Building, in protecting it from the Weather, and casting off the Rain, in representing the Ends of Beams with their intervals, the production of Rafters, and so forth. And if we consider the graceful Angels in Frontispieces, the Spaces between the Columns, or the Ornaments of their Capitels, shall we not find, that their Beauty riseth from the appearance of Use, or the imitation of natural Things, whose Beauty is originally founded on the same Principle? which is, indeed, the grand distinction between Graecian and Gothic Architecture, the latter being fantastical, and for the most part founded neither in Nature nor in Reason, in Necessity nor Use, the appearance of which accounts for all the Beauty, Grace, and Ornament of the other. CRI. What Euphranor has said confirms the Opinion I always entertained, that the Rules of Architecture were founded, as all other Arts which flourished among the Greeks, in Truth, and Nature, and good Sense. But the Ancients, who, from a thorough consideration of the Grounds and Principles of Art, formed their Idea of Beauty, did not always confine themselves strictly to the same Rules and Proportions: But, whenever the particular Distance, Position, Elevation, or Dimension of the Fabric or its Parts seemed to require it, made no scruple to depart from them, without deserting the original Principles of Beauty, which governed whatever Deviations they made. This latitude or licence might not, perhaps, be safely trusted with most modern Architects, who in their bold Sallies seem to act without aim or design, and to be governed by no Idea, no Reason or principle of Art, but pure Caprice, joined with a thorough contempt of that noble Simplicity of the Ancients, without which there can be no unity, gracefulness, or grandeur in their Works; which of consequence must serve only to disfigure and dishonour the Nation, being so many Monuments to future Ages of the opulence and ill taste of the present; which, it is to be feared, wou’d succeed as wretchedly, and make as mad work in other Affairs, were Men to follow, instead of rules, precepts and models, their own taste and first thoughts of Beauty. ALC. I shou’d now, methinks, be glad to see a little more distinctly the use and tendency of this Digression upon Architecture. EUPH. Was not Beauty the very thing we inquired after? ALC. It was. EUPH. What think you, Alciphron, can the appearance of a thing please at this time, and in this place, which pleased two thousand Years ago, and two thousand Miles off, without some real principle of Beauty? ALC. It cannot. EUPH. And is not this the case with respect to a just piece of Architecture? ALC. No body denies it. EUPH. Architecture, the noble Offspring of judgment and fancy, was gradually formed in the most polite and knowing Countries of Asia, Egypt, Greece, and Italy. It was cherished and esteemed by the most flourishing States, and most renowned Princes, who with vast expence improved and brought it to perfection. It seems, above all other Arts, peculiarly conversant about Order, Proportion and Symmetry. May it not therefore be supposed on all accounts, most likely to help us to some rational Notion of the je ne sçay quoy in Beauty? And, in effect, have we not learned from this Digression, that as there is no Beauty without Proportion, so Proportions are to be esteem’d just and true, only as they are relative to some certain use or end, their Aptitude and Subordination to which end is, at bottom, that which makes them please and charm? ALC. I admit all this to be true.

X.

EUPH. According to this Doctrine, I wou’d fain know what Beauty can be found in a moral System, formed connected and governed by Chance. Fate, or any other blind unthinking Principle; forasmuch as without thought there can be no end or design, and without an end there can be no use, and without use there is no aptitude or fitness of Proportion, from whence Beauty springs? ALC. May we not suppose a certain vital Principle of Beauty, Order, and Harmony diffused throughout the World, without supposing a Providence inspecting, punishing, and rewarding the moral Actions of Men? Without supposing the Immortality of the Soul, or a Life to come, in a word, without admitting any part of what is commonly called Faith, Worship, and Religion? CRI. Either you suppose this Principle intelligent, or not intelligent: If the latter, it is all one with Chance or Fate which was just now argued against: If the former, let me intreat Alciphron to explain to me, wherein consists the Beauty of a moral System, with a supreme Intelligence at the head of it, which neither protects the innocent, punishes the wicked, nor rewards the virtuous? To suppose indeed a Society of rational Agents acting under the Eye of Providence, concurring in one design to promote the common benefit of the whole, and conforming their Actions to the established Laws and Order of the Divine Parental Wisdom: Wherein each particular Agent shall not consider himself apart, but as the Member of a great City, whose Author and Founder is God: In which the Civil Laws are no other, than the Rules of Virtue, and the Duties of Religion: And where every one’s true Interest is combined with his Duty: To suppose this wou’d be delightful: on this Supposition a Man need be no Stoic or Knight-errant, to account for his Virtue. In such a System Vice is Madness, Cunning is Folly, Wisdom and Virtue are the same thing, where, notwithstanding all the crooked Paths and By-roads, the wayward Appetites and Inclinations of Men, sovereign Reason is sure to reform whatever seems amiss, to reduce that which is devious, make straight that which is crooked, and in the last Act wind up the whole Plot, according to the exactest Rules of Wisdom and Justice. In such a System or Society, governed by the wisest precepts, enforced by the highest rewards and discouragements, it is delightful to consider, how the regulation of Laws, the distribution of Good and Evil, the aim of moral Agents, do all conspire in due Subordination to promote the noblest End, to wit, the compleat Happiness or Well-being of the whole. In contemplating the Beauty of such a moral System, we may cry out with the Psalmist, Very excellent Things are spoken of thee, thou City of God.

XI.

In a System of Spirits, subordinate to the Will, and under the Direction, of the Father of Spirits, governing them by Laws, and conducting them by Methods suitable to wise and good Ends, there will be great Beauty. But in an incoherent, fortuitous System governed by Chance, or in a blind System governed by Fate, or in any System where Providence doth not preside, how can Beauty be, which cannot be without order, which cannot be without design? When a Man is conscious that his will is inwardly conformed to the Divine Will, producing Order and Harmony in the Universe, and conducting the whole by the justest Methods to the best End: This gives a beautiful Idea. But on the other hand, a Consciousness of Virtue overlooked, neglected, distressed by Men, and not regarded or rewarded by God, ill-used in this World, without Hope or Prospect of being better used in another, I wou’d fain know, where is the Pleasure of this Reflection, where is the Beauty of this Scene? Or how cou’d any Man, in his Senses, think the spreading such Notions the way to spread or propagate Virtue in the World? Is it not, I beseech you an ugly System in which you can suppose no Law and prove no Duty, wherein Men thrive by Wickedness and suffer by Virtue? Would it not be a disagreeable Sight to see an honest Man peeled by Sharpers, to see virtuous Men injured and despised while Vice triumph’d? An Enthusiast may entertain himself with Visions and fine Talk about such a System; but when it comes to be considered by Men of cool Heads, and close Reason, I believe they will find no Beauty nor Perfection in it; nor will it appear, that such a moral System can possibly come from the same Hand, or be of a piece with the natural, throughout which there shines so much Order, Harmony, and Proportion. ALC. Your Discourse serves to confirm me in my Opinion. You may remember, I declared, that touching this Beauty of Morality in the high Sense, a Man’s first Thoughts are best; and that, if we pretend to examine, and inspect, and reason, we are in danger to lose sight of it. That in Fact there is such a thing cannot be doubted, when we consider that in these Days some of our Philosophers have a high Sense of Virtue, without the least Notion of Religion, a clear Proof of the Usefulness and Efficacy of our Principles!

XII.

CRI. Not to dispute the Virtue of Minute Philosophers, we may venture to call its Cause in question, and make a doubt, whether it be an inexplicable Enthusiastic Notion of Moral Beauty, or rather, as to me it seems, what was already assigned by Euphranor, Complexion, Custom, and Religious Education? But, allowing what Beauty you please to Virtue in an Irreligious System, it cannot be less in a Religious, unless you will suppose that her Charms diminish as her Dowry increaseth. The Truth is, a Believer hath all the Motives from the Beauty of Virtue in any sense whatsoever that an Unbeliever can possibly have, besides other Motives which an Unbeliever hath not. Hence it is plain, those of your Sect, who have Moral Virtue, owe it not to their peculiar Tenets, which serve only to lessen the Motives to Virtue. Those therefore, who are good, are less good, and those who are bad are more bad, than they wou’d have been were they Believers. EUPH. To me it seems, those heroic infidel Inamorato’s of abstracted Beauty are much to be pitied, and much to be admired. Lysicles hearing this, said with some Impatience; Gentlemen, You shall have my whole Thoughts upon this Point plain and frank. All that is said about a Moral Sense, or Moral Beauty, in any signification, either of Alciphron or Euphranor, or any other, I take to be at bottom meer Bubble and Pretence. The [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] and the [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , the beautiful and decent, are Things outward, relative, and superficial, which have no Effect in the dark, but are specious Topics to discourse and expatiate upon, as some formal Pretenders of our Sect, though in other Points very Orthodox, are used to do. But shou’d one of them get into Power, you wou’d find him no such Fool as Euphranor imagines. He wou’d soon shew he had found out, that the Love of one’s Country is a Prejudice: That Mankind are Rogues and Hypocrites, and that it were Folly to sacrifice one’s self for the sake of such: That all Regards center in this Life, and that, as this Life is to every Man his own Life, it clearly follows that Charity begins at Home. Benevolence to Mankind is perhaps pretended, but Benevolence to himself is practised by the Wise. The livelier sort of our Philosophers do not scruple to own these Maxims; and as for the graver, if they are true to their Principles, one may guess what they must think at the Bottom. CRI. Whatever may be the Effect of pure Theory upon certain select Spirits, of a peculiar Make, or in some other Parts of the World, I do verily think that in this Country of ours, Reason, Religion, Law, are all together little enough to subdue the Outward to the Inner Man; and that it must argue a wrong Head and weak Judgment to suppose, that without them Men will be enamoured of the golden Mean. To which my Countrymen perhaps are less inclined than others, there being in the Make of an English Mind a certain Gloom and Eagerness, which carries to the sad Extreme; Religion to Fanaticism; Free-thinking to Atheism; Liberty to Rebellion: Nor shou’d we venture to be governed by Taste, even in matters of less Consequence. The Beautiful in Dress, Furniture, and Building, is, as Euphranor hath observed, something real and well grounded: And yet our English do not find it out of themselves. What wretched Work do they and other Northern People make, when they follow their own Taste of Beauty in any of these Particulars, instead of acquiring the true, which is to be got from ancient Models and the Principles of Art, as in the Case of Virtue from great Models and Meditation, so far as natural Means can go? But in no Case is it to be hoped, that [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] will be the leading Idea of the many, who have quick Senses, strong Passions, and gross Intellects.

XIII.

ALC. The fewer they are, the more ought we esteem and admire such Philosophers, whose Souls are touched and transported with this sublime Idea. CRI. But then one might expect from such Philosophers, so much good Sense and Philanthropy, as to keep their Tenets to themselves, and consider their weak Brethren, who are more strongly affected by certain Senses and Notions of another kind, than that of the Beauty of pure disinterested Virtue. Cratylus, a Man prejudiced against the Christian Religion, of a crazy Constitution, of a Rank above most Mens Ambition, and a Fortune equal to his Rank, had little Capacity for sensual Vices, or Temptation to dishonest ones. Cratylus having talked himself, or imagined that he had talked himself, into a Stoical Enthusiasm about the Beauty of Virtue, did, under the Pretence of making Men heroically virtuous, endeavour to destroy the Means of making them reasonably and humanly so: A clear Instance, that neither Birth nor Books nor Conversation can introduce a Knowledge of the World into a conceited Mind, which will ever be its own Object, and contemplate Mankind in its own Mirrour! ALC. Cratylus was a Lover of Liberty, and of his Country, and had a mind to make Men incorrupt and virtuous, upon the purest and most disinterested Principles. CRI. His Conduct seems just as wise, as if a Monarch shou’d give out, that there was neither Jayl nor Executioner in his Kingdom to enforce the Laws, but that it wou’d be beautiful to observe them, and that in so doing Men wou’d taste the pure Delight which results from Order and Decorum. ALC. After all, is it not true that certain ancient Philosophers, of great Note, held the same Opinion with Cratylus, declaring that he did not come up to the Character, or deserve the Title of a good Man, who practised Virtue for the sake of any thing but its own Beauty? CRI. I believe, indeed, that some of the Ancients said such Things as gave Occasion for this Opinion. Aristotle distinguisheth between two Characters of a good Man, the one he calleth [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , or simply good, the other [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , from whence the Compound Term [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , which cannot, perhaps, be render’d by any one Word in our Language. But his Sense is plainly this: [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] he defineth to be that Man to whom the good Things of Nature are good; for, according to him, those Things, which are vulgarly esteemed the greatest Goods, as Riches, Honours, Power, and bodily Perfections, are indeed good by Nature, but they happen nevertheless to be hurtful and bad to some Persons, upon the account of evil Habits: Inasmuch as neither a Fool, nor an unjust Man, nor an Intemperate can be at all the better for the Use of them, any more than a sick Man for using the Nourishment proper for these who are in Health. But [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] ; is that Man in whom are to be found all Things worthy and decent and laudable, purely as such, and for their own sake, and who practiseth Virtue from no other Motive but the sole Love of her own innate Beauty. That Philosopher observes likewise, that there is a certain political Habit, such as the Spartans and others had, who thought Virtue was to be valued and practised on account of the natural Advantages that attend it. For which Reason he adds, They are indeed good Men, but they have not the [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , or supreme consummate Virtue. From hence it is plain that, according to Aristotle, a Man may be a good Man without believing Virtue its own Reward, or being only moved to Virtue by the Sense of Moral Beauty. It is also plain, that he distinguisheth the political Virtues of Nations, which the Publick is every where concerned to maintain, from this sublime and speculative kind. It might also be observed, that his exalted Idea did consist with supposing a Providence which inspects and rewards the Virtues of the best Men. For saith he in another Place , if the Gods have any Care of Human Affairs, as it appears they have, it shou’d seem reasonable to suppose, they are most delighted with the most excellent Nature, and most approaching their own, which is the Mind, and that they will reward those who chiefly love and cultivate what is most dear to them. The same Philosopher observes , that the Bulk of Mankind are not naturally disposed to be awed by Shame, but by Fear; nor to abstain from vicious Practices, on account of their Deformity, but only of the Punishment which attends them. And again , he tells us that Youth, being of it self averse from Abstinence and Sobriety, shou’d be under the Restraint of Laws regulating their Education and Employment, and that the same Discipline shou’d be continued even after they became Men. For which, saith he, we want Laws, and, in one word, for the whole ordering of Life, inasmuch as the Generality of Mankind obey rather Force than Reason, and are influenced rather by Penalties than the Beauty of Virtue; [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] . From all which it is very plain, what Aristotle wou’d have thought of those, who shou’d go about to lessen or destroy the Hopes and Fears of Mankind, in order to make them virtuous on this sole Principle of the Beauty of Virtue.

XIV.

ALC. But, whatever the Stagirite and his Peripatetics might think, is it not certain that the Stoics maintained this Doctrine in its highest Sense, asserting the Beauty of Virtue to be all-sufficient, that Virtue was her own Reward, that this alone cou’d make a Man happy, in spight of all those Things which are vulgarly esteemed the greatest Woes and Miseries of Human Life? And all this they held at the same time that they believed, the Soul of Man to be of a corporeal Nature, and in Death dissipated like a Flame or Vapour. CRI. It must be owned, the Stoics sometimes talk, as if they believed the Morality of the Soul. Seneca in a Letter of his to Lucilius, speaks much like a Minute Philosopher, in this Particular. But in several other Places, he declares himself of a clear contrary Opinion, affirming that the Souls of Men after Death mount aloft into the Heavens, look down upon Earth, entertain themselves with the Theory of coelestial Bodies, the Course of Nature, and the Conversation of wise and excellent Men, who having lived in distant Ages and Countries upon Earth, make one Society in the other World. It must also be acknowledged, that Marcus Antoninus sometimes speaks of the Soul as perishing, or dissolving into its Elementary Parts: But it is to be noted, that he distinguisheth three Principles in the Composition of Human Nature, the [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , Body, Soul, Mind, or as he otherwise expresseth himself, [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] and [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , Flesh, Spirit, and governing Principle. What he calls the [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , or Soul, containing the brutal Part of our Nature, is indeed represented as a Compound dissoluble, and actually dissolved by Death: But the [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] or [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , the Mind or ruling Principle he held to be of a pure coelestial Nature, [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] a Particle of God, which he sends back intire to the Stars and the Divinity. Besides, among all his magnificent Lessons and splendid Sentiments, upon the Force and Beauty of Virtue, he is positive as to the Being of God, and that not meerly as a plastic Nature, or Soul of the World, but in the strict Sense of a Providence inspecting and taking care of Human Affairs . The Stoics therefore, though their Style was high, and often above Truth and Nature, yet, it cannot be said, that they so resolved every Motive to a virtuous Life into the sole Beauty of Virtue, as to endeavour to destroy the Belief of the Immortality of the Soul and a distributive Providence. After all, allowing the disinterested Stoics (therein not unlike our modern Quietists) to have made Virtue its own sole Reward, in the most rigid and absolute Sense, yet what is this to those who are no Stoics? If we adopt the whole Principles of that Sect, admitting their Notions of Good and Evil, their celebrated Apathy, and, in one word, setting up for compleat Stoics, we may possibly maintain this Doctrine with a better Grace; at least it will be of a piece and consistent with the whole. But he who shall borrow this splendid Patch from the Stoics, and hope to make a Figure by inserting it into a Piece of modern Composition, seasoned with the Wit and Notions of these Times, will indeed make a Figure, but perhaps it may not be in the Eyes of a wise Man the Figure he intended.

XV.

Though it must be owned, the present Age is very indulgent to every thing that aims at profane Raillery; which is alone sufficient to recommend any fantastical Composition to the Public. You may behold the Tinsel of a modern Author pass upon this knowing and learned Age for good Writing; affected Strains for Wit; Pedantry for Politeness; Obscurities for Depths; Ramblings for Flights; the most aukward Imitation for original Humour; and all this upon the sole Merit of a little artful Profaneness. ALC. Every one is not alike pleased with Writings of Humour, nor alike capable of them. It is the fine Irony of a Man of Quality,

That certain Reverend Authors, who can condescend to Lay-wit, are nicely qualified to hit the Air of Breeding and Gentility, and that they will in time, no doubt, refine their Manner to the Edification of the polite World; who have been so long seduced by the way of Raillery and Wit.

The Truth is, the various Taste of Readers requireth various Kinds of Writers. Our Sect hath provided for this with great Judgment. To proselyte the graver sort we have certain profound Men at Reason and Argument. For the Coffee-houses and Populace we have Declaimers of a copious Vein. Of such a Writer it is no Reproach to say, fluit lutulentus; he is the fitter for his Readers. Then, for Men of Rank and Politeness we have the finest and wittiest Railleurs in the World, whose Ridicule is the surest Test of Truth. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, are those ingenious Railleurs Men of Knowledge? ALC. Very knowing. EUPH. Do they know for Instance the Copernican System, or the Circulation of the Blood? ALC. One wou’d think you judged of our Sect, by your Country Neighbours: There is no body in Town but knows all those Points. EUPH. You believe then Antipodes, Mountains in the Moon, and the Motion of the Earth. ALC. We do. EUPH. Suppose, five or six Centuries ago, a Man had maintained these Notions among the beau Esprits of an English Court; how do you think they would have been received? ALC. With great Ridicule. EUPH. And now it wou’d be ridiculous to ridicule them. ALC. It wou’d. EUPH. But Truth was the same then and now. ALC. It was EUPH. It shou’d seem, therefore, that Ridicule is no such sovereign Touchstone and Test of Truth, as you Gentlemen imagine. ALC. One thing we know: Our Raillery and Sarcasms gall the black Tribe, and that is our Comfort. CRI. There is another thing it may be worth your while to know: That Men in a Laughing Fit may applaud a Ridicule, which shall appear contemptible when they come to themselves; witness the Ridicule of Socrates by the Comic Poet, the Humour and Reception it met with no more proving that, than the same will yours, to be just, when calmly considered by Men of Sense. ALC. After all, thus much is certain, our ingenious Men make Converts by deriding the Principles of Religion. And, take my word, it is the most successful and pleasing Method of Conviction. These Authors laugh Men out of their Religion, as Horace did out of their Vices; Admissi circum praecordia ludunt. But a Bigot cannot relish or find out their Wit.

XVI.

CRI. Wit without Wisdom, if there be such a thing, is hardly worth finding. And as for the Wisdom of these Men, it is of a kind so peculiar one may well suspect it. Cicero was a Man of Sense, and no Bigot, nevertheless he makes Scipio own himself much more vigilant and vigorous in the Race of Virtue, from supposing Heaven the Prize . And he introduceth Cato declaring, he wou’d never have undergone those virtuous Toils for the Service of the Public, if he had thought his Being was to end with this Life . ALC. I acknowledge Cato, Scipio, and Cicero, were very well for their Times, but you must pardon me, if I do not think they arrived at the high consummate Virtue of our modern Free-thinkers. EUPH. It shou’d seem then that Virtue flourisheth more than ever among us. ALC. It shou’d. EUPH. And this abundant Virtue is owing to the Method taken by your profound Writers to recommend it. ALC. This I grant. EUPH. But you have acknowledged, that the Enthusiastic Lovers of Virtue are not the many of your Sect, but only a few select Spirits. To which Alciphron making no Answer, Crito addressed himself to Euphranor: To make, said he, a true Estimate of the Worth and Growth of modern Virtue, you are not to count the virtuous Men, but rather to consider the quality of their Virtue. Now you must know, the Virtue of these refined Theorists is something so pure and genuine, that a very little goes far, and is in truth invaluable. To which that reasonable interested Virtue, of the old English or Spartan kind, can bear no proportion. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, are there not Diseases of the Soul, as well as of the Body? ALC. Without doubt. EUPH. And are not those Diseases vicious Habits? ALC. They are. EUPH. And, as bodily Distempers are cured by Physic, those of the Mind are cured by Philosophy; are they not? ALC. I acknowledge it. EUPH. It seems, therefore, that Philosophy is a Medicine for the Soul of Man. ALC. It is. EUPH. How shall we be able to judge of Medicines, or know which to prefer? Is it not from the Effects wrought by them? ALC. Doubtless. EUPH. Where an Epidemical Distemper rages, suppose a new Physician shou’d condemn the known established Practice, and recommend another Method of Cure, wou’d you not, in proportion as the Bills of Mortality increased, be tempted to suspect this new Method, notwithstanding all the plausible Discourse of its Abettors? ALC. This serves only to amuse and lead us from the question. CRI. It puts me in mind of my Friend Lamprocles, who needed but one Argument against Infidels. I observed, said he, that, as Infidelity grew, there grew Corruption of every kind, and new Vices. This simple Observation on matter of Fact was sufficient to make him, notwithstanding the Remonstrance of several ingenious Men, imbue and season the Minds of his Children betimes with the Principles of Religion. The new Theories, which our acute Moderns have endeavoured to substitute in place of Religion, have had their full Course in the present Age, and produced their Effect on the Minds and Manners of Men. That Men are Men is a sure Maxim: But it is as sure that Englishmen are not the same Men they were; whether better or worse, more or less virtuous, I need not say. Every one may see and judge. Though, indeed, after Aristides had been banished, and Socrates put to death at Athens, a Man, without being a Conjurer, might guess what the Beauty of Virtue cou’d do in England. But there is now neither room nor occasion for guessing. We have our own Experience to open our Eyes; which yet if we continue to keep shut, till the Remains of religious Education are quite worn off from the Minds of Men, it is to be feared we shall then open them wide, not to avoid, but to behold and lament our Ruin. ALC. Be the Consequences what they will, I can never bring my self to be of a mind with those, who measure Truth by Convenience. Truth is the only Divinity that I adore. Wherever Truth leads I shall follow. EUPH. You have then a Passion for Truth? ALC. Undoubtedly. EUPH. For all Truths? ALC. For all. EUPH. To know or to publish them? ALC. Both. EUPH. What! wou’d you undeceive a Child that was taking Physic? Wou’d you officiously set an Enemy right, that was making a wrong Attack? Wou’d you help an enraged Man to his Sword? ALC. In such Cases, common Sense directs one how to behave. EUPH. Common Sense, it seems then, must be consulted whether a Truth be salutary or hurtful, fit to be declared or concealed. ALC. How! you wou’d have me conceal and stifle the Truth, and keep it to my self? Is this what you aim at? EUPH. I only make a plain Inference from what you grant. As for my self, I do not believe your Opinions true. And although you do, you shou’d not therefore, if you wou’d appear consistent with yourself, think it necessary or wise to publish hurtful Truths. What Service can it do Mankind to lessen the Motives to Virtue, or what Damage to increase them? ALC. None in the World. But I must needs say, I cannot reconcile the received Notions of a God and Providence to my Understanding, and my Nature abhors the Baseness of conniving at a Falshood. EUPH. Shall we therefore appeal to Truth, and examine the Reasons by which you are withheld from believing these Points? ALC. With all my Heart, but enough for the present. We will make this the Subject of our next Conference.

 THE FOURTH DIALOGUE.I. Prejudices concerning a Deity. II. Rules laid down by Alciphron to be observed in proving a God. III. What Sort of Proof he expects. IV. Whence we collect the being of other Thinking Individuals. V. The same Method à fortiori proves the Being of God. VI. Alciphron’s second Thoughts on this Point. VII. God speaks to Men. VIII. How Distance is perceived by Sight. IX. The proper Objects of Sight at no Distance. X. Lights, Shades and Colours variously combined form a Language. XI. The Signification of this Language learned by Experience. XII. God explaineth himself to the Eyes of Men by the arbitrary Use of sensible Signs. XIII. The Prejudice and two-fold Aspect of a Minute Philosopher. XIV. God present to Mankind, informs, admonishes, and directs them in a sensible Manner. XV. Admirable Nature and Use of this visual Language. XVI. Minute Philosophers content to admit a God in certain Senses. XVII. Opinion of some who hold that Knowledge and Wisdom are not properly in God. XVIII. Dangerous Tendency of this Notion. XIX. Its Original. XX. The Sense of Schoolmen upon it. XXI. Scholastic Use of the Terms Analogy and Analogical explained: Analogical Perfections of God misunderstood. XXII. God intelligent, wise, and good in the proper Sense of the Words. XXIII. Objection from Moral Evil considered. XXIV. Men argue from their own Defects against a Deity. XXV. Religious Worship reasonable and expedient.

 [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

I.

EARLY the next Morning, as I looked out of my Window, I saw Alciphron walking in the Garden with all the Signs of a Man in deep Thought. Upon which I went down to him. Alciphron, said I, this early and profound Meditation puts me in no small Fright. How so! Because I shou’d be sorry to be convinced there was no God. The Thought of Anarchy in Nature is to me more shocking than in Civil Life; inasmuch as Natural Concerns are more important than Civil and the Basis of all others. I grant, replied Alciphron, that some Inconvenience may possibly follow from disproving a God, but as to what you say of Fright and Shocking, all that is nothing but mere Prejudice. Men frame an Idea or Chimaera in their own Minds, and then fall down and worship it. Notions govern Man-kind, but of all Notions, that of God’s governing the World hath taken the deepest Root and spread the farthest: It is therefore in Philosophy an heroical Atchievement to dispossess this imaginary Monarch of his Government, and banish all those Fears and Spectres which the Light of Reason alone can dispel;

Non radii solis, non lucida tela diei

Discutiunt, sed Naturae species ratioque .

My Part, said I, shall be to stand by, as I have hitherto done, and take Notes of all that passeth during this memorable Event, while a Minute Philosopher not six Foot high attempts to dethrone the Monarch of the Universe. Alas! replied Alciphron, Arguments are not to be measured by Feet and Inches. One Man may see more than a Million; and a short Argument, managed by a Free-thinker, may be sufficient to overthrow the most Gigantic Chimaera. As we were engaged in this Discourse, Crito and Euphranor joined us. I find you have been beforehand with us to day, said Crito to Alciphron, and taken the Advantage of Solitude and early Hours, while Euphranor and I were asleep in our Beds. We may therefore expect to see Atheism placed in the best Light, and supported by the strongest Arguments.

II.

ALC. The Being of a God is a Subject upon which there has been a world of Common-place, which it is needless to repeat. Give me leave therefore to lay down certain Rules and Limitations, in order to shorten our present Conference. For as the End of debating is to persuade, all those Things which are foreign to this End shou’d be left out of our Debate. First then, let me tell you, I am not to be persuaded by Metaphysical Arguments; such for Instance as are drawn from the Idea of an All-perfect Being, or the Absurdity of an infinite Progression of Causes. This sort of Arguments I have always found dry and jejune; and, as they are not suited to my way of Thinking, they may perhaps puzzle, but never will convince me. Secondly, I am not to be persuaded by the Authority either of past or present Ages, of Mankind in general, or of particular wise Men, all which passeth for little or nothing with a Man of sound Argument and free Thought. Thirdly, All Proofs drawn from Utility or Convenience are foreign to the purpose. They may prove indeed the Usefulness of the Notion, but not the Existence of the Thing. Whatever Legislators or Statesmen may think, Truth and Convenience are very different Things to the rigorous Eyes of a Philosopher. And now, that I may not seem partial, I will limit myself also not to object, in the first place, from any thing that may seem irregular or unaccountable in the Works of Nature, against a Cause of infinite Power and Wisdom; because I already know the Answer you wou’d make, to wit, That no one can judge of the Symmetry and Use of the Parts of an infinite Machine, which are all relative to each other, and to the whole, without being able to comprehend the intire Machine or the whole Universe. And in the second place, I shall engage my self not to object against the Justice and Providence of a Supreme Being, from the Evil that befals good Men, and the Prosperity which is often the Portion of wicked Men in this Life, because I know that, instead of admitting this to be an Objection against a Deity, you wou’d make it an Argument for a future State; in which there shall be such a Retribution of Rewards and Punishments, as may vindicate the Divine Attributes, and set all Things right in the End. Now these Answers, though they shou’d be admitted for good ones are in truth no Proofs of the Being of God, but only Solutions of certain Difficulties which might be objected, supposing it already proved by proper Arguments. Thus much I thought fit to premise, in order to save Time and Trouble both to you and myself. CRI. I think that, as the proper End of our Conference ought to be supposed the Discovery and Defence of Truth, so Truth may be justified, not only by persuading its Adversaries, but, where that cannot be done, by shewing them to be unreasonable. Arguments, therefore, which carry Light, have their Effect, even against an Opponent who shuts his Eyes, because they shew him to be obstinate and prejudiced. Besides, this Distinction between Arguments that puzzle and that convince, is least of all observed by Minute Philosophers, and need not therefore be observed by others in their favour. But, perhaps Euphranor may be willing to encounter you on your own Terms, in which Case I have nothing farther to say.

III.

EUPH. Alciphron acts like a skilful General, who is bent upon gaining the Advantage of the Ground, and alluring the Enemy out of their Trenches. We, who believe a God, are intrenched within Tradition, Custom, Authority, and Law. And nevertheless, instead of attempting to force us, he proposes that we shou’d voluntarily abandon these Intrenchments, and make the Attack, when we may act on the defensive with much Security and Ease, leaving him the Trouble to dispossess us of what we need not resign. Those Reasons (continued he, addressing himself to Alciphron) which you have mustered up in this Morning’s Meditation, if they do not weaken, must establish our Belief of a God; for the utmost is to be expected from so great a Master in his Profession, when he sets his Strength to a Point. ALC. I hold the confused Notion of a Deity, or some invisible Power, to be of all Prejudices the most unconquerable. When half a dozen ingenious Men are got together over a Glass of Wine, by a chearful Fire, in a Room well lighted, we banish with ease all the Spectres of Fancy or Education, and are very clear in our Decisions. But, as I was taking a solitary Walk before it was broad Day-light in yonder Grove, me thought the Point was not quite so clear; nor cou’d I readily recollect the Force of those Arguments, which used to appear so conclusive at other Times. I had I know not what Awe upon my Mind, and seemed haunted by a sort of Panic, which I cannot otherwise account for, than by supposing it the Effect of Prejudice: For you must know, that I, like the rest of the World, was once upon a Time catechised and tutored into the Belief of a God or Spirit. There is no surer Mark of Prejudice, than the believing a Thing without Reason. What Necessity then can there be that I shou’d set myself the difficult Task of proving a Negative, when it is sufficient to observe that there is no Proof of the Affirmative, and that the admitting it without Proof is unreasonable? Prove therefore your Opinion, or, if you cannot, you may indeed remain in possession of it, but you will only be possessed of a Prejudice. EUPH. O Alciphron, to content you we must prove, it seems, and we must prove upon your own Terms. But, in the first place, let us see what sort of Proof you expect. ALC. Perhaps I may not expect it, but I will tell you what sort of Proof I wou’d have: And that is in short, such Proof as every Man of Sense requires of a Matter of Fact, or the Existence of any other particular Thing. For Instance, shou’d a Man ask why I believe there is a King of Great Britain? I might answer because I had seen him; Or a King of Spain? because I had seen those who saw him. But as for this King of Kings, I neither saw him myself, nor any one else that ever did see him. Surely if there be such a Thing as God, it is very strange, that he shou’d leave himself without a Witness; that Men shou’d still dispute his Being; and that there shou’d be no one evident, sensible, plain Proof of it without recourse to Philosophy or Metaphysics. A Matter of Fact is not to be proved by Notions, but by Facts. This is clear and full to the Point. You see what I wou’d be at. Upon these Principles I defy Superstition. EUPH. You believe then as far as you can see. ALC. That is my Rule of Faith. EUPH. How! will you not believe the Existence of Things which you hear, unless you also see them? ALC. I will not say so neither. When I insisted on seeing I wou’d be understood to mean perceiving in general: Outward Objects make very different Impressions upon the animal Spirits, all which are comprised under the common Name of Sense. And whatever we can perceive by any Sense we may be sure of.

IV.

EUPH. What! do you believe then there are such Things as animal Spirits? ALC. Doubtless. EUPH. By what Sense do you perceive them? ALC. I do not perceive them immediately by any of my Senses. I am nevertheless persuaded of their Existence, because I can collect it from their Effects and Operations. They are the Messengers, which running to and fro in the Nerves, preserve a Communication between the Soul and outward Objects. EUPH. You admit then the Being of a Soul. ALC. Provided I do not admit an immaterial Substance, I see no Inconvenience in admitting there may be such a Thing as a Soul. And this may be no more than a thin fine Texture of subtile Parts or Spirits residing in the Brain. EUPH. I do not ask about its Nature. I only ask whether you admit that there is a Principle of Thought and Action, and whether it be perceivable by Sense. ALC. I grant that there is such a Principle, and that it is not the Object of Sense itself, but inferred from Appearances which are perceived by Sense. EUPH. If I understand you rightly, from animal Functions and Motions you infer the Existence of animal Spirits, and from reasonable Acts you infer the Existence of a reasonable Soul. Is it not so? ALC. It is. EUPH. It shou’d seem, therefore, that the Being of Things imperceptible to Sense may be collected from Effects and Signs, or sensible Tokens. ALC. It may. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, is not the Soul that which makes the principal Distinction between a real Person and a Shadow, a living Man and a Carcase? ALC. I grant it is. EUPH. I cannot, therefore, know that you for Instance are a distinct thinking Individual, or a living real Man, by surer or other Signs than those from which it can be inferred that you have a Soul. ALC. You cannot. EUPH. Pray tell me, are not all acts immediately and properly perceived by Sense reducible to Motion? ALC. They are EUPH. From Motions therefore you infer a Mover or Cause: and from reasonable Motions (or such as appear calculated for a reasonable End) a rational Cause, Soul, or Spirit. ALC. Even so.

V.

EUPH. The Soul of Man actuates but a small Body, an insignificant Particle, in respect of the great Masses of Nature, the Elements, and heavenly Bodies, and System of the World. And the Wisdom that appears in those Motions, which are the Effect of Human Reason, is incomparably less than that which discovers it self, in the structure and use of organized natural Bodies, Animal or Vegetable. A Man with his Hand can make no Machine so admirable as the hand it self: Nor can any of those Motions, by which we trace out Human Reason, approach the skill and contrivance of those wonderful Motions of the Heart and Brain and other vital parts, which do not depend on the Will of Man. ALC. All this is true. EUPH. Doth it not follow then that from natural Motions, independent of Man’s Will, may be inferred both Power and Wisdom incomparably greater than that of the Human Soul? ALC. It shou’d seem so. EUPH. Further, is there not in natural Productions and Effects a visible Unity of counsel and design? Are not the Rules fixed and immoveable? Do not the same Laws of Motion obtain throughout? The same in China and here, the same two thousand years ago and at this day? ALC. All this I do not deny. EUPH. Is there not also a Connexion or Relation between Animals and Vegetables, between both and the Elements, between the Elements and Heavenly Bodies; so that from their mutual Respects, Influences, Subordinations, and Uses, they may be collected to be parts of one whole, conspiring to one and the same end, and fulfilling the same design? ALC. Supposing all this to be true. EUPH. Will it not then follow, that this vastly great or infinite Power and Wisdom must be supposed in one and the same Agent, Spirit, or Mind, and that we have, at least, as clear, full and immediate Certainty of the being of this infinitely wise and powerful Spirit, as of any one Human Soul whatsoever besides our own? ALC. Let me consider; I suspect we proceed too hastily. What! Do you pretend you can have the same Assurance of the Being of a God, that you can have of mine whom you actually see stand before you and talk to you? EUPH. The very same, if not greater. ALC. How do you make this appear? EUPH. By the person Alciphron is meant an individual thinking thing, and not the Hair, Skin or visible Surface, or any part of the outward Form, Colour, or Shape of Alciphron. ALC. This I grant. EUPH. And in granting this, you grant that in a strict Sense, I do not see Alciphron, i. e. that individual thinking thing, but only such visible signs and tokens, as suggest and infer the Being of that invisible thinking Principle or Soul. Even so, in the self same manner it seems to me, that though I cannot with Eyes of Flesh behold the Invisible God; yet I do in the strictest Sense behold and perceive by all my Senses such Signs and Tokens, such Effects and Operations, as suggest, indicate, and demonstrate an invisible God, as certainly and with the same Evidence, at least, as any other Signs, perceived by Sense, do suggest to me the Existence of your Soul, Spirit, or thinking Principle; which I am convinced of only by a few Signs or Effects, and the Motions of one small organized Body: Whereas I do, at all times and in all places, perceive sensible Signs, which evince the Being of God. The point, therefore, doubted or denied by you at the beginning now seems manifestly to follow from the Premises. Throughout this whole Inquiry, have we not considered every step with care, and made not the least advance without clear Evidence? You and I examined and assented singly to each foregoing Proposition: What shall we do then with the Conclusion? For my part, if you do not help me out, I find my self under an absolute necessity of admitting it for true. You must therefore be content, henceforward to bear the blame, if I live and die in the Belief of a God.

VI.

ALC. It must be confest, I do not readily find an answer. There seems to be some Foundation for what you say. But on the other hand, if the point was so clear as you pretend, I cannot conceive how so many sagacious Men of our Sect shou’d be so much in the dark, as not to know or believe one Syllable of it. EUPH. O Alciphron, it is not our present business to account for the Oversights, or vindicate the Honour of those great Men the Free-thinkers, when their very Existence is in danger of being called in question. ALC. How so? EUPH. Be pleased to recollect the Concessions you have made, and then shew me, if the Arguments for a Deity be not conclusive, by what better Argument you can prove the Existence of that thinking Thing, which in strictness constitutes the Free-thinker. As soon as Euphranor had uttered these Words, Alciphron stopt short and stood in a posture of Meditation, while the rest of us continued our walk and took two or three turns, after which he joined us again with a smiling Countenance, like one who had made some Discovery. I have found, said he, what may clear up the point in dispute, and give Euphranor intire satisfaction; I wou’d say an Argument which will prove the Existence of a Free-thinker, the like whereof cannot be applied to prove the Existence of a God. You must know then, that your Notion of our perceiving the Existence of God, as certainly and immediately as we do that of a Human Person, I cou’d by no means digest, though I must own it puzzled me, till I had considered the matter. At first methought, a particular Structure, Shape, or Motion was the most certain Proof of a thinking, reasonable Soul. But a little attention satisfied me, that these things have no necessary Connexion with Reason, Knowledge, and Wisdom. And that allowing them to be certain Proofs of a living Soul, they cannot be so of a thinking and reasonable one. Upon second Thoughts, therefore, and a minute Examination of this point, I have found that nothing so much convinces me of the Existence of another Person as his speaking to me. It is my hearing you talk that, in strict and philosophical Truth, is to me the best Argument for your Being. And this is a peculiar Argument inapplicable to your purpose: for you will not, I suppose, pretend that God speaks to Man in the same clear and sensible manner, as one Man doth to another.

VII.

EUPH. How! is then the Impression of Sound so much more evident than that of other Senses? Or, if it be, is the voice of Man louder than that of Thunder? ALC. Alas! You mistake the point. What I mean is not the Sound of Speech meerly as such, but the arbitrary use of sensible Signs, which have no Similitude or necessary Connexion with the things signified, so as by the apposite Management of them, to suggest and exhibit to my mind an endless variety of things, differing in nature, time and place, thereby informing me, entertaining me, and directing me how to act, not only with regard to things near and present, but also with regard to things distant and future. No matter, whether these Signs are pronounced or written, whether they enter by the Eye or the Ear: they have the same use, and are equally Proofs of an intelligent, thinking, designing Cause. EUPH. But what if it shou’d appear that God really speaks to Man; wou’d this content you? ALC. I am for admitting no inward Speech, no holy Instincts, or Suggestions of Light or Spirit. All that, you must know, passeth with Men of Sense for nothing. If you do not make it plain to me, that God speaks to Men by outward sensible Signs, of such sort and in such manner, as I have defined, you do nothing. EUPH. But if it shall appear plainly, that God speaks to Men, by the intervention and use of arbitrary, outward, sensible Signs, having no Resemblance or necessary Connexion with the things they stand for and suggest: if it shall appear, that by innumerable Combinations of these Signs, an endless variety of things is discovered and made known to us; and that we are thereby instructed or informed in their different Natures; that we are taught and admonished what to shun, and what to pursue; and are directed how to regulate our Motions, and how to act with respect to things distant from us, as well in time as place; will this content you? ALC. It is the very thing I wou’d have you make out; for therein consists the force and use and nature of Language.

VIII.

EUPH. Look, Alciphron, do you not see the Castle upon yonder Hill? ALC. I do. EUPH. Is it not at a great Distance from you? ALC. It is. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, is not Distance a Line turned End-wise to the Eye? ALC. Doubtless. EUPH. And can a Line, in that Situation, project more than one single Point on the Bottom of the Eye? ALC. It cannot. EUPH. Therefore the Appearance of a long and of a short Distance is of the same Magnitude, or rather of no Magnitude at all, being in all Cases one single Point. ALC. It seems so. EUPH. Shou’d it not follow from hence, that Distance is not immediately perceived by the Eye? ALC. It shou’d. EUPH. Must it not then be perceived by the mediation of some other Thing? ALC. It must. EUPH. To discover what this is, let us examine what Alteration there may be in the Appearance of the same Object, placed at different Distances from the Eye. Now I find by Experience that, when an Object is removed still farther and farther off in a direct Line from the Eye, its visible Appearance still grows lesser and fainter, and this Change of Appearance, being proportional and universal, seems to me to be that by which we apprehend the various Degrees of Distance. ALC. I have nothing to object to this. EUPH. But Littleness or Faintness, in their own Nature, seem to have no necessary Connexion with greater Length of Distance. ALC. I admit this to be true. EUPH. Will it not follow then, that they cou’d never suggest it but from Experience? ALC. It will. EUPH. That is to say, we perceive Distance, not immediately, but by mediation of a Sign, which hath no Likeness to it, or necessary Connexion with it, but only suggests it from repeated Experience as Words do Things. ALC. Hold, Euphranor; now I think of it, the Writers in Optics tell us of an Angle made by the two Optic Axes, where they meet in the visible Point or Object; which Angle the obtuser it is the nearer it shews the Object to be, and by how much the acuter by so much the farther off; and this by a necessary demonstrable Connexion. EUPH. The Mind then finds out the Distance of Things by Geometry. ALC. It doth. EUPH. Shou’d it not follow therefore that no body cou’d see but those who had learned Geometry, and knew something of Lines and Angles? ALC. There is a sort of natural Geometry which is got without Learning. EUPH. Pray inform me, Alciphron, in order to frame a Proof of any kind, or deduce one Point from another, is it not necessary, that I perceive the Connexion of the Terms in the Premises, and the Connexion of the Premises with the Conclusion; and, in general, to know one Thing by means of another, must I not first know that other Thing? when I perceive your Meaning by your Words, must I not first perceive the Words themselves? and must I not know the Premises before I infer the Conclusion? ALC. All this is true. EUPH. Whoever therefore collects a nearer Distance from a wider Angle, or a farther Distance from an acuter Angle, must first perceive the Angles themselves. And he who doth not perceive those Angles, can infer nothing from them. Is it so or not? ALC. It is as you say. EUPH. Ask now the first Man you meet, whether he perceives or knows any thing of those Optic Angles? Or whether he ever thinks about them, or makes any Inferences from them, either by natural or artificial Geometry? What Answer do you think he wou’d make? ALC. To speak the Truth, I believe his Answer wou’d be, that he knew nothing of those Matters. EUPH. It cannot therefore be, that Men judge of Distance by Angles: Nor consequently can there be any Force in the Argument you drew from thence, to prove that Distance is perceived by means of something which hath a necessary Connexion with it. ALC. I agree with you.

IX.

EUPH. To me it seems, that a Man may know whether he perceives a Thing or no; and if he perceives it, whether it be immediately or mediately: And if mediately, whether by means of something like or unlike, necessarily or arbitrarily connected with it. ALC. It seems so. EUPH. And is it not certain, that Distance is perceived only by Experience, if it be neither perceived immediately by itself, nor by means of any Image, nor of any Lines and Angles, which are like it, or have a necessary Connexion with it? ALC. It is. EUPH. Doth it not seem to follow from what hath been said and allowed by you; that before all Experience a Man wou’d not imagine, the Things he saw were at any Distance from him? ALC. How! let me see. EUPH. The Littleness or Faintness of Appearance, or any other Idea or Sensation, not necessarily connected with, or resembling Distance, can no more suggest different Degrees of Distance, or any Distance at all, to the Mind, which hath not experienced a Connexion of the Things signifying and signified, than Words can suggest Notions before a Man hath learned the Language. ALC. I allow this to be true. EUPH. Will it not thence follow, that a Man born blind, and made to see, wou’d, upon first receiving his Sight, take the Things he saw, not to be at any Distance from him, but in his Eye, or rather in his Mind? ALC. I must own it seems so; and yet, on the other hand, I can hardly persuade myself, that, if I were in such a State, I shou’d think those Objects, which I now see at so great Distance, to be at no Distance at all. EUPH. It seems then, that you now think the Objects of Sight are at a Distance from you. ALC. Doubtless I do. Can any one question but yonder Castle is at a great Distance? EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, can you discern the Doors, Windows, and Battlements of that same Castle? ALC. I cannot. At this Distance it seems only a small round Tower. EUPH. But I, who have been at it, know that it is no small round Tower, but a large square Building with Battlements and Turrets, which it seems you do not see. ALC. What will you infer from thence? EUPH. I wou’d infer, that the very Object, which you strictly and properly perceive by Sight, is not that Thing which is several Miles distant. ALC. Why so? EUPH. Because a little round Object is one thing, and a great square Object is another. Is it not? ALC. I cannot deny it. EUPH. Tell me, is not the visible Appearance alone the proper Object of Sight? ALC. It is. What think you now (said Euphranor pointing towards the Heavens) of the visible Appearance of yonder Planet? Is it not a round luminous Flat, no bigger than a Sixpence? ALC. What then? EUPH. Tell me then, what you think of the Planet itself. Do you not conceive it to be a vast Opaque Globe, with several unequal Risings and Vallies? ALC. I do. EUPH. How can you therefore conclude, that the proper Object of your Sight exists at a Distance? ALC. I confess I know not. EUPH. For your farther Conviction, do but consider that crimson Cloud. Think you that if you were in the very Place where it is, you wou’d perceive any Thing like what you now see? ALC. By no means. I shou’d perceive only a dark Mist. EUPH. Is it not plain, therefore, that neither the Castle, the Planet, nor the Cloud, which you see here, are those real ones which you suppose exist at a Distance?

X.

ALC. What am I to think then? Do we see any thing at all, or is it altogether Fancy and Illusion? EUPH. Upon the whole, it seems the proper Objects of Sight are Light and Colours, with their several Shades and Degrees, all which, being infinitely diversified and combined, do form a Language wonderfully adapted to suggest and exhibit to us the Distances, Figures, Situations, Dimensions, and various Qualities of tangible Objects; not by Similitude, nor yet by Inference of necessary Connexion, but by the arbitrary Imposition of Providence, just as Words suggest the Things signified by them. ALC. How! Do we not, strictly speaking, perceive by Sight such Things as Trees, Houses, Men, Rivers, and the like? EUPH. We do, indeed, perceive or apprehend those Things by the Faculty of Sight. But will it follow from thence, that they are the proper and immediate Objects of Sight, any more than that all those Things are the proper and immediate Objects of Hearing, which are signified by the Help of Words or Sounds? ALC. You wou’d have us think then, that Light, Shades, and Colours, variously combined, answer to the several Articulations of Sound in Language, and that, by means thereof, all sorts of Objects are suggested to the Mind through the Eye, in the same manner as they are suggested by Words or Sounds through the Ear; that is, neither from necessary Deduction to the Judgment, nor from Similitude to the Fancy, but purely and solely from Experience, Custom, and Habit. EUPH. I wou’d not have you think any thing, more than the Nature of Things obligeth you to think, nor submit in the least to my Judgment, but only to the Force of Truth, which is an Imposition that I suppose the freest Thinkers will not pretend to be exempt from. ALC. You have led me, it seems, Step by Step, till I am got I know not where. But I shall try to get out again, if not by the Way I came, yet by some other of my own finding. Here Alciphron, having made a short Pause, proceeded as follows.

XI.

Answer me, Euphranor, shou’d it not follow from these Principles, that a Man born blind, and made to see, wou’d at first Sight, not only not perceive their Distance, but also not so much as know the very Things themselves which he saw, for Instance, Men or Trees? which surely to suppose must be absurd. EUPH. I grant, in consequence of those Principles, which both you and I have admitted, that such a one wou’d never think of Men, Trees, or any other Objects that he had been accustomed to perceive by Touch, upon having his Mind filled with new Sensations of Light and Colours, whose various Combinations he doth not yet understand, or know the Meaning of, no more than a Chinese, upon first hearing the Words Man and Tree, wou’d think of the Things signified by them. In both Cases, there must be Time and Experience, by repeated Acts, to acquire a Habit of knowing the Connexion between the Signs and Things signified, that is to say, of understanding the Language, whether of the Eyes or of the Ears. And I conceive no Absurdity in all this. ALC. I see therefore, in strict Philosophical Truth, that Rock only in the same Sense that I may be said to hear it, when the Word Rock is pronounced. EUPH. In the very same. ALC. How comes it to pass then, that every one shall say he sees, for Instance, a Rock or a House, when those things are before his Eyes; but no body will say he hears a Rock or a House, but only the words or sounds themselves, by which those things are said to be signified or suggested, but not heard? Besides, if Vision be only a Language speaking to the Eyes, it may be asked; When did Men learn this Language? To acquire the knowledge of so many Signs, as go to the making up a Language, is a work of some difficulty. But will any Man say he hath spent time, or been at pains, to learn this Language of Vision? EUPH. No wonder, we cannot assign a time beyond our remotest Memory. If we have been all practising this Language, ever since our first entrance into the World: If the Author of Nature constantly speaks to the Eyes of all Mankind, even in their earliest Infancy, whenever the Eyes are open in the Light, whether alone or in Company: It doth not seem to me at all strange, that Men shou’d not be aware they had ever learned a Language, begun so early, and practised so constantly, as this of Vision. And, if we also consider that it is the same throughout the whole World, and not, like other Languages, differing in different places, it will not seem unaccountable, that Men shou’d mistake the Connexion between the proper Objects of Sight and the things signified by them, to be founded in necessary Relation, or Likeness, or that they shou’d even take them for the same things. Hence it seems easy to conceive, why Men, who do not think, shou’d confound in this Language of Vision the Signs with the things signified, otherwise than they are wont to do, in the various particular Languages formed by the several Nations of Men.

XII.

It may be also worth while to observe, that Signs being little considered in themselves, or for their own sake, but only in their relative Capacity, and for the sake of those things whereof they are Signs, it comes to pass, that the mind often overlooks them, so as to carry its Attention immediately on to the things signified. Thus, for example, in reading we run over the Characters with the slightest regard, and pass on to the meaning. Hence it is frequent for Men to say, they see Words, and Notions, and Things in reading of a Book; whereas in strictness, they see only the Characters, which suggest Words, Nations, and Things. And by parity of Reason, may we not suppose, that Men, not resting in, but overlooking, the immediate and proper Objects of Sight, as in their own Nature of small moment, carry their Attention onward to the very things signified, and talk as if they saw the secondary Objects? which, in truth and strictness, are not seen but only suggested and apprehended by means of the proper Objects of Sight, which alone are seen. ALC. To speak my mind freely, this Dissertation grows tedious, and runs into points too dry and minute for a Gentleman’s Attention. I thought said Crito, we had been told, the Minute Philosophers loved to consider things closely and minutely. ALC. That is true, but in so polite an Age who wou’d be a meer Philosopher? There is a certain scholastic Accuracy which ill suits the freedom and case of a well-bred Man. But, to cut short this Chicane, I propound it fairly to your own Conscience, whether you really think, that God himself speaks every day and in every place to the Eyes of all Men? EUPH. That is really and in truth my Opinion; and it shou’d be yours too, if you are consistent with your self, and abide by your own Definition of Language. Since you cannot deny, that the Great Mover and Author of Nature constantly explaineth himself to the Eyes of Men, by the sensible intervention of arbitrary Signs, which have no Similitude or Connexion with the things signified; so as by compounding and disposing them, to suggest and exhibit an endless variety of Objects differing in nature, time, and place, thereby informing and directing Men, how to act with respect to things distant and future, as well as near and present. In consequence, I say, of your own Sentiments and Concessions, you have as much reason to think, the universal Agent or God speaks to your Eyes, as you can have for thinking any particular Person speaks to your Ears. ALC. I cannot help thinking, that some Fallacy runs throughout this whole Ratiocination, though perhaps I may not readily point it out. Hold! let me see. In Language the Signs are arbitrary, are they not? EUPH. They are. ALC. And consequently, they do not always suggest real matters of Fact. Whereas this natural Language, as you call it. or these visible Signs do always suggest things, in the same uniform way, and have the same constant regular Connexion with matters of Fact: whence it shou’d seem, the Connexion was necessary, and therefore, according to the Definition premised, it can be no Language. How do you solve this Objection? EUPH. You may solve it your self, by the help of a Picture or Looking-glass. ALC. You are in the right. I see there is nothing in it. I know not what else to say to this Opinion, more than that it is so odd and contrary to my way of thinking, that I shall never assent to it.

XIII.

EUPH. Be pleased to recollect your own Lectures upon Prejudice, and apply them in the present case. Perhaps they may help you to follow where Reason leads, and to suspect Notions which are strongly riveted, without having been ever examined. ALC. I disdain the suspicion of Prejudice. And I do not speak only for my self. I know a Club of most ingenious Men, the freest from Prejudice of any Men alive, who abhor the Notion of a God, and I doubt not wou’d be very able to untie this knot. Upon which Words of Alciphron, I, who had acted the part of an indifferent stander-by, observed to him, that it misbecame his Character and repeated Professions, to own an Attachment to the Judgment, or build upon the presumed Abilities of other Men how ingenious soever: and that this proceeding might encourage his Adversaries to have recourse to Authority, in which perhaps they wou’d find their account more than he. Oh! said Crito, I have often observed the Conduct of Minute Philosophers. When one of them has got a ring of Disciples round him, his method is to exclaim against Prejudice, and recommend thinking and reasoning, giving to understand that himself is a Man of deep Researches and close Argument, one who examines impartially and concludes warily. The same Man in other Company, if he chance to be pressed with Reason, shall laugh at Logic and assume the lazy supine Airs of a fine Gentleman, a Wit, a Railleur, to avoid the dryness of a regular and exact Inquiry. This double Face of the Minute Philosopher is of no small use to propagate and maintain his Notions. Though to me it seems a plain Case, that if a fine Gentleman will shake off Authority, and appeal from Religion to Reason, unto Reason he must go: And if he cannot go without leading strings, surely he had better be led by the Authority of the Public, than by that of any knot of Minute Philosophers. ALC. Gentlemen, this Discourse is very irksome and needless. For my part, I am a friend to Inquiry. I am willing Reason shou’d have its full and free Scope. I build on no Man’s Authority. For my part I have no interest in denying a God. Any Man may believe or not believe a God as he pleases for me. But after all, Euphranor must allow me to stare a little at his Conclusions. EUPH. The Conclusions are yours as much as mine, for you were led to them by your own Concessions.

XIV.

You it seems stare to find, that God is not far from every one of us, and that in him we live and move and have our Being. You, who in the beginning of this Morning’s Conference, thought it strange, that God shou’d leave himself without a witness, do now think it strange the witness shou’d be so full and clear. ALC. I must own I do. I was aware, indeed, of a certain Metaphysical Hypothesis, of our seeing all things in God by the union of the Humane Soul with the intelligible Substance of the Deity, which neither I nor any one else cou’d make sense of. But I never imagined it cou’d be pretended, that we saw God with our fleshly Eyes as plain as we see any Human Person whatsoever, and that he daily speaks to our Senses in a manifest and clear Dialect. CRI. This Language hath a necessary Connexion with Knowledge, Wisdom and Goodness. It is equivalent to a constant Creation, betokening an immediate act of Power and Providence. It cannot be accounted for by mechanical Principles, by Atoms, Attractions, or Effluvia. The instantaneous Production and Reproduction of so many Signs combined, dissolved, transposed, diversified, and adapted to such an endless variety of purposes, ever shifting with the occasions and suited to them, being utterly inexplicable and unaccountable by the Laws of Motion, by Chance, by Fate, or the like blind Principles, doth set forth and testify the immediate Operation of a Spirit or thinking Being; and not meerly of a Spirit, which every Motion or Gravitation may possibly infer, but of one wise, good and provident Spirit, who directs and rules and governs the World. Some Philosophers, being convinced of the Wisdom and Power of the Creator, from the make and contrivance of organized Bodies and orderly System of the World, did nevertheless imagine, that he left this System with all its parts and contents well adjusted and put in motion, as an Artist leaves a Clock, to go thenceforward of it self for a certain Period. But this visual Language proves, not a Creator meerly, but a provident Governor actually and intimately present and attentive to all our Interests and Motions; who watches over our Conduct, and takes care of our minutest Actions and Designs, throughout the whole course of our lives, informing, admonishing, and directing incessantly, in a most evident evident and sensible manner. This is truly wonderful. EUPH. And is it not so, that Men shou’d be encompassed by such a wonder, without reflecting on it?

XV.

Something there is of Divine and Admirable in this Language, addressed to our Eyes, that may well a waken the Mind, and deserve its utmost Attention; it is learned with so little pains, it expresseth the Differences of Things so clearly and aptly, it instructs with such Facility and Dispatch, by one Glance of the Eye conveying a greater Variety of Advices, and a more distinct Knowledge of Things, than cou’d be got by a Discourse of several Hours. And, while it informs, it amuses and entertains the Mind with such singular Pleasure and Delight. It is of such excellent Use in giving a Stability and Permanency to Humane Discourse, in recording Sounds and bestowing Life on dead Languages, enabling us to converse with Men of remote Ages and Countries. And it answers so apposite to the Uses and Necessities of Mankind, informing us more distinctly of those Objects, whose Nearness and Magnitude qualify them to be of greatest Detriment or Benefit to our Bodies, and less exactly, in Proportion as their Littleness or Distance make them of less Concern to us. ALC. And yet these strange Things affect Men but little. EUPH. But they are not strange, they are familiar, and that makes them be overlooked. Things which rarely happen strike; whereas Frequency lessens the Admiration of Things, though in themselves ever so admirable. Hence a common Man, who is not used to think and make Reflexions, wou’d probably be more convinced of the Being of a God, by one single Sentence heard once in his life from the Sky, than by all the Experience he has had of this visual Language, contrived with such exquisite skill, so constantly addressed to his Eyes, and so plainly declaring the Nearness, Wisdom, and Providence of him with whom we have to do. ALC. After all, I cannot satisfy my self, how Men shou’d be so little surprised or amazed about this visive Faculty, if it was really of a nature so surprising and amazing. EUPH. But let us suppose a Nation of Men blind from their Infancy, among whom a Stranger arrives, the only Man who can see in all the Country: Let us suppose this Stranger travelling with some of the Natives, and that one while he foretels to them, that, in case they walk straight forward, in half an Hour they shall meet Men or Cattle or come to a House; that if they turn to the right and proceed, they shall in a few Minutes be in danger of falling down a Precipice; that shaping their course to the left, they will in such a time arrive at a River, a Wood, or a Mountain. What think you? Must they not be infinitely surprised, that one, who had never been in their Country before, shou’d know it so much better than themselves? And wou’d not those Predictions seem to them as unaccountable and incredible, as Prophecy to a Minute Philosopher? ALC. I cannot deny it. EUPH. But it seems to require intense thought, to be able to unravel a Prejudice that has been so long forming, to get over the vulgar Error of Ideas common to both Senses, and so to distinguish between the Objects of Sight and Touch , which have grown (if I may so say) blended together in our Fancy, as to be able to suppose our selves exactly in the State, that one of those Men wou’d be in, if he were made to see. And yet this I believe is possible, and might seem worth the pains of a little thinking, especially to those Men whose proper Employment and Profession it is to think, and unravel Prejudices, and confute Mistakes. I frankly own I cannot find my way out of this Maze, and shou’d gladly be set right by those who see better than my self. CRI. The pursuing this Subject in their own Thoughts wou’d possibly open a new Scene, to those speculative Gentlemen of the Minute Philosophy. It puts me in mind of a passage in the Psalmist, where he represents God to be covered with Light as with a Garment, and wou’d methinks be no ill Comment on that ancient Notion of some Eastern Sages: That God had Light for his Body, and Truth for his Soul. This Conversation lasted till a Servant came to tell us the Tea was ready: Upon which we walked in, and found Lysicles at the Tea-table.

XVI.

As soon as we fate down, I am glad, said Alciphron, that I have here found my Second, a fresh Man to maintain our common Cause, which, I doubt, Lysicles will think hath suffered by his absence. LYS. Why so? ALC. I have been drawn into some Concessions you won’t like. LYS. Let me know what they are? ALC. Why, that there is such a thing as a God, and that his Existence is very certain. LYS. Bless me! How came you to entertain so wild a Notion? ALC. You know we profess to follow Reason wherever it leads. And in short I have been reasoned into it. LYS. Reasoned? You shou’d say amused with Words, bewildered with Sophistry. EUPH. Have you a mind to hear the same Reasoning that led Alciphron and me Step by Step, that we may examine whether it be Sophistry or no? LYS. As to that I am very easy. I guess all that can be said on that Head. It shall be my Business to help my Friend out, whatever Arguments drew him in. EUPH. Will you admit the Premises and deny the Conclusions? LYS. What if I admit the Conclusion? EUPH. How! will you grant there is a God? LYS. Perhaps I may. EUPH. Then we are agreed. LYS. Perhaps not. EUPH. O Lysicles, you are a subtle Adversary. I know not what you wou’d be at. LYS. You must know then, that at bottom the Being of a God is a Point in it self of small consequence, and a Man may make this Concession without yielding much. The great Point is what Sense the word God is to be taken in. The very Epicureans allowed the Being of Gods; but then they were indolent Gods, unconcerned with Human Affairs. Hobbes allowed a corporeal God; and Spinosa held the Universe to be God. And yet no body doubts they were staunch Free-thinkers. I cou’d wish indeed the word God were quite omitted, because in most minds it is coupled with a sort of superstitious Aw, the very Root of all Religion. I shall not, nevertheless, be much disturbed though the name be retained, and the Being of God allowed in any Sense but in that of a Mind, which knows all things, and beholds Human Actions, like some Judge or Magistrate with infinite Observation and Intelligence. The Belief of a God in this Sense fills a Man’s Mind with Scruples, lays him under Constraints and imbitters his very Being: But in another Sense, it may be attended with no great ill Consequence. This I know was the Opinion of our great Diagoras, who told me he wou’d never have been at the pains, to find out a Demonstration that there was no God, if the received Notion of God had been the same with that of some Fathers and Schoolmen. EUPH. Pray what was that?

XVII.

LYS. You must know, Diagoras, a Man of much reading and inquiry, had discovered that once upon a time, the most profound and speculative Divines finding it impossible to reconcile the Attributes of God, taken in the common Sense, or in any known Sense, with Human Reason, and the Appearances of things, taught that the words Knowledge, Wisdom, Goodness, and such like, when spoken of the Deity, must be understood in a quite different Sense, from what they signify in the vulgar Acceptation, or from any thing that we can form a Notion of, or conceive. Hence, whatever Objections might be made against the Attributes of God they easily solved, by denying those Attributes belonged to God, in this or that or any known particular Sense or Notion; which was the same thing as to deny they belonged to him at all. And thus denying the Attributes of God they in effect deny’d his Being, though perhaps they were not aware of it. Suppose, for instance, a Man shou’d object, that future Contingencies were inconsistent with the Fore-knowledge of God, because it is repugnant that certain Knowledge shou’d be of an uncertain thing: it was a ready and an easy answer to say, that this may be true, with respect to Knowledge taken in the common Sense, or in any Sense that we can possibly form any Notion of; but that there wou’d not appear the same Inconsistency, between the contingent Nature of Things and Divine Foreknowledge, taken to signify somewhat that we know nothing of, which in God supplies the place of what we understand by Knowledge; from which it differs not in Quantity or Degree of Perfection, but altogether, and in kind, as Light doth from Sound; and even more, since these agree in that they are both Sensations: whereas Knowledge in God hath no sort of Resemblance or Agreement with any Notion, that Man can frame of Knowledge. The like may be said of all the other Attributes, which indeed may by this means be equally reconciled with every thing or with nothing: But all Men who think must needs see, this is cutting knots and not untying them. For how are things reconciled with the Divine Attributes, when these Attributes themselves are in every intelligible Sense denied; and consequently the very Notion of God taken away, and nothing left but the Name, without any meaning annexed to it? In short, the Belief that there is an unknown Subject of Attributes absolutely unknown is a very innocent Doctrine; which the acute Diagoras well saw, and was therefore wonderfully delighted with this System.

XVIII.

For, said he, if this cou’d once make its way and obtain in the World, there wou’d be an end of all natural or rational Religion, which is the Basis both of the Jewish and the Christian: for he who comes to God, or enters himself in the Church of God, must first believe that there is a God in some intelligible Sense; and not only that there is something in general without any proper Notion, though never so inadequate, of any of its Qualities or Attributes; for this may be Fate, or Chaos, or Plastic Nature, or any thing else as well as God. Nor will it avail to say, there is something in this unknown Being analogous to Knowledge and Goodness; that is to say, which produceth those Effects, which we cou’d not conceive to be produced by Men in any Degree, without Knowledge and Goodness. For this is in Fact to give up the Point in dispute between Theists and Atheists, the Question having always been, not whether there was a Principle, (which Point was allowed by all Philosophers as well before as since Anaxagoras) but whether this Principle was a [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , a thinking intelligent Being: That is to say, whether that Order and Beauty and Use, visible in Natural Effects, cou’d be produced by any thing but a Mind or Intelligence, in the proper Sense of the Word; and whether there must not be true, real, and proper Knowledge in the first Cause. We will therefore acknowledge, that all those natural Effects which are vulgarly ascribed to Knowledge and Wisdom, proceed from a Being in which there is, properly speaking, no Knowledge or Wisdom at all, but only something else, which, in reality, is the Cause of those things which Men, for want of knowing better, ascribe to what they call Knowledge and Wisdom and Understanding. You wonder perhaps to hear a Man of Pleasure, who diverts himself as I do, philosophize at this rate. But you shou’d consider that much is to be got by conversing with ingenious Men, which is a short way to Knowledge, that saves a Man the drudgery of Reading and Thinking. And now we have granted to you that there is a God in this indefinite Sense, I wou’d fain see what use you can make of this Concession. You cannot argue from unknown Attributes, or which is the same thing, from Attributes in an unknown Sense. You cannot prove, that God is to be loved for his Goodness, or feared for his Justice, or respected for his Knowledge: All which Consequences, we own, wou’d follow from those Attributes admitted in an intelligible Sense. But we deny, that those or any other Consequences can be drawn from Attributes admitted in no particular Sense, or in a Sense which none of us understand. Since therefore nothing can be inferred from such an Account of God, about Conscience, or Worship, or Religion, you may e’en make the best of it; and, not to be singular, we will use the Name too, and so at once there is an end of Atheism. EUPH. This Account of a Deity is new to me. I do not like it, and therefore shall leave it to be maintain’d by those who do.

XIX.

CRI. It is not new to me. I remember not long since to have heard a Minute Philosopher triumph upon this very Point; which put me on inquiring what Foundation there was for it in the Fathers or Schoolmen. And, for ought that I can find, it owes its Original to those Writings, which have been published under the Name of Dionysius the Areopagite. The Author of which, it must be owned, hath written upon the Divine Attributes in a very singular Style. In his Treatise of the Coelestial Hierarchy he saith, that God is something above all Essence and Life, [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] ; and again in his Treatise of the Divine Names , that he is above all Wisdom and Understanding, [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] , ineffable and innominable, [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] ; the Wisdom of God he terms an unreasonable, unintelligent, and foolish Wisdom; [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] . But then the Reason he gives, for expressing himself in this strange manner, is, that the Divine Wisdom is the Cause of all Reason, Wisdom, and Understanding, and therein are contained the Treasures of all Wisdom and Knowledge. He calls God [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] and [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] ; as if Wisdom and Life were Words not worthy to express the Divine Perfections: And he adds, that the Attributes unintelligent and unperceiving must be ascribed to the Divinity, not [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] by way of Defect, but [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] by way of Eminency; which he explains by our giving the Name of Darkness to Light inaccessible. And, notwithstanding the Harshness of his Expressions in some Places, he affirms over and over in others, that God knows all Things; not that he is beholden to the Creatures for his Knowledge, but by knowing himself, from whom they all derive their Being, and in whom they are contained as in their Cause. It was late before these Writings appear to have been known in the World; and although they obtained Credit during the Age of the Schoolmen, yet since critical Learning hath been cultivated, they have lost that Credit, and are at this Day given up for spurious, as containing several evident Marks of a much later Date than the Age of Dionysius. Upon the whole, although this Method of growing in Expression, and dwindling in Notion, of clearing up Doubts by Nonsense, and avoiding Difficulties by running into affected Contradictions, may perhaps proceed from a well-meant Zeal; yet it appears not to be according to Knowledge, and instead of reconciling Atheists to the Truth, hath, I doubt, a Tendency to confirm them in their own Persuasion. It shou’d seem, therefore, very weak and rash in a Christian to adopt this harsh Language of an Apocryphal Writer, preferably to that of the Holy Scriptures. I remember, indeed, to have read of a certain Philosopher, who lived some Centuries ago, that used to say, if these supposed Works of Dionysius had been known to the Primitive Fathers, they wou’d have furnished them admirable Weapons against the Hereticks, and wou’d have saved a world of Pains. But the Event since their Discovery hath by no means confirmed his Opinion. It must be owned, the celebrated Picus of Mirandula, among his Nine Hundred Conclusions (which that Prince, being very young, proposed to maintain by public Disputation at Rome) hath this for one; to wit, that it is more improper to say of God, he is an Intellect or intelligent Being, than to say of a reasonable Soul that it is an Angel: Which Doctrine it seems was not relished. And Picus, when he comes to defend it, supports himself altogether by the Example and Authority of Dionysius, and in effect explains it away into a meer verbal Difference, affirming, that neither Dionysius nor himself ever meant to deprive God of Knowledge, or to deny that he knows all Things: But that, as Reason is of kind peculiar to Man, so by Intellection he understands a kind or manner of Knowing peculiar to Angels: And that the Knowledge, which is in God, is more above the Intellection of Angels, than Angel is above Man. He adds that, as his Tenet consists with admitting the most perfect Knowledge in God, so he wou’d by no means be understood to exclude from the Deity Intellection it self, taken in the common or general Sense, but only that peculiar sort of Intellection proper to Angels, which he thinks ought not to be attributed to God any more than Human Reason . Picus, therefore, though he speaks as the Apocryphal Dionysius, yet when he explains himself, it is evident he speaks like other Men. And although the forementioned Books of the Coelestial Hierarchy and of the Divine Names, being attributed to a Saint and Martyr of the Apostolical Age, were respected by the Schoolmen, yet it is certain they rejected or softned his harsh Expressions, and explained away or reduced his Doctrine to the received Notions taken from Holy Scripture, and the Light of Nature.

XX.

Thomas Aquinas expresseth his Sense of this Point in the following manner. All Perfections, saith he, derived from God to the Creatures are in a certain higher Sense, or (as the Schoolmen term it) eminently in God. Whenever, therefore, a Name borrowed from any Perfection in the Creature is attributed to God, we must exclude from its Signification every thing that belongs to the imperfect Manner, wherein that Attribute is found in the Creature. Whence he concludes, that Knowledge in God is not an Habit, but a pure Act . And again the same Doctor observes, that our Intellect gets its Notions of all sorts of Perfections from the Creatures, and that as it apprehends those Perfections, so it signifies them by Names. Therefore, saith he, in attributing these Names to God, we are to consider two Things; first, The Perfections themselves as Goodness, Life, and the like, which are properly in God; and, secondly, The Manner which is peculiar to the Creature, and cannot, strictly and properly speaking, be said to agree to the Creator . And although Suarez, with other Schoolmen, teacheth, that the Mind of Man conceiveth Knowledge and Will to be in God as Faculties or Operations, by Analogy only to created Beings; yet he gives it plainly as his Opinion, that when Knowledge is said not to be properly in God, it must be understood in a Sense including Imperfection, such as discursive Knowledge, or the like imperfect kind found in the Creatures: And that, none of those Imperfections in the Knowledge of Men or Angels belonging to the formal Notion of Knowledge, or to Knowledge as such, it will not thence follow that Knowledge, in its proper formal Sense, may not be attributed to God: And of Knowledge taken in general for the clear evident understanding of all Truth, he expresly affirms that it is in God, and that this was never denied by any Philosopher who believed a God . It was, indeed, a current Opinion in the Schools, that even Being itself shou’d be attributed analogically to God and the Creatures. That is, they held that God, the supreme, independent, self-originate Cause and Source of all Beings, must not be supposed to exist in the same Sense with created Beings, not that he exists less truly, properly, or formally than they, but only because he exists in a more eminent and perfect Manner.

XXI.

But to prevent any Man’s being led, by mistaking the Scholastic Use of the Terms Analogy and Analogical, into an Opinion that we cannot frame in any Degree, a true and proper Notion of Attributes applied by Analogy, or, in the School Phrase, predicated analogically, it may not be amiss to inquire into the true Sense and Meaning of those Words. Every one knows, that Analogy is a Greek Word used by Mathematicians, to signify a Similitude of Proportions. For Instance, when we observe that Two is to Six, as Three is to Nine, this Similitude or Equality of Proportion is termed Analogy. And although Proportion strictly signifies the Habitude or Relation of one Quantity to another, yet, in a looser and translated Sense, it hath been applied to signify every other Habitude; and consequently the Term Analogy comes to signify all Similitude of Relations, or Habitudes whatsoever. Hence, the Schoolmen tell us there is Analogy between Intellect and Sight; forasmuch as Intellect is to the Mind, what Sight is to the Body? And that he who governs the State is analogous to him who steers a Ship. Hence a Prince is analogically stiled a Pilot, being to the State as a Pilot is to his Vessel . For the farther clearing of this Point it is to be observed, that a twofold Analogy is distinguished by the Schoolmen, metaphorical and proper. Of the first Kind there are frequent Instances in Holy Scripture, attributing Human Parts and Passions to God. When he is represented as having a Finger, an Eye, or an Ear, when he is said to repent, to be angry, or grieved, every one sees the Analogy is meerly metaphorical. Because those Parts and Passions, taken in the proper Signification, must in every Degree necessarily, and from the formal Nature of the Thing, include Imperfection. When therefore it is said, the Finger of God appears in this or that Event, Men of common Sense mean no more, but that it is as truly ascribed to God, as the Works wrought by Human Fingers are to Man: and so of the rest. But the case is different, when Wisdom and Knowledge are attributed to God. Passions and Senses as such imply Defect; but in Knowledge simply, or as such, there is no Defect. Knowledge therefore, in the proper formal meaning of the Word, may be attributed to God proportionably, that is preserving a Proportion to the infinite Nature of God. We may say, therefore, that as God is infinitely above Man, so is the Knowledge of God infinitely above the Knowledge of Man, and this is what Cajetan calls Analogia propriè facta. And after this same Analogy, we must understand all those Attributes to belong to the Deity, which in themselves simply, and as such, denote Perfection. We may therefore consistently with what hath been premised, affirm that all sorts of Perfection, which we can conceive in a finite Spirit, are in God, but without any of that allay which is found in the Creatures. This Doctrine therefore of Analogical Perfections in God, or our knowing God by Analogy, seems very much misunderstood and misapplied by those who wou’d infer from thence, that we cannot frame any direct or proper Notion, though never so inadequate, of Knowledge or Wisdom, as they are in the Deity, or understand any more of them than one born blind can of Light and Colours.

XXII.

And now, Gentlemen, it may be expected I shou’d ask your Pardon, for having dwelt so long on a point of Metaphysics, and introduced such unpolished and unfashionable Writers as the Schoolmen into good Company: but as Lysicles gave the occasion, I leave him to answer for it. LYS. I never dreamt of this dry Dissertation. But, if I have been the occasion of discussing these Scholastic Points, by my unluckily mentioning the Schoolmen, it was my first fault of the kind, and I promise it shall be the last. The meddling with crabbed Authors of any sort is none of my taste. I grant one meets now and then with a good Notion in what we call dry Writers, such an one for example as this I was speaking of, which I must own struck my Fancy. But then for these we have such as Prodicus or Diagoras, who look into obsolete Books, and save the rest of us that trouble. CRI. So you pin your Faith upon them. LYS. It is only for some odd Opinions, and matters of Fact, and critical Points. Besides, we know the Men to whom we give credit: They are judicious and honest, and have no end to serve but Truth. And I am confident some Author or other has maintained the forementioned Notion in the same Sense as Diagoras related it. CRI. That may be. But it never was a received Notion, and never will, so long as Men believe a God; the same Arguments that prove a first Cause proving an intelligent Cause: Intelligent, I say, in the proper Sense: Wise and Good in the true and formal Acceptation of the Words. Otherwise it is evident, that every Syllogism brought to prove those Attributes, or (which is the same thing) to prove the Being of a God, will be found to consist of four terms, and consequently can conclude nothing. But for your part, Alciphron, you have been fully convinced, that God is a thinking intelligent Being in the same sense with other Spirits, though not in the same imperfect manner or degree.

XXIII.

ALC. And yet I am not without my Scruples: For with Knowledge you infer Wisdom, and with Wisdom Goodness. But how is it possible, to conceive God so good, and Man so wicked? It may perhaps with some Colour be alledged, that a little soft shadowing of Evil sets off the bright and luminous parts of the Creation, and so contributes to the Beauty of the whole Piece: But, for Blots so large and so black it is impossible to account by that Principle. That there shou’d be so much Vice and so little Virtue upon Earth, and that the Laws of God’s Kingdom shou’d be so ill observed by his Subjects, is what can never be reconciled with that surpassing Wisdom and Goodness of the supreme Monarch. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, wou’d you argue that a State was ill administred, or judge of the manners of its Citizens, by the Disorders committed in the Goal or Dungeon? ALC. I wou’d not. EUPH. And for ought we know, this Spot with the few Sinners on it, bears no greater Proportion to the Universe of Intelligences, than a Dungeon doth to a Kingdom. It seems we are led not only by Revelation but by common Sense, observing and inferring from the Analogy of visible Things, to conclude there are innumerable Orders of intelligent Beings more happy and more perfect than Man, whose Life is but a Span, and whose place this earthly Globe is but a Point, in respect of the whole System of God’s Creation. We are dazzled indeed with the Glory and Grandeur of Things here below, because we know no better. But I am apt to think, if we knew what it was to be an Angel for one hour, we shou’d return to this World, though it were to sit on the brightest Throne in it, with vastly more loathing and reluctance, than we wou’d now descend into a loathsome Dungeon or Sepulchre.

XXIV.

CRI. To me it seems natural, that such a weak passionate and short-sighted Creature as Man, shou’d be ever liable to Scruples of one kind or other. But, as this same Creature is apt to be over positive in judging, and over hasty in concluding, it falls out, that these Difficulties and Scruples about God’s Conduct are made Objections to his Being. And so Men come to argue from their own Defects against the Divine Perfections. And, as the Views and Humours of Men are different and often opposite, you may sometimes see them deduce the same atheistical Conclusion from contrary Premises. I knew an Instance of this, in two Minute Philosophers of my Acquaintance, who used to argue each from his own Temper against a Providence. One of them, a Man of a choleric and vindictive Spirit, said he cou’d not believe a Providence, because London was not swallowed up or consumed by Fire from Heaven, the Streets being as he said full of People, who shew no other Belief or Worship of God, but perpetually praying that he wou’d damn, rot, sink, and confound them. The other, being of an indolent and easy Temper, concluded there cou’d be no such thing as a Providence, for that a Being of consummate Wisdom must needs employ himself better, than in minding the Prayers, and Actions, and little Interests of Mankind. ALC. After all, if God have no Passions, how can it be true that Vengeance is his? Or how can he be said to be jealous of his Glory? CRI. We believe that God executes Vengeance without Revenge, and is jealous without Weakness, just as the mind of Man sees without Eyes, and apprehends without Hands.

XXV.

ALC. To put a Period to this Discourse, we will grant, there is a God in this dispassionate Sense; but what then? What hath this to do with Religion or Divine Worship? To what purpose, are all these Prayers, and Praises, and Thanks-givings, and Singing of Psalms, which the foolish Vulgar call serving God? What sense or use or end is there in all these things? CRI. We worship God, we praise and pray to him: not because we think that he is proud of our Worship, or fond of our Praise or Prayers, and affected with them as Mankind are, or that all our Service can contribute in the least Degree to his Happiness or Good: But because it is good for us, to be so disposed towards God: because it is just and right and suitable to the Nature of Things, and becoming the Relation we stand in to our supreme Lord and Governor. ALC. If it be good for us to worship God; it shou’d seem that the Christian Religion, which pretends to teach Men the Knowledge and Worship of God, was of some use and benefit to Mankind. CRI. Doubtless. ALC. If this can be made appear, I shall own my self very much mistaken. CRI. It is now near Dinner time. Wherefore if you please, we will put an end to this Conversation for the present, and to-morrow morning resume our Subject.

 THE FIFTH DIALOGUE.I. Minute Philosophers join in the Cry, and follow the Scent of others. II. Worship prescribed by the Christian Religion suitable to God and Man. III. Power and Influence of the Druids. IV. Excellency and Usefulness of the Christian Religion. V. It ennobles Mankind and makes them happy. VI. Religion neither Biggotry nor Superstition. VII. Physicians and Physic for the Soul. VIII. Character of the Clergy. IX. Natural Religion and Humane Reason not to be disparaged. X. Tendency and Use of the Gentile Religion. XI. Good Effects of Christianity. XII. Englishmen compared with ancient Greeks and Romans. XIII. The Modern Practice of Duelling. XIV. Character of the old Romans, how to be formed. XV. Genuine Fruits of the Gospel. XVI. Wars and Factions not an Effect of the Christian Religion. XVII. Civil Rage and Massacres in Greece and Rome. XVIII. Virtue of ancient Greeks. XIX. Quarrels of Polemical Divines. XX. Tyranny, Usurpation, Sophistry of Ecclesiastics. XXI. The Universities censured. XXII. Divine Writings of a certain modern Critic. XXIII. Learning the Effect of Religion. XXIV. Barbarism of the Schools. XXV. Restauration of Learning and polite Arts, to whom owing. XXVI. Prejudice and Ingratitude of Minute Philosophers. XXVII. Their Pretensions and Conduct inconsistent. XXVIII. Men and Brutes compared with respect to Religion. XXIX. Christianity the only Means to establish Natural Religion. XXX. Free-thinkers mistake their Talents; have a strong Imagination. XXXI. Tithes and Church-lands. XXXII. Men distinguished from Human Creatures. XXXIII. Distribution of Mankind into Birds, Beasts, and Fishes. XXXIV. Plea for Reason allowed, but Unfairness taxed. XXXV. Freedom a Blessing or a Curse as it is used. XXXVI. Priestcraft not the reigning Evil.

 [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

I.

WE amused ourselves next Day every one to his Fancy, till Nine of the Clock, when Word was brought that the Tea-table was set in the Library, which is a Gallery on a Ground-floor, with an arched Door at one End opening into a Walk of Limes; where, as soon as we had drank Tea, we were tempted by fine Weather to take a Walk which led us to a small Mount of easy Ascent, on the Top whereof we found a Seat under a spreading Tree. Here we had a Prospect on one hand of a narrow Bay or Creek of the Sea, inclosed on either Side by a Coast beautified with Rocks and Woods, and green Banks and Farm-houses. At the End of the Bay was a small Town placed upon the Slope of a Hill, which from the Advantage of its Situation made a considerable Figure. Several Fishing-boats and Lighters gliding up and down on a Surface as smooth and bright as Glass enlivened the Prospect. On the other Side we looked down on green Pastures, Flocks, and Herds, basking beneath in Sun-shine, while we in our superior Situation enjoy’d the Freshness of Air and Shade. Here we felt that sort of joyful Instinct which a rural Scene and fine Weather inspire; and proposed no small Pleasure, in resuming and continuing our Conference without Interruption till Dinner: But we had hardly seated ourselves, and looked about us, when we saw a Fox run by the Foot of our Mount into an adjacent Thicket. A few Minutes after, we heard a confused Noise of the opening of Hounds, the winding of Horns, and the roaring of Country Squires. While our Attention was suspended by this Event, a Servant came running out of Breath and told Crito, that his Neighbour Ctesippus, a Squire of Note, was fallen from his Horse attempting to leap over a Hedge, and brought into the Hall, where he lay for dead. Upon which we all rose and walked hastily to the House, where we found Ctesippus just come to himself, in the midst of half a dozen Sun-burnt Squires in Frocks and short Wigs and Jockey-Boots. Being asked how he did? he answered it was only a broken Rib. With some Difficulty Crito persuaded him to lie on a Bed till the Chirurgeon came. These Fox-hunters, having been up early at their Sport, were eager for Dinner, which was accordingly hastened. They passed the Afternoon in a loud rustic Mirth, gave Proof of their Religion and Loyalty by the Healths they drank, talked of Hounds and Horses and Elections and Country Affairs till the Chirurgeon, who had been employed about Ctesippus, desired he might be put into Crito’s Coach, and sent home, having refused to stay all Night. Our Guests being gone, we reposed ourselves after the Fatigue of this tumultuous Visit, and next Morning assembled again at the Seat on the Mount. Now Lysicles, being a nice Man, and a bel esprit, had an infinite Contempt for the rough Manners and Conversation of Fox-hunters, and cou’d not reflect with Patience that he had lost, as he called it, so many Hours in their Company. I flattered myself, said he, that there had been none of this Species remaining among us: Strange that Men shou’d be diverted with such uncouth Noise and Hurry, or find Pleasure in the Society of Dogs and Horses! How much more elegant are the Diversions of the Town! There seems, replied Euphranor, to be some Resemblance between Fox-hunters and Free-thinkers; the former exerting their animal Faculties in pursuit of Game, as you Gentlemen employ your Intellectuals in the pursuit of Truth. The kind of Amusement is the same, although the Object be different. LYS. I had rather be compared to any Brute upon Earth than a rational Brute. CRI. You wou’d then have been less displeased with my Friend Pythocles, whom I have heard compare the common sort of Minute Philosophers, not to the Hunters, but the Hounds. For, said he, you shall often see among the Dogs a loud Babler, with a bad Nose, lead the unskilful part of the Pack, who join all in his Cry without following any Scent of their own, any more than the Herd of Free-thinkers follow their own Reason.

II.

But Pythocles was a blunt Man, and must never have known such Reasoners among them as you Gentlemen, who can sit so long at an Argument, dispute every Inch of Ground, and yet know when to make a reasonable Concession. LYS. I don’t know how it comes to pass, but methinks Alciphron makes Concessions for himself and me too. For my own part, I am not altogether of such a yielding Temper: But yet I don’t care to be singular neither. CRI. Truly, Alciphron, when I consider where we are got, and how far we are agreed, I conceive it probable we may agree altogether in the end. You have granted that a Life of Virtue is upon all Accounts eligible, as most conducive both to the general and particular Good of Mankind: And you allow, that the Beauty of Virtue alone is not a sufficient Motive with Mankind to the Practice of it. This led you to acknowledge, that the Belief of a God wou’d be very useful in the World; and that consequently you shou’d be disposed to admit any reasonable Proof of his Being: Which Point hath been proved, and you have admitted the Proof. If then we admit a Divinity, why not Divine Worship? And if Worship, why not Religion to teach this Worship? And if a Religion, why not the Christian, if a better cannot be assigned, and it be already established by the Laws of our Country, and handed down to us from our Fore-fathers? Shall we believe a God, and not pray to him for future Benefits nor thank him for the past? Neither trust in his Protection, nor love his Goodness, nor praise his Wisdom, nor adore his Power? And if these Things are to be done, can we do them in a Way more suitable to the Dignity of God or Man, than is prescribed by the Christian Religion? ALC. I am not perhaps altogether sure that Religion must be absolutely bad for the Public: But I cannot bear to see Policy and Religion walk hand in hand: I do not like to see Human Rights attached to the Divine: I am for no Pontifex Maximus, such as in ancient or in modern Rome: No High Priest, as in Judaea: No Royal Priests, as in Aegypt and Sparta: No such Things as Dairos of Japan, or Lamas of Tartary.

III.

I knew a late witty Gentleman of our Sect, who was a great Admirer of the ancient Druids. He had a mortal Antipathy to the present established Religion, but used to say he shou’d like well to see the Druids and their Religion restored, as it anciently flourished in Gaul and Britain; for it wou’d be right enough that there shou’d be a Number of contemplative Men set apart to preserve a Knowledge of Arts and Sciences, to educate Youth, and teach Men the Immortality of the Soul and the moral Virtues. Such, said he, were the Druids of old, and I shou’d be glad to see them once more established among us. CRI. How wou’d you like, Alciphron, that Priests shou’d have Power to decide all Controversies, adjudge Property, distribute Rewards and Punishments; that all who did not acquiesce in their Decrees shou’d be excommunicated, held in Abhorrence, excluded from all Honours and Privileges, and deprived of the common Benefit of the Laws; and that now and then, a Number of Lay-men shou’d be crammed together in a Wicker-idol, and burnt for an Offering to their Pagan Gods? How shou’d you like living under such Priests and such a Religion? ALC. Not at all. Such a Situation wou’d by no means agree with Free-thinkers. CRI. And yet such were the Druids and such their Religion, if we may trust Caesar’s Account of them . LYS. I am now convinced more than ever, there ought to be no such Thing as an established Religion of any kind. Certainly all the Nations of the World have been hitherto out of their Wits. Even the Athenians themselves, the wisest and freest People upon Earth, had, I know not what, foolish Attachment to their established Church. They offered it seems a Talent as a Reward to whoever shou’d kill Diagoras the Melian, a Free-thinker of those Times who derided their Mysteries: And Protagoras, another of the same Turn, narrowly escaped being put to Death, for having wrote something that seemed to contradict their received Notions of the Gods. Such was the Treatment our generous Sect met with at Athens. And I make no doubt, but these Druids wou’d have sacrificed many a Holocaust of Free-thinkers. I wou’d not give a single Farthing to exchange one Religion for another. Away with all together, Root and Branch, or you had as good do nothing. No Druids or Priests of any sort for me: I see no occasion for any of them.

IV.

EUPH. What Lysicles saith puts me in mind of the Close of our last Conference, wherein it was agreed, in the following to resume the Point we were then entered upon, to wit, the Use or Benefit of the Christian Religion, which Alciphron expected Crito shou’d make appear. CRI. I am the readier to undertake this Point, because I conceive it to be no difficult one, and that one great Mark of the Truth of Christianity is, in my mind, its Tendency to do good, which seems the North Star to conduct our Judgment in moral Matters, and in all Things of a practic Nature; Moral or practical Truths being ever connected with universal Benefit. But to judge rightly of this Matter, we shou’d endeavour to act like Lysicles upon another Occasion, taking into our View the Sum of Things, and considering Principles as branched forth into Consequences to the utmost Extent we are able. We are not so much to regard the Humour or Caprice, or imaginary Distresses of a few idle Men, whose Conceit may be offended, though their Conscience cannot be wounded; but fairly to consider the true Interest of Individuals as well as of Human Society. Now the Christian Religion, considered as a Fountain of Light, and Joy, and Peace, as a Source of Faith, and Hope, and Charity, (and that it is so will be evident to whoever takes his Notion of it from the Gospel) must needs be a Principle of Happiness and Virtue. And he who sees not, that the destroying the Principles of good Actions must destroy good Actions, sees nothing: And he who, seeing this, shall yet persist to do it, if he be not wicked, who is?

V.

To me it seems the Man can see neither deep nor far, who is not sensible of his own Misery, Sinfulness, and Dependence; who doth not perceive, that this present World is not designed or adapted to make rational Souls happy; who wou’d not be glad of getting into a better State, and who wou’d not be overjoy’d to find, that the Road leading thither was the Love of God and Man, the practising every Virtue, the living reasonably while we are here upon Earth, proportioning our Esteem to the Value of Things, and so using this World as not to abuse it, for this is what Christianity requires. It neither injoyns the Nastiness of the Cynic, nor the Insensibility of the Stoic. Can there be a higher Ambition than to overcome the World, or a wiser than to subdue our selves, or a more comfortable Doctrine than the Remission of Sins, or a more joyful Prospect than that of having our base Nature renewed and assimilated to the Deity, our being made Fellow-citizens with Angels and Sons of God? Did ever Pythagoreans, or Platonists, or Stoics, even in Idea or in Wish, propose to the Mind of Man purer Means or a nobler End? How great a Share of our Happiness depends upon Hope! How totally is this extinguished by the Minute Philosophy! On the other hand, how is it cherished and raised by the Gospel! Let any Man who thinks in earnest but consider these Things, and then say which he thinks deserveth best of Mankind, he who recommends, or he who runs down Christianity? Which he thinks likelier to lead a happy Life, to be a hopeful Son, an honest Dealer, a worthy Patriot, He who sincerely believes the Gospel, or He who believes not one Title of it? He who aims at being a Child of God, or He who is contented to be thought, and to be, one of Epicurus’s Hogs? And in fact do but scan the Characters, and observe the Behaviour of the common sort of Men on both sides: Observe and say which live most agreeably to the Dictates of Reason? How Things shou’d be, the Reason is plain; how they are, I appeal to Fact.

VI.

ALC. It is wonderful to observe how Things change Appearance, as they are viewed in different Lights, or by different Eyes. The Picture, Crito, that I form of Religion is very unlike yours, when I consider how it unmans the Soul, filling it with absurd Reveries and slavish Fears; how it extinguishes the gentle Passions, inspiring a Spirit of Malice, and Rage, and Persecution: When I behold bitter Resentments and unholy Wrath in those very Men, who preach up Meekness and Charity to others. CRI. It is very possible, that Gentlemen of your Sect may think Religion a Subject beneath their Attention; but yet it seems that whoever lets up for opposing any Doctrine, shou’d know what it is he disputes against. Know then, that Religion is the virtuous Mean between Incredulity and Superstition. We do not therefore contend for superstitious Follies, or for the Rage of Bigots. What we plead for is Religion against Profaneness, Law against Confusion, Virtue against Vice, the Hope of a Christian against the Despondency of an Atheist. I will not justify bitter Resentments and unholy Wrath in any Man, much less in a Christian, and least of all in a Clergyman. But if Sallies of Human Passion shou’d sometimes appear even in the best, it will not surprise any one who reflects on the Sarcasms and ill Manners with which they are treated by the Minute Philosophers. For as Cicero somewhere observes, Habet quendam aculeum Contumelia, quem pati prudentes ac viri boni difficillimè possunt. But although you might sometimes observe particular Persons, professing themselves Christians, run into faulty Extremes of any kind through Passion and Infirmity, while Infidels of a more calm and dispassionate Temper shall perhaps behave better. Yet these natural Tendencies on either side prove nothing, either in favour of Infidel Principles, or against Christian. If a Believer doth Evil it is owing to the Man not to his Belief. And if an Infidel doth good it is owing to the Man and not to his Infidelity.

VII.

LYS. To cut this Matter short, I shall borrow an Allusion to Physic, which one of you made use of against our Sect. It will not be denied, that the Clergy pass for Physicians of the Soul, and that Religion is a sort of Medicine which they deal in and administer. If then Souls in great numbers are diseased and lost, how can we think the Physician skilful or his Physic good? It is a common Complaint, that Vice increases, and Men grow daily more and more wicked. If a Shepherd’s Flock be diseased or unsound, who is to blame but the Shepherd, for neglecting or not knowing how to cure them? a Fig therefore for such Shepherds, such Physic, and such Physicians, who like other Mountebanks, with great Gravity and elaborate Harangues put off their Pills to the People, who are never the better for them. EUPH. Nothing seems more reasonable than this Remark, that Men shou’d judge of a Physician, and his Physic by its Effect on the Sick. But Pray, Lysicles, wou’d you judge of a Physician by those Sick, who take his Physic and follow his Prescriptions, or by those who do not? LYS. Doubtless by those who do. EUPH. What shall we say then, if great numbers refuse to take the Physic, or instead of it take Poison of a direct contrary Nature prescribed by others, who make it their Business to discredit the Physician and his Medicines, to hinder Men from using them, and to destroy their Effect by Drugs of their own? Shall the Physician be blamed for the miscarriage of those People? LYS. By no means. EUPH. By a parity of Reason shou’d it not follow, that the Tendency of religious Doctrines ought to be judged of by the Effects which they produce, not upon all who hear them, but upon those only who receive or believe them? LYS. It seems so. EUPH. Therefore to proceed fairly, shall we not judge of the Effects of Religion by the Religious, of Faith by Believers, of Christianity by Christians?

VIII.

LYS. But I doubt these sincere Believers are very few. EUPH. But will it not suffice to justify our Principles, if in proportion to the Numbers which receive them, and the degree of Faith with which they are received, they produce good Effects. Perhaps the number of Believers are not so few as you imagine; and if they were, whose fault is that so much as of those who make it their professed Endeavour to lessen that number? And who are those but the Minute Philosophers? LYS. I tell you it is owing to the Clergy themselves, to the Wickedness and Corruption of Clergymen. EUPH. And who denies but there may be Minute Philosophers even among the Clergy? CRI. In so numerous a Body it is to be presumed there are Men of all sorts. But notwithstanding the cruel Reproaches cast upon that Order by their Enemies, an equal Observer of Men and Things will, if I mistake not, be inclined to think those Reproaches owing as much to other Faults as those of the Clergy, especially if he considers the declamatory manner of those who censure them. EUPH. My Knowledge of the World is too narrow for me to pretend to judge of the Virtue and Merit and liberal Attainments of Men in the several Professions. Besides, I shou’d not care for the odious work of Comparison: But I may venture to say, the Clergy of this Country where I live are by no means a disgrace to it: on the contrary, the People seem much the better for their Example and Doctrine. But supposing the Clergy to be (what all Men certainly are) Sinners and faulty; supposing you might spy out here and there among them even great Crimes and Vices, what can you conclude against the Profession it self from its unworthy Professors, any more than from the Pride, Pedantry, and bad Lines of some Philosophers against Philosophy, or of Lawyers against Law?

IX.

It is certainly right to judge of Principles from their Effects, but then we must know them to be Effects of those Principles. It is the very Method I have observed, with respect to Religion and the Minute Philosophy. And I can honestly aver, that I never knew any Man or Family grow worse in proportion as they grew religious: But I have often observed that Minute Philosophy is the worst thing which can get into a Family, the readiest way to impoverish, divide and disgrace it. ALC. By the same Method of tracing Causes from their Effects, I have made it my Observation, that the Love of Truth, Virtue, and the Happiness of Mankind are specious Pretexts, but not the inward Principles that set Divines at work: Else why shou’d they affect to abuse Human Reason, to disparage natural Religion, to traduce the Philosophers as they universally do? CRI. Not so universally perhaps as you imagine. A Christian, indeed, is for confining Reason within its due Bounds; and so is every reasonable Man. If we are forbid meddling with unprofitable Questions, vain Philosophy, and Science falsly so called, it cannot be thence inferred, that all Inquiries into profitable Questions, useful Philosophy, and true Science, are unlawful. A Minute Philosopher may indeed impute, and perhaps a weak Brother may imagine those Inferences, but Men of Sense will never make them. God is the common Father of Lights; and all Knowledge really such, whether natural or revealed, is derived from the same Source of Light and Truth. To amass together Authorities upon so plain a Point wou’d be needless. It must be owned some Mens attributing too much to Human Reason, hath, as is natural, made others attribute too little to it. But thus much is generally acknowledged, that there is a natural Religion, which may be discovered and proved by the light of Reason, to those who are capable of such Proofs. But it must be withal acknowledged, that Precepts and Oracles from Heaven are incomparably better suited to popular Improvement and the good of Society, than the Reasonings of Philosophers; and accordingly we do not find, that natural or rational Religion ever became the popular national Religion of any Country.

X.

ALC. It cannot be denied, that in all Heathen Countries there have been received under the colour of Religion, a world of Fables and superstitious Rites. But I question whether they were so absur’d and of so bad Influence as is vulgarly represented, since their respective Legislators and Magistrates must, without doubt, have thought them useful. CRI. It were needless to inquire into all the Rites and Notions of the Gentile World. This hath been largely done when it was thought necessary. And whoever thinks it worth while may be easily satisfied about them. But as to the Tendency and Usefulness of the Heathen Religion in general, I beg leave to mention a Remark of St. Augustine’s , who observes that the Heathens in their Religion had no Assemblies for preaching, wherein the People were to be instructed what Duties or Virtues the Gods required, no Place or Means to be taught what Persius exhorts them to learn.

Disciteque ô miseri, & causas cognoscite rerum,

Quid sumus, & quidnam victuri gignimur. —

ALC. This is the true Spirit of the Party, never to allow a Grain of Use or Goodness to any thing out of their own Pale: But we have had learned Men who have done Justice to the Religion of the Gentiles. CRI. We do not deny but there was something useful in the old Religions of Rome and Greece, and some other Pagan Countries. On the contrary, we freely own they produced some good Effects on the People: But then these good Effects were owing to the Truths contained in those false Religions, the truer therefore the more useful. I believe you will find it a hard Matter to produce any useful Truth, any moral Precept, any salutary Principle or Notion in any Gentile System, either of Religion or Philosophy, which is not comprehended in the Christian, and either enforced by stronger Motives, or supported by better Authority, or carried to a higher Point of Perfection.

XI.

Consequently you wou’d have us think our selves a finer People than the ancient Greeks or Romans.CRI. If by finer you mean better, perhaps we are; and if we are not, it is not owing to the Christian Religion, but to the want of it. ALC. You say perhaps we are. I do not pique my self on my reading: But shou’d be very ignorant to be capable of being imposed on in so plain a Point. What! compare Cicero or Brutus to an English Patriot, or Seneca to one of our Parsons! Then that invincible Constancy and Vigour of Mind, that disinterested and noble Virtue, that adorable publick Spirit you so much admire, are things in them so well known, and so different from our Manners, that I know not how to excuse your perhaps. Euphranor, indeed, who passeth his Life in this obscure Corner, may possibly mistake the Characters of our Times, but you who know the World, how cou’d you be guilty of such a Mistake? CRI. O Alciphron, I wou’d by no means detract from the noble Virtue of ancient Heroes: But I observe those great Men were not the Minute Philosophers of their Times; that the best Principles upon which they acted are common to them with Christians, of whom it wou’d be no difficult Matter to assign many Instances, in every kind of Worth and Virtue, publick or private, equal to the most celebrated of the Ancients. Though perhaps their Story might not have been so well told, set off with such fine Lights and colourings of Style, or so vulgarly known and considered by every School-boy. But though it shou’d be granted, that here and there a Greek or Roman Genius, bred up under strict Laws and severe Discipline, animated to public Virtue by Statues, Crowns, Triumphal Arches, and such Rewards and Monuments of great Actions, might attain to a Character and Fame beyond other Men, yet this will prove only, that they had more Spirit and lived under a civil Polity more wisely ordered in certain points than ours; Which advantages of Nature and civil Institution will be no Argument for their Religion or against ours. On the contrary, it seems an invincible Proof of the Power and Excellency of the Christian Religion, that, without the help of those civil Institutions and Incentives to Glory, it shou’d be able to inspire a Phlegmatic People with the noblest Sentiments, and soften the rugged Manners of Northern Boors into Gentleness and Humanity: and that these good Qualities shou’d become National, and rise and fall in proportion to the Purity of our Religion, as it approaches to, or recedes from the Plan laid down in the Gospel.

XII.

To make a right Judgment of the Effects of the Christian Religion, let us take a survey of the prevailing Notions and Manners of this very Country where we live, and compare them with those of our Heathen Predecessors. ALC. I have heard much of the glorious Light of the Gospel, and shou’d be glad to see some Effects of it in my own dear Country, which, by the bye, is one of the most corrupt and profligate upon Earth, notwithstanding the boasted Purity of our Religion. But it wou’d look mean and diffident, to affect a Comparison with the barbarous Heathen, from whence we drew our Original: If you wou’d do Honour to your Religion, dare to make it with the most renowned Heathens of Antiquity. CRI. It is a common Prejudice, to despise the present and over-rate remote Times and Things. Something of this seems to enter into the Judgments Men make of the Greeks and Romans. For though it must be allowed, those Nations produced some noble Spirits and great Patterns of Virtue: yet upon the whole, it seems to me they were much inferior in point of real Virtue and good Morals, even to this corrupt and Profligate Nation, as you are now pleased to call it in dishonour to our Religion; however you may think fit to characterize it, when you wou’d do honour to the Minute Philosophy. This, I think, will be plain to any one, who shall turn off his Eyes from a few shining Characters, to view the general Manners and Customs of those People. Their insolent treatment of Captives, even of the highest Rank and softer Sex, their unnatural exposing of their own Children, their bloody Gladiatorian Spectacles, compared with the common Notions of Englishmen, are to me a plain Proof, that our Minds are much softened by Christianity. Cou’d any thing be more unjust, than the condemning a young Lady to the most infamous Punishment and Death for the guilt of her Father, or a whole Family of Slaves, perhaps some hundreds for a Crime committed by one? Or more Abominable than their Bacchanals and unbridled Lusts of every kind? which, notwithstanding all that has been done by Minute Philosophers to debauch the Nation, and their successful Attempts on some part of it, have not yet been matched among us, at least not in every circumstance of Impudence and Effrontery. While the Romans were poor, they were temperate; but, as they grew rich, they became luxurious to a degree that is hardly believed or conceived by us. It cannot be denied, the old Roman Spirit was a great one. But it is as certain, there have been numberless Examples of the most resolute and clear Courage in Britons, and in general from a Religious Cause. Upon the whole, it seems an instance of the greatest Blindness and Ingratitude, that we do not see and own the exceeding great Benefits of Christianity, which, to omit higher considerations, hath so visibly softened, polished, and embellished our Manners.

XIII.

ALC. O Crito, we are alarmed at Cruelty in a foreign Shape, but over-look it in a familiar one. Else how is it possible that you shou’d not see the Inhumanity of that barbarous Custom of Duelling, a thing avowed and tolerated and even reputable among us? Or that seeing this, you shou’d suppose our Englishmen of a more gentle disposition than the old Romans, who were altogether Strangers to it? CRI. I will by no means make an Apology for every Goth that walks the Streets, with a determined purpose to murder any Man who shall but spit in his Face, or give him the Lye. Nor do I think the Christian Religion is in the least answerable, for a practice so directly opposite to its Precepts, and which obtains only among the idle part of the Nation, your Men of Fashion; who, instead of Law, Reason or Religion, are governed by Fashion. Be pleased to consider that what may be, and truly is, a most scandalous reproach to a Christian Country, may be none at all to the Christian Religion: For the Pagan encouraged Men in several Vices, but the Christian in none. ALC. Give me leave to observe, that what you now say is foreign to the purpose. For the question, at present, is not concerning the respective tendencies of the Pagan and the Christian Religions, but concerning our Manners, as actually compared with those of ancient Heathens, who I aver had no such barbarous Custom as Duelling. CRI. And I aver that, bad as this is, they had a worse; and that was Poisoning. By which we have reason to think there were many more Lives destroyed, than by this Gothic Crime of Duelling: Inasmuch as it extended to all Ages, Sexes, and Characters, and as its Effects were more secret and unavoidable; and as it had more Temptations, Interest as well as Passion, to recommend it to wicked Men. And for the Fact, not to waste time, I refer you to the Roman Authors themselves. LYS. It is very true: Duelling is not so general a Nusance as Poisoning, nor of so base a Nature. This Crime, if it be a Crime, is in a fair way to keep its ground in spight of the Law and the Gospel. The Clergy never preach against it, because themselves never suffer by it: and the Man of honour must not appear against the means of vindicating Honour. CRI. Though it be remarked by some of your Sect, that the Clergy are not used to preach against Duelling, yet I neither think the Remark it self just, nor the Reason assigned for it. In effect, one half of their Sermons, all that is said of Charity, Brotherly Love, Forbearance, Meekness, and Forgiving Injuries is directly against this wicked Custom; by which the Clergy themselves are so far from never suffering, that perhaps they will be found, all things considered, to suffer oftner than other Men. LYS. How do you make this appear? CRI. An Observer of Mankind may remark two kinds of Bully, the Fighting and the Tame, both public Nusances, the former (who is the more dangerous Animal, but by much the less common of the two) employs himself wholly and solely against the Laity, while the tame Species exert their Talents upon the Clergy. The Qualities constituent of this tame Bully are natural Rudeness joined with a delicate sense of Danger. For, you must know, the force of inbred Insolence and ill Manners is not diminished, though it acquire a new Determination, from the fashionable custom of calling Men to account for their Behaviour. Hence you may often see one of these tame Bullies ready to burst with Pride and ill Humour, which he dares not vent till a Parson has come in the way to his Relief. And the Man of Raillery, who wou’d as soon bite off his Tongue, as break a jest on the profession of Arms in the presence of a military Man, shall instantly brighten up, and assume a familiar Air with Religion and the Church before Ecclesiastics. Dorcon, who passeth for a Poltron and stupid in all other Company, and really is so, when he is got among Clergymen, affects a quite opposite Character. And many Dorcons there are, which owe their Wit and Courage to this Passive Order.

XIV.

ALC. But, to return to the point in hand, can you deny, the old Romans were as famous for Justice and Integrity, as Men in these days for the contrary Qualities? CRI. The Character of the Romans is not to be taken from the Sentiments of Tully, or Cato’s Actions, or a shining passage here and there in their History, but from the prevailing tenor of their Lives and Notions. Now if they and our modern Britons are weighed in this same equal balance, you will, if I mistake not, appear to have been prejudiced in favour of the old Romans against your own Country, probably because it professeth Christianity. Whatever instances of Fraud or Injustice may be seen in Christians carry their own censure with them, in the care that is taken to conceal them, and the shame that attends their discovery. There is, even at this day, a sort of Modesty in all our public Councils and Deliberations. And I believe, the boldest of our Minute Philosophers wou’d hardly undertake in a popular Assembly, to propose any thing paralled to the Rape of the Sabines, the most unjust usage of Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus, or the ungrateful treatment of Camillus, which, as a learned Father observes, were instances of Iniquity agreed to by the public body of the Romans. And if Rome in her early days were capable of such flagrant Injustice, it is most certain she did not mend her Manners, as she grew great in Wealth and Empire, having produced Monsters in every kind of Wickedness, as far exceeding other Men, as they surpassed them in power. I freely acknowledge, the Christian Religion hath not had the same influence upon the Nation, that it wou’d in case it had been always professed in its Purity, and cordially believed by all Men. But I will venture to say, that if you take the Roman History from one end to the other, and impartially compare it with our own, you will neither find them so good, nor your Countrymen so bad as you imagine. On the contrary an indifferent Eye may, I verily think, perceive a vein of Charity and Justice, the effect of Christian Principles, run through the latter; which, though not equally discernible in all parts, yet discloseth it self sufficiently to make a wide difference upon the whole in spight of the general Appetites and Passions of Human Nature, as well as of the particular hardness and roughness of the block out of which we were hewn. And it is observable (what the Roman Authors themselves do often suggest) that, even their Virtues and magnanimous Actions rose and fell with a sense of Providence, and a future State, and a Philosophy the nearest to the Christian Religion.

XV.

Crito having spoke thus, paused. But Alciphron addressing himself to Euphranor and me, said, It is natural for Men, according to their several Educations and Prejudices, to form contrary Judgments upon the same things, which they view in very different lights. Crito, for instance, imagines that none but Salutary Effects proceed from Religion: on the other hand, if you appeal to the general Experience and Observation of other Men, you shall find it grown into a Proverb that Religion is the root of evil.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.

And this not only among Epicureans or other ancient Heathens, but among Moderns speaking of the Christian Religion. Now methinks it is unreasonable to oppose against the general concurring Opinion of the World, the Observation of a particular Person, or particular set of Zealots, whose Prejudice sticks close to them, and ever mixeth with their Judgment; and who read, collect, and observe with an Eye not to discover the Truth, but to defend their Prejudice. CRI. Though I cannot think with Alciphron, yet I must own, I admire his Address and Dexterity in Argument. Popular and general Opinion is by him represented, on certain occasions, to be a sure mark of Error. But when it serves his ends that it shou’d seem otherwise, he can as easily make it a Character of Truth. But it will by no means follow, that a profane Proverb used by the Friends and admired Authors of a Minute Philosopher, must therefore be a received Opinion, much less a Truth grounded on the Experience and Observation of Mankind. Sadness may spring from Guilt or Superstition, and Rage from Bigotry, but Darkness might as well be supposed the natural Effect of Sunshine, as sullen and furious Passions to proceed from the glad Tidings and divine Precepts of the Gospel. What is the Sum and Substance, Scope and End of Christ’s Religion, but the Love of God and Man? To which all other Points and Duties are relative and subordinate, as Parts or Means, as Signs, Principles, Motives, or Effects. Now I wou’d fain know, how it is possible for Evil or Wickedness of any kind to spring from such a source. I will not pretend, there are no evil Qualities in Christians, nor good in Minute Philosophers. But this I affirm, that whatever evil is in us, our Principles certainly lead to Good; and whatever good there may be in you, it is most certain your Principles lead to evil.

XVI.

ALC. It must be owned there is a fair outside, and many plausible things may be said, for the Christian Religion taken simply as it lies in the Gospel. But it is the Observation of one of our great Writers, that the first Christian Preachers very cunningly began with the fairest Face and the best moral Doctrines in the World. It was all Love, Charity, Meekness, Patience and so forth. But when by this means they had drawn over the World and got Power, they soon changed their Appearance, and shewed Cruelty, Ambition, Avarice and every bad quality. CRI. That is to say, some Men very cunningly preached and underwent a world of hardships, and laid down their lives to propagate the best Principles and the best Morals, to the end that others some Centuries after might reap the benefit of bad ones. Whoever may be cunning, there is not much Cunning in the maker of this Observation. ALC. And yet ever since this Religion hath appeared in the World, we have had eternal Feuds, Factions, Massacres and Wars, the very reverse of that Hymn with which it is introduced in the Gospel: Glory be to God on high, on Earth Peace, Good-will towards Men. CRI. This I will not deny. I will even own that the Gospel and the Christian Religion have been often the Pretexts for these Evils; but it will not thence follow they were the Cause. On the contrary it is plain they cou’d not be the real proper Cause of these Evils, because a rebellious, proud, revengeful, quarrelsome Spirit is directly opposite to the whole Tenor and most express Precepts of Christianity: a Point so clear that I shall not prove it. And secondly, because all those Evils you mention were as frequent, nay much more frequent, before the Christian Religion was known in the World. They are the common Product of the Passions and Vices of Mankind, which are sometimes covered with the Masque of Religion by wicked Men, having the Form of Godliness without the Power of it. This Truth seems so plain, that I am surprised how any Man of Sense, Knowledge, and Candour can make a doubt of it.

XVII.

Take but a view of Heathen Rome; what a Scene is there of Faction and Fury and civil Rage? Let any Man consider the perpetual Feuds between the Patricians and Plebeians, the bloody and inhuman Factions of Marius and Sylla, Cinna and Octavius, and the vast havoc of Mankind, during the two famous Triumvirates. To be short, let any Man of common Candour and common Sense but cast an Eye, from one end to the other of the Roman Story, and behold that long Scene of Seditions, Murders, Massacres, Proscriptions and Desolations of every kind, enhansed by every cruel circumstance of Rage, Rapine and Revenge, and then say, whether those Evils were introduced into the World with the Christian Religion, or whether they are not less frequent now than before? ALC. The ancient Romans, it must be owned, had a high and fierce Spirit, which produced eager Contentions and very bloody Catastrophes. The Greeks, on the other hand, were a polite and gentle sort of Men, softened by Arts and Philosophy. It is impossible to think of the little States and Cities of Greece, without wishing to have lived in those times, without admiring their Policy and eavying their Happiness. CRI. Men are apt to consider the dark sides of what they possess, and the bright ones of things out of their reach. A fine Climate, elegant Taste, polite Amusements, love of Liberty, and a most ingenious inventive Spirit for Arts and Sciences were indisputable Prerogatives of ancient Greece. But as for Peace and Quietness, Gentleness and Humanity, I think we have plainly the advantage: For those envied Cities composed of gentle Greeks were not without their Factions, which persecuted each other with such Treachery, Rage, and Malice, that in respect of them our factious Folk are meer Lambs. To be convinced of this Truth, you need only look into Thucydides, where you will find those Cities in general involved in such bitter Factions, as for Fellow-Citizens without the formalities of War, to murder one another, even in their Senate-houses and their Temples, no regard being had to Merit, Rank, Obligation, or Nearness of Blood. And if Human Nature boiled up to so vehement a pitch in the politest People, what wonder that savage Nations shou’d scalp, roast, torture, and destroy each other, as they are known to do? It is therefore plain, that without Religion there wou’d not be wanting Pretexts for Quarrels and Debates; all which can very easily be accounted for by the natural Infirmities and Corruption of Men. It wou’d not perhaps be so easy to account for the Blindness of those, who impute the most hellish Effects to the most divine Principle, if they cou’d be supposed in earnest, and to have considered the Point. One may daily see ignorant and prejudiced Men make the most absurd Blunders: But that Free-thinkers, Divers to the Bottom of Things, Fair Inquirers, and Openers of Eyes should be capable of such a gross Mistake, is what one would not expect.

XVIII.

ALC. The rest of Mankind we cou’d more easily give up: but as for the Greeks, Men of the most refined Genius express an high esteem of them, not only on account of those Qualities which you think fit to allow them, but also for their Virtues. CRI. I shall not take upon me to say how far some Men may be prejudiced against their Country, or whether others may not be prejudiced in favour of it. But upon the fullest and most equal Observation that I am able to make, it is my opinion, that, if by Virtue is meant Truth, Justice, Gratitude, there is incomparably more Virtue, now at this day in England, than at any time cou’d be found in ancient Greece. Thus much will be allowed, that we know few Countries, if any, where Men of eminent Worth, and famous for deserving well of the Public, met with harder Fate, and were more ungratefully treated than in the most polite and learned of the Grecian States. Though Socrates it must be owned wou’d not allow, that those Statesmen, by adorning the City, augmenting the Fleet, or extending the Commerce of Athens, deserved well of their Country; or cou’d with justice complain of the ungrateful Returns made by their Fellow-Citizens, whom, while they were in power, they had taken no care to make better Men, by improving and cultivating their Minds with the Principles of Virtue, which if they had done, they needed not to have feared their Ingratitude. If I were to declare my opinion, what gave the chief Advantage to Greeks and Romans and other Nations, which have made the greatest Figure in the World, I shou’d be apt to think it was a peculiar Reverence for their respective Laws and Institutions, which inspired them with Steadiness and Courage, and that hearty generous Love of their Country, by which they did not meerly understand a certain Language or Tribe of Men, much less a particular spot of Earth, but included a certain System of Manners, Customs, Notions, Rites, and Laws Civil and Religious. ALC. Oh! I perceive your Drift, you wou’d have us reverence the Laws and religious Institutions of our Country. But herein we beg to be excused, if we do not think fit to imitate the Greeks, or to be governed by any Authority whatsoever. But to return: As for Wars and Factions, I grant they ever were and ever will be in the World upon some pretext or other, as long as Men are Men.

XIX.

But there is a sort of War and Warriors peculiar to Christendom, which the Heathens had no notion of: I mean Disputes in Theology and Polemical Divines, which the World hath been wonderfully pestered with: these Teachers of Peace, Meekness, Concord, and what not! if you take their word for it: But, if you cast any eye upon their Practice, you find them to have been in all Ages the most contentious, quarrelsome, disagreeing Crew that ever appeared upon Earth. To observe the Skill and Sophistry, the Zeal and Eagerness, with which those Barbarians, the School Divines, split Hairs and contest about Chimaera’s, gives me more Indignation, as being more absurd and a greater scandal to human Reason, than all the ambitious Intrigues, Cabals, and Politics of the Court of Rome. CRI. If Divines are quarrelsome, that is not so far forth as Divine, but as Undivine and Unchristian. Justice is a good thing; and the Art of Healing is excellent; nevertheless in the administring of Justice or Physic Men may be wronged or poisoned. But as Wrong cannot be Justice, or the Effect of Justice, so Poison cannot be Medicine or the Effect of Medicine, so neither can Pride or Strife be Religion or the effect of Religion. Having premised this, I acknowledge, you may often see hot-headed Bigots engage themselves in religious as well as civil Parties, without being of credit or service to either. And as for the Schoolmen in particular, I do not in the least think the Christian Religion concerned in the Defence of them, their Tenets, or their Method of handling them: but, whatever futility there may be in their Notions, or inelegancy in their Language, in pure justice to Truth one must own, they neither banter nor rail nor declaim in their Writings, and are so far from shewing Fury or Passion, that perhaps an impartial Judge will think, the Minute Philosophers are by no means to be compared with them, for keeping close to the Point, or for Temper and good Manners. But after all, if Men are puzzled, wrangle, talk nonsense, and quarrel about Religion, so they do about Law, Physic, Politics, and every thing else of moment. I ask whether in these Professions, or in any other, where men have refined and abstracted, they do not run into Disputes, Chicane, Nonsense, and Contradictions, as well as in Divinity? And yet this doth not hinder but there may be many excellent Rules, and just Notions, and useful Truths in all those Professions. In all Disputes human Passions too often mix themselves, in proportion as the Subject is conceived to be more or less important. But we ought not to confound the Cause of Men with the Cause of God, or make Human Follies an Objection to Divine Truths. It is easy to distinguish what looks like Wisdom from above, and what proceeds from the passion and weakness of Men. This is so clear a Point, that one wou’d be tempted to think, the not doing it was an Effect, not of Ignorance, but, of something worse.

XX.

The Conduct we object to Minute Philosophers is a natural consequence of their Principles. Whatsoever they can reproach us with is an Effect, not of our Principles, but of Human Passion and Frailty. ALC. This is admirable. So we must no longer object to Christians the absurd Contentions of Councils, the Cruelty of Inquisitions, the Ambition and Usurpations of Churchmen. CRI. You may object them to Christians but not to Christianity. If the Divine Author of our Religion and his Disciples have sowed a good Seed; and together with this good Seed, the Enemies of his Gospel (among whom are to be reckoned the Minute Philosophers of all Ages) have sowed bad Seeds, whence spring Tares and Thistles; is it not evident, these bad Weeds cannot be imputed to the good Seed, or to those who sowed it? Whatever you do or can object against Ecclesiastical Tyranny, Usurpation, or Sophistry, may, without any blemish or disadvantage to Religion, be acknowledged by all true Christians; provided still that you impute those wicked effects to their true Cause, not blaming any Principles or Persons for them, but those that really produce or justify them. Certainly, as the Interests of Christianity are not to be supported by unchristian Methods, whenever these are made use of, it must be supposed there is some other latent Principle which sets them at work. If the very Court of Rome hath been known, from Motives of Policy, to oppose settling the Inquisition in a Kingdom, where the secular Power hath endeavoured to introduce it in spight of that Court : We may well suppose, that elsewhere Factions of State, and political Views of Princes, have given birth to Transactions seemingly religious, wherein at bottom neither Religion, nor Church, nor Churchmen, were at all consider’d. As no Man of common Sense and Honesty will engage in a general Desence of Ecclesiastics, so I think no Man of common Candour can condemn them in general. Wou’d you think it reasonable, to blame all Statesmen, Lawyers, or Soldiers, for the Faults committed by those of their Profession, though in other Times, or in other Countries, and influenced by other Maxims and other Discipline? And if not, why do you measure with one Rule to the Clergy, and another to the Laity? Surely the best Reason that can be given for this is Prejudice. Shou’d any Man rake together all the Mischiefs that have been committed in all Ages and Nations, by Soldiers and Lawyers, you wou’d, I suppose, conclude from thence, not that the State shou’d be deprived of those useful Professions, but only that their Exorbitances shou’d be guarded against and punished. If you took the same equitable Course with the Clergy, there wou’d indeed be less to be said against you; but then you wou’d have much less to say. This plain obvious Consideration, if every one who read considered, wou’d lessen the Credit of your Declaimers. ALC. But when all is said that can be said, it must move a Man’s Indignation to see reasonable Creatures, under the Notion of Study and Learning, employ’d in reading and writing so many voluminous Tracts, de lanâ caprinâ. CRI. I shall not undertake the Vindication of Theological Writings, a general Defence, being as needless as a general Charge is groundless. Only let them speak for themselves; and let no Man condemn them upon the Word of a Minute Philosopher. But we will imagine the very worst, and suppose a wrangling Pedant in Divinity disputes and ruminates and writes upon a refined Point, as useless and unintelligible as you please. Suppose this same Person bred a Layman, might he not have employ’d himself in tricking Bargains, vexatious Law-suits, Factions, Seditions, and such like Amusements, with much more Prejudice to the Public? Suffer then curious Wits to spin Cobwebs; where is the hurt? ALC. The Mischief is, what Men want in light they commonly make up in Heat: Zeal, and ill Nature, being Weapons constantly exerted by the Partisans, as well as Champions, on either Side: And those perhaps not mean Pedants or Book-worms. You shall often see even the learned and eminent Divine lay himself out in explaining Things inexplicable, or contend for a barren Point of Theory, as if his Life, Liberty, or Fortune were at stake. CRI. No doubt all Points in Divinity are not of equal Moment. Some may be too fine spun, and others have more Stress laid on them than they deserve. Be the Subject what it will, you shall often observe that a Point by being controverted, singled out, examined, and nearly inspected, groweth considerable to the same Eye, that, perhaps, wou’d have overlooked it in a large and comprehensive View. Nor is it an uncommon thing, to behold Ignorance and Zeal united in Men, who are born with a Spirit of Party, though the Church or Religion have in Truth but small Share in it. Nothing is easier than to make a Caricatura (as the Painters call it) of any Profession upon Earth: But at bottom, there will be found nothing so strange in all this Charge upon the Clergy, as the Partiality of those who censure them, in supposing the common Defects of Mankind peculiar to their Order, or the Effect of religious Principles. ALC. Other Folks may dispute or squabble as they please, and no Body mind them; but it seems, these venerable Squabbles of the Clergy pass for Learning, and interest Man-kind. To use the Words of the most ingenious Characterizer of our Times,

A Ring is made, and Readers gather in abundance. Every one takes Party and encourages his own Side. This shall be my Champion! This Man for my Money! Well hit on our Side! Again a good Stroke! There he was even with him! Have at him the next Bout! Excellent Sport!

CRI. Methinks I trace the Man of Quality and Breeding in this delicate Satyr, which so politely ridicules those Arguments, Answers, Defences, and Replications which the Press groans under. ALC. To the infinite waste of Time and Paper, and all the while no Body is one whit the wiser. And who indeed can be the wiser for reading Books upon Subjects quite out of the way, incomprehensible, and most wretchedly written? What Man of Sense or Breeding wou’d not abhor the Infection of prolix Pulpit Eloquence, or of that dry, formal, pedantic, stiff, and clumsy Style which smells of the Lamp and the College.

XXI.

They who have the Weakness to reverence the Universities as Seats of Learning, must needs think this a strange Reproach; but it is a very just one. For the most ingenious Men are now agreed, that they are only Nurseries of Prejudice, Corruption, Barbarism, and Pedantry. LYS. For my part, I find no Fault with Universities. All I know is, that I had the spending three hundred Pounds a Year in one of them, and think it the chearfullest time of my Life. As for their Books and Style I had not leisure to mind them. CRI. Whoever hath a mind to weed will never want work; and he that shall pick out bad Books on every Subject will soon fill his Library. I do not know what Theological Writings Alciphron and his Friends may be conversant in; but I will venture to say, one may find among our English Divines many Writers, who for compass of Learning, weight of Matter, Strength of Argument, and Purity of Style, are not inferiour to any in our Language. It is not my Design to apologize for the Universities: whatever is amiss in them (and what is there perfect among Men?) I heartily wish amended. But I dare affirm, because I know it to be true, that any impartial Observer, although they shou’d not come up to what in Theory he might wish or imagine, will nevertheless find them much superior to those that in Fact are to be found in other Countries, and far beyond the mean Picture that is drawn of them by Minute Philosophers. It is natural for those to rail most at Places of Education, who have profited least by them. Weak and fond Parents will also readily impute to a wrong Cause, those Corruptions themselves have occasion’d, by allowing their Children more Money than they knew how to spend innocently. And too often a Gentleman who has been idle at the College, and kept idle Company, will judge of a whole University from his own Cabal. ALC. Crito mistakes the Point. I vouch the Authority, not of a Dunce or a Rake or absurd Parent, but of the most consummate Critic this Age has produced. This great Man characterizeth Men of the Church and Universities with the finest Touches and most masterly Pencil. What do you think he calls them? EUPH. What? ALC. Why, the black Tribe, Magicians, Formalists, Pedants, bearded Boys, and, having sufficiently derided and exploded them and their mean ungenteel Learning, he sets most admirable Models of his own for good Writing: And it must be acknowledged they are the finest things in our Language; as I cou’d easily convince you, for I am never without something of that noble Writer about me. EUPH. He is then a noble Writer. ALC. I tell you he is a Nobleman. EUPH. But a Nobleman who writes is one thing, and a noble Writer another. ALC. Both Characters are coincident, as you may see.

XXII.

 Upon which Alciphron pulled a Treatise out of his Pocket, entitled a Soliloquy or Advice to an Author. Wou’d you behold, said he, looking round upon the Company, a noble Specimen of fine Writing; do but dip into this Book: which Crito opening read verbatim as follows .

‘Where then are the Pleasures which Ambition promises

‘And Love affords? How’s the gay World enjoy’d?

‘Or are those to be esteem’d no Pleasures

‘Which are lost by Dulness and Inaction?

‘But Indolence is the highest Pleasure.

‘To live and not to feel! To feel no Trouble.

‘What Good then? Life it self. And is

‘This properly to live? is sleeping Life?

‘Is this what I shou’d study to prolong?

‘Here the

‘Fantastic Tribe it self seems scandaliz’d.

‘A Civil War begins: The major Part

‘Of the capricious Dames do range themselves

‘On Reason’s Side,

‘And declare against the languid Siren.

‘Ambition blushes at the offer’d Sweet.

‘Conceit and Vanity take superior Airs.

‘Ev’n Luxury her self in her polite

‘And elegant Humour reproves th’ Apostate

‘Sister.

‘And marks her as an Alien to true Pleasure.

‘Away thou

‘Drowsy Phantome! Haunt me no more for I

‘Have learned from better than thy Sisterhood

‘That Life and Happiness consist in Action

‘And Employment.

‘But here a busy Form sollicits us,

‘Active, Industrious, Watchful and despising

‘Pains and Labour. She wears the serious

‘Countenance of Virtue, but with Features

‘Of Anxiety and Disquiet.

‘What is’t she mutters? What looks she on with

‘Such Admiration and Astonishment?

‘Bags! Coffers! Heaps of shining Metal! What?

‘For the service of Luxury? For her?

‘These Preparations? Art thou then her Friend,

‘Grave Fancy! Is it for her thou toilest?

‘No, but for Provision against Want.

But Luxury apart! tell me now,

Hast thou not already a Competence?

’Tis good to be secure against the Fear

Of starving. Is there then no Death but this?

No other Passage out of Life? Are other Doors

Secur’d if this be bar’d? Say Avarice!

Thou emptiest of Phantoms, is it not vile

Cowardice thou serv’st? what further have I then

To do with thee (thou doubly vile Dependent)

When once I have dismist thy Patroness,

And despised her threats?

Thus I contend with Fancy and Opinion.

Euphranor, having heard thus far, cried out: What! will you never have done with your Poetry? another time may serve: But why shou’d we break off our Conference to read a Play? You are mistaken, it is no Play nor Poetry, replied Alciphron, but a famous modern Critic moralizing in Prose. You must know this great Man hath (to use his own Words) revealed a Grand Arcanum to the World, having instructed Mankind in what he calls Mirrour-writing, Self-discoursing Practice, and Author Practice, and shew’d

That by virtue of an intimate Recess, we may discover a certain Duplicity of Soul, and divide our Self into two Parties, or (as he varies the Phrase) practically form the Dual Number.

In consequence whereof, he hath found out that a Man may argue with himself, and not only with himself, but also with Notions, Sentiments, and Vices, which by a marvellous Prosopopoeia he converts into so many Ladies, and so converted, he confutes and confounds them in a Divine Strain. Can any thing be finer, bolder, or more sublime? EUPH. It is very wonderful. I thought indeed you had been reading a Piece of a Tragedy. Is this he who despiseth our Universities, and sets up for reforming the Style and Taste of the Age? ALC. The very same. This is the admired Critic of our Times. Nothing can stand the Test of his correct Judgment, which is equally severe to Poets and Parsons.

The British Muses (saith this great Man) lisp as in their Cradles: and their stammering Tongues, which nothing but Youth and Rawness can excuse, have hitherto spoken in wretched Pun and Quibble. Our Dramatic Shakespear, our Fletcher, Johnson, and our Epique Milton preserve this Style. And, according to him, even our later Authors aiming at a false Sublime, entertain our raw Fancy and unpractised Ear, which has not yet had leisure to form it self, and become truly musical.

EUPH. Pray what Effect may the Lessons of this great Man, in whose Eyes our learned Professors are but bearded Boys, and our most celebrated Wits but wretched Punsters, have had upon the Public? Hath he rubbed off the College Rust, cured the rudeness and rawness of our Authors, and reduced them to his own Attic Standard? Do they aspire to his true Sublime, or imitate his chaste unaffected Style? ALC. Doubtless the Taste of the Age is much mended: in proof whereof his Writings are universally admired. When our Author published this Treatise, he foresaw the public Taste wou’d improve apace; that Arts and Letters wou’d grow to great perfection; that there wou’d be a happy Birth of Genius: of all which things he spoke, as he saith himself, in a prophetic Style. CRI. And yet, notwithstanding the prophetical Predictions of this Critic, I do not find any Science that throve among us of late, so much as the Minute Philosophy. In this kind, it must be confessed, we have had many notable Productions. But whether they are such Master-pieces for good Writing, I leave to be determined by their Readers.

XXIII.

In the mean time, I must beg to be excused, if I cannot believe your great Man on his bare word; when he wou’d have us think, that Ignorance and ill Taste are owing to the Christian Religion or the Clergy, it being my sincere Opinion, that whatever Learning or Knowledge we have among us, is derived from that Order. If those, who are so sagacious at discovering a Mote in other Eyes, wou’d but purge their own, I believe they might easily see this Truth. For what but Religion cou’d kindle and preserve a Spirit towards Learning, in such a Northern rough People? Greece produced Men of active and subtile Genius. The public Conventions and Aemulations of their Cities forwarded that Genius: And their natural Curiosity was amused and excited by learned Conversations, in their public Walks and Gardens and Porticos. Our Genius leads to Amusements of a grosser kind: we breathe a grosser and a colder Air: and that Curiosity which was general in the Athenians, and the gratifying of which was their chief Recreation, is among our People of Fashion treated like Affectation, and as such banished from polite Assemblies and places of Resort; and without doubt wou’d in a little Time be banished the Country, if it were not for the great Reservoirs of Learning, where those Formalists, Pedants, and bearded Boys, as your profound Critic calls them, are maintained by the Liberality and Piety of our Predecessors. For it is as evident that Religion was the Cause of those Seminaries, as it is that they are the Cause or Source of all the Learning and Taste which is to be found, even in those very Men who are the declared Enemies of our Religion and public Foundations. Every one, who knows any thing, knows we are indebted for our Learning to the Greek and Latin Tongues. This those severe Censors will readily grant. Perhaps they may not be so ready to grant, what all Men must see, that we are indebted for those Tongues to our Religion. What else cou’d have made foreign and dead Languages in such request among us? What cou’d have kept in being and handed them down to our times, through so many dark Ages in which the World was wasted and disfigured by Wars and Violence? What, but a regard to the Holy Scriptures, and Theological Writings of the Fathers and Doctors of the Church? And in fact, do we not find that the Learning of those Times was solely in the Hands of Ecclesiastics, that they alone lighted the Lamp in succession one from another, and transmitted it down to After-ages; and that ancient Books were collected and preserved in their Colleges and Seminaries, when all Love and Remembrance of polite Arts and Studies was extinguished among the Laity, whose Ambition intirely turned to Arms?

XXIV.

ALC. There is, I must needs say, one sort of Learning undoubtedly of Christian Original, and peculiar to the Universities; where our Youth spend several Years in acquiring that mysterious jargon of Scholasticism; than which there cou’d never have been contrived a more effectual Method, to perplex and confound Human Understanding. It is true, Gentlemen are untaught by the World what they have been taught at the College: but then their Time is doubly lost. CRI. But what if this scholastic Learning was not of Christian but of Mahomeran Original, being derived from the Arabs? And what if this Grievance of Gentlemen’s spending several Years in learning and unlearning this Jargon, be all Grimace and a Specimen only of the truth and candour of certain Minute Philosophers, who raise great Invectives from slight occasions, and judge too often without inquiring. Surely it wou’d be no such deplorable loss of Time, if a young Gentleman spent a few Months upon that so much despised and decried Art of Logic, a Surfeit of which is by no means the prevailing Nusance of this Age. It is one thing to waste one’s Time in learning and unlearning the barbarous Terms, wiredrawn Distinctions, and prolix Sophistry of the Schoolmen, and another to attain some exactness in Defining and Arguing: Things perhaps not altogether beneath the Dignity even of a Minute Philosopher. There was indeed a Time, when Logic was considered as its own Object: And that Art of Reasoning, instead of being transferred to Things turned altogether upon Words and Abstractions; which produced a sort of Leprosy in all parts of Knowledge, corrupting and converting them into hollow verbal Disputations in a most impure Dialect. But those Times are passed; and that, which had been cultivated as the principal Learning for some Ages, is now considered in another Light, and by no means makes that Figure in the Universities, or bears that Part in the Studies of young Gentlemen educated there, which is pretended by those admirable Reformers of Religion and Learning, the Minute Philosophers.

XXV.

But who were they that encouraged and produced the Restoration of Arts and polite Learning? What Share had the Minute Philosophers in this Affair? Matthias Corvinus King of Hungary, Alphonsus King of Naples, Cosmus de Medicis, Picus of Mirandula, and other Princes and great Men, famous for Learning themselves, and for encouraging it in others with a munificent Liberality, were neither Turks nor Gentiles nor Minute Philosophers. Who was it that transplanted and revived the Greek Language and Authors, and with them all polite Arts and Literature in the West? Was it not chiefly Bessarion a Cardinal, Marcus Musurus an Archbishop, Theodore Gaza a private Clergyman? Has there been a greater and more renowned Patron, and Restorer of elegant Studies in every kind, since the days of Augustus Caesar, than Leo the tenth Pope of Rome? Did any Writers approach the Purity of the Classics nearer than the Cardinals Bembus and Sadoletus, or than the Bishops Jovius and Vida? not to mention an endless Number of ingenious Ecclesiastics, who flourished on the other side of the Alpes in the Golden Age (as the Italians call it) of Leo the Tenth, and wrote, both in their own Language and the Latin, after the best Models of Antiquity. It is true, this first Recovery of Learning preceded the Reformation, and lighted the way to it: But the Religious Controversies, which ensued, did wonderfully propagate and improve it in all Parts of Christendom. And surely, the Church of England is, at least, as well calculated for the Encouragement of Learning as that of Rome. Experience confirms this Observation; and I believe the Minute Philosophers will not be so partial to Rome as to deny it, ALC. It is impossible your account of Learning beyond the Alpes shou’d be true. The noble Critic in my hands, having complimented the French, to whom he allows some good Authors, asserts of other Foreigners, particularly the Italians,

That they may be reckoned no better than the Corrupters of true Learning and Erudition.

CRI. With some sorts of Critics, Dogmatical Censures and Conclusions are not always the result of perfect Knowledge or exact Inquiry: And if they harangue upon Taste, truth of Art, a just Piece, grace of Style, Attic Elegance and such Topics, they are to be understood only as those that would fain talk themselves into Reputation for Courage. To hear Thrasymachus speak of Resentment, Duels, and point of Honour, one wou’d think him ready to burst with Valour. LYS. Whatever Merit this Writer may have as a Demolisher, I always thought he had very little as a Builder. It is natural for careless Writers to run into Faults they never think of: But for an exact and severe Critic to shoot his Bolt at random, is unpardonable. If he, who professes at every turn an high esteem for polite Writing, shou’d yet despise those who most excel in it; one would be tempted to suspect his Taste. But if the very Man, who of all Men talks most about Art, and Taste, and critical Skill, and wou’d be thought to have most considered those Points, shou’d often deviate from his own Rules, into the false Sublime or the mauvaise Plaisanterie; What reasonable Man wou’d follow the Taste and Judgment of such a Guide, or be seduced to climb the steep Ascent, or tread in the rugged Paths of Virtue on his Recommendation?

XXVI.

ALC. But to return, methinks Crito makes no Compliment to the Genius of his Country, in supposing that Englishmen might not have wrought out of themselves, all Art and Science and good Taste, without being beholden to Church or Universities, or ancient Languages. CRI. What might have been is only Conjecture. What has been, it is not difficult to know. That there is a Vein in Britain, of as rich an Ore as ever was in any Country, I will not deny; but it lies deep, and will cost Pains to come at: And extraordinary Pains require an extraordinary Motive. As for what lies next the Surface, it seems but indifferent, being neither so good nor in such plenty as in some other Countries. It was the Comparison of an ingenious Florentine, that the celebrated Poems of Tasso and Ariosto are like two Gardens, the one of Cucumbers, the other of Melons. In the one you shall find few bad, but the best are not a very Good Fruit, in the other much the greater part are good for nothing, but those that are good are excellent. Perhaps the same Comparison may hold, between the English and some of their Neighbours. ALC. But suppose we should grant that the Christian Religion and its Seminaries might have been of use, in preserving or retrieving polite Arts and Letters; what then? Will you make this an Argument of its Truth? CRI. I will make it an Argument of Prejudice and Ingratitude in those Minute Philosophers, who object Darkness, Ignorance, and Rudeness, as an Effect of that very thing, which above all others hath enlightened and civilized and embellished their Country: which is as truly indebted to it for Arts and Sciences (which nothing but Religion was ever known to have planted in such a Latitude) as for that general Sense of Virtue and Humanity, and the Belief of a Providence and future State, which all the Argumentation of Minute Philosophers hath not yet been able to abolish.

XXVII.

ALC. It is strange you shou’d still persist to argue, as if all the Gentlemen of our Sect were Enemies to Virtue, and downright Atheists: Though I have assured you of the contrary, and that we have among us several, who profess themselves in the Interests of Virtue and Natural Religion, and have also declared, that I my self do now argue upon that Foot. CRI. How can you pretend, to be in the Interest of Natural Religion, and yet be professed Enemies of the Christian, the only established Religion which includes whatever is excellent in the Natural, and which is the only means of making those Precepts, Duties, and Notions, so called, become reverenced throughout the World? Would not he be thought weak or insincere, who shou’d go about to persuade People, that he was much in the Interests of an earthly Monarch; that he loved and admired his Government; when at the same time he shewed himself on all occasions, a most bitter Enemy of those very Persons and Methods, which above all others contributed most to his Service, and to make his Dignity known and revered, his Laws observed, or his Dominion extended? And is not this what Minute Philosophers do, while they set up for Advocates of God and Religion, and yet do all they can to discredit Christians and their Worship? It must be owned, indeed, that you argue against Christianity, as the Cause of Evil and Wickedness in the World; but with such Arguments, and in such a manner, as might equally prove the same thing of civil Government, of Meat and Drink, of every Faculty and Profession, of Learning, of Eloquence, and even of Human Reason it self. After all, even those of your Sect who allow themselves to be called Deists, if their Notions are thoroughly examined, will I fear be found to include little of Religion in them. As for the Providence of God watching over the Conduct of Human Agents, and dispensing Blessings or Chastisements, the Immortality of the Soul, a final Judgment, and future State of Rewards and Punishments; how few, if any, of your Free-thinkers have made it their Endeavour to possess Mens Minds with a serious sense of those great points of Natural Religion! How many, on the contrary, endeavour to render the Belief of them doubtful or ridiculous! LYS. To speak the Truth, I for my part, had never any liking to Religion of any kind, either revealed or unrevealed: And I dare venture to say the same for those Gentlemen of our Sect that I am acquainted with, having never observed them guilty of so much meanness, as even to mention the Name of God with Reverence, or speak with the least regard of Piety or any sort of Worship. There may perhaps be found one or two formal pretenders to Enthusiasm and Devotion, in the way of Natural Religion, who laughed at Christians for publishing Hymns and Meditations, while they plagued the World with as bad of their own: But the sprightly Men make a jest of all this. It seems to us meer Pedantry. Sometimes, indeed, in good Company one may hear a Word dropt in Commendation of Honour and Good-nature: but the former of these, by Connoisseurs, is always understood to mean nothing but Fashion, as the latter is nothing but Temper and Constitution, which guides a Man just as Appetite doth a Brute.

XXVIII.

And after all these Arguments and Notions, which beget one another without end; to take the matter short, neither I nor my Friends for our Souls cou’d ever comprehend, why Man might not do very well, and govern himself without any Religion at all, as well as a Brute which is thought the sillier Creature of the two. Have Brutes Instincts, Senses, Appetites, and Passions, to steer and conduct them? So have Men, and Reason over and above to consult upon occasion. From these Premises we conclude, the Road of Human Life is sufficiently lighted without Religion. CRI. Brutes having but small power, limited to things present or particular, are sufficiently opposed and kept in order, by the Force or Faculties of other Animals and the Skill of Man, without Conscience or Religion: But Conscience is a necessary balance to Human Reason, a Faculty of such mighty Extent and Power, especially toward Mischief. Besides, other Animals are, by the Law of their Nature, determined to one certain end or kind of Being, without Inclination or Means either to deviate or go beyond it. But Man hath in him a Will and higher Principle; by virtue whereof he may pursue different or even contrary ends, and either fall short of or exceed the Perfection natural to his Species in this World, as he is capable either, by giving up the Reins to his sensual Appetites, of degrading himself into the condition of Brutes, or else, by well ordering and improving his Mind, of being transformed into the similitude of Angels. Man alone of all Animals hath understanding to know his God. What availeth this Knowledge unless it be to ennoble Man, and raise him to an Imitation and Participation of the Divinity? Or what cou’d such Ennoblement avail if to end with this Life? Or how can these things take effect without Religion? But the points of Vice and Virtue, Man and Beast, Sense and Intellect, have been already at large canvassed. What! Lysicles, wou’d you have us go back where we were three or four days ago? LYS. By no means: I had much rather go forward, and make an end as soon as possible. But to save trouble, give me leave to tell you once for all, that, say what you can, you shall never persuade me so many ingenious agreeable Men are in the wrong, and a pack of snarling four Bigots in the right.

XXIX.

CRI. O Lysicles, I neither look for Religion among Bigots, nor Reason among Libertines; each kind disgrace their several Pretensions; the one owning no regard even to the plainest and most important Truths, while the others exert an angry Zeal for points of least concern. And surely whatever there is of silly, narrow, and uncharitable in the Bigot, the same is in great measure to be imputed to the conceited Ignorance, and petulant Profaneness of the Libertine. And it is not at all unlikely that as Libertines make Bigots, so Bigots shou’d make Libertines, the Extreme of one party being ever observed to produce a contrary Extreme of another. And although, while these Adversaries draw the Rope of Contention, Reason and Religion are often called upon, yet are they perhaps very little considered or concerned in the Contest. Lysicles, instead of answering Crito, turned short upon Alciphron. It was always my Opinion, said he, that nothing cou’d be sillier than to think of destroying Christianity, by crying up Natural Religion. Whoever thinks highly of the one can never, with any consistency, think meanly of the other; it being very evident, that Natural Religion, without Revealed, never was and never can be established or received any where, but in the brains of a few idle speculative Men. I was aware what your Concessions wou’d come to. The Belief of God, Virtue, a Future State, and such fine Notions are, as every one may see with half an eye, the very Basis and corner Stone of the Christian Religion. Lay but this Foundation for them to build on, and you shall soon see what Superstructures our Men of Divinity will raise from it. The Truth and Importance of those points once admitted, a Man need be no Conjurer to prove, upon that Principle, the Excellency and Usefulness of the Christian Religion: And then to be sure, there must be Priests to teach and propagate this useful Religion. And if Priests, a regular Subordination without doubt in this worthy Society, and a Provision for their Maintenance, such as may enable them to perform all their Rites and Ceremonies with Decency, and keep their sacred Character above Contempt. And the plain consequence of all this is a Confederacy between the Prince and the Priesthood to subdue the People: So we have let in at once upon us, a long train of Ecclesiastical Evils, Priestcraft, Hierarchy, Inquisition. We have lost our Liberty and Property, and put the Nation to vast Expence, only to purchase Bridles and Saddles for their own backs.

XXX.

This being spoke with some Sharpness of Tone, and an upbraiding Air, touched Alciphron to the quick, who replied nothing, but shew’d Confusion in his Looks. Crito smiling look’d at Euphranor and me, then, casting an eye on the two Philosophers, spoke as follows: If I may be admitted to interpose good Offices, for preventing a Rupture between old Friends and Brethren in Opinion, I wou’d observe, that in this Charge of Lysicles there is something right and something wrong. It seems right to assert as he doth, that the real Belief of Natural Religion will lead a Man to approve of Revealed: But it is as wrong to assert, that Inquisitions, Tyranny, and Ruin must follow from thence. Your Free-Thinkers, without Offence be it said, seem to mistake their Talent. They imagine strongly, but reason weakly; mighty at Exaggeration, and jejune in Argument! Can no Method be found, to relieve them from the Terror of that fierce and bloody Animal an English Parson? Will it not suffice to pair his Talons without chopping off his Fingers? Then they are such wonderful Patriots for Liberty and Property! When I hear these two Words in the mouth of a Minute Philosopher, I am put in mind of the Teste di Ferro at Rome. His Holiness, it seems, not having Power to assign Pensions on Spanish Benefices to any but Natives of Spain, always keeps at Rome two Spaniards, called Teste di Ferro, who have the Name of all such Pensions but not the Profit, which goes to Italians. As we may see every day, both Things and Notions placed to the account of Liberty and Property, which in reality neither have nor are meant to have any share in them. What! Is it impossible for a Man to be a Christian, but he must be a Slave; or a Clergyman, but he must have the Principles of an Inquisitor? I am far from screening and justifying Appetite of Domination or Tyrannical Power in Ecclesiastics. Some, who have been guilty in that respect, have sorely paid for it, and it is to be hoped they always will. But having laid the Fury and Folly of the ambitious Prelate, is it not time to look about and spy whether, on the other hand, some Evil may not possibly accrue to the State, from the overflowing Zeal of an Independent Whig? This I may affirm, without being at any pains to prove it, that the worst Tyranny this Nation ever felt was from the Hands of Patriots of that Stamp.

XXXI.

LYS. I don’t know. Tyranny is a harsh Word, and sometimes misapplied. When spirited Men of independent Maxims create a Ferment or make a Change in the State: He that loseth is apt to consider things in one light, and he that wins in another. In the mean time this is certainly good Policy, that we shou’d be frugal of our Money, and reserve it for better Uses, than to expend on the Church and Religion. CRI. Surely the old Apologue of the Belly and Members need not be repeated to such knowing Men. It shou’d seem as needless to observe, that all other States, which ever made any Figure in the World for Wisdom and Politeness, have thought Learning deserved Encouragement as well as the Sword; that Grants for religious Uses were as fitting as for Knights Service; and Foundations for propagating Piety, as necessary to the publick Welfare and Defence, as either Civil or Military Establishments. But I ask who are at this Expence, and what is this Expence so much complained of? LYS. As if you had never heard of Church Lands and Tithes. CRI. But I wou’d fain know, how they can be charged as an Expence, either upon the Nation or private Men. Where nothing is exported the Nation loseth nothing: and it is all one to the Public, whether Money circulates at Home through the Hands of a Vicar or a Squire. Then as for private Men, who, for want of Thought, are full of Complaint about the payment of Tithes; can any Man justly complain of it as a Tax, that he pays what never belonged to him? The Tenant rents his Farm with this Condition, and pays his Landlord proportionably less, than if his Farm had been exempt from it: So he loseth nothing; it being all one to him, whether he pays his Pastor or his Landlord. The Landlord cannot complain that he has not what he hath no Right to, either by Grant, Purchase, or Inheritance. This is the Case of Tithes; and as for the Church Lands, he surely can be no Free-thinker, nor any Thinker at all, who doth not see that no Man whether Noble, Gentle, or Plebeian, hath any sort of Right or Claim to them, which he may not with equal Justice pretend to all the Lands in the Kingdom. LYS. At present indeed we have no Right, and that is our Complaint. CRI. You wou’d have then what you have no Right to. LYS. Not so neither: what we wou’d have is first a Right convey’d by Law, and in the next place, the Lands by virtue of such Right. CRI. In order to this, it might be expedient in the first place, to get an Act passed for excommunicating from all civil Rights every Man, that is a Christian, a Scholar, and wears a black Coat, as guilty of three capital Offences against the public Weal of this Realm. LYS. To deal frankly, I think it wou’d be an excellent good Act. It wou’d provide at once for several deserving Men, rare Artificers in Wit and Argument and Ridicule, who have, too many of them, but small Fortunes with a great Arrear of Merit towards their Country, which they have so long enlightened and adorned gratis. EUPH. Pray tell me, Lysicles, are not the Clergy legally possessed of their Lands and Emoluments? LYS. No Body denies it. EUPH. Have they not been possessed of them from Time immemorial? LYS. This too I grant. EUPH. They claim then by Law and ancient Prescription. LYS. They do. EUPH. Have the oldest Families of the Nobility a better Title? LYS. I believe not. It grieves me to see so many overgrown Estates in the hands of ancient Families, on account of no other Merit, but what they brought with them into the World. EUPH. May you not then as well take their Lands too, and bestow them on the Minute Philosophers, as Persons of more Merit? LYS. So much the better. This enlarges our View, and opens a new Scene: It is very delightful in the Contemplation of Truth, to behold how one Theory grows out of another. ALC. Old Paetus used to say, that if the Clergy were deprived of their Hire, we shou’d lose the most popular Argument against them. LYS. But so long as Men live by Religion, there will never be wanting Teachers and Writers in Defence of it. CRI. And how can you be sure they wou’d be wanting though they did not live by it; since it is well known Christianity had its Defenders even when Men died by it? LYS. One thing I know, there is a rare Nursery of young Plants growing up, who have been carefully guarded against every Air of Prejudice, and sprinkled with the Dew of our choicest Principles; mean while, Wishes are wearisome, and to our infinite Regret nothing can be done, so long as there remains any Prejudice in favour of old Customs and Laws and national Constitutions, which, at bottom, we very well know and can demonstrate to be only Words and Notions.

XXXII.

But, I can never hope, Crito, to make you think my Schemes reasonable. We reason each right upon his own Principles, and shall never agree till we quit our Principles, which cannot be done by reasoning. We all talk of Just and Right and Wrong, and public Good, and all those things. The Names may be the same, but the Notions and Conclusions very different, perhaps diametrically opposite; and yet each may admit of clear Proofs, and be inferred by the same way of reasoning. For instance, the Gentlemen of the Club which I frequent, define Man to be a sociable Animal: Consequently, we exclude from this Definition all those Human Creatures, of whom it may be said, we had rather have their Room than their Company. And such, though wearing the Shape of Man, are to be esteem’d in all account of Reason, not as Men, but only as Human Creatures. Hence it plainly follows, that Men of Pleasure, Men of Humour, and Men of Wit, are alone properly and truly to be considered as Men. Whatever therefore conduceth to the Emolument of such, is for the good of Mankind, and consequently very just and lawful, although seeming to be attended with Loss or Damage to other Creatures: inasmuch as no real injury can be done in life or property to those, who know not how to enjoy them. This we hold for clear and well connected Reasoning. But others may view things in another light, assign different Definitions, draw other Inferences, and perhaps consider, what we suppose the very Top and Flower of the Creation, only as a wart or excrescence of Human Nature. From all which there must ensue a very different System of Morals, Politics, Rights, and Notions. CRI. If you have a mind to argue, we will argue, if you have more mind to jest, we will laugh with you. LYS.

 — Ridentem dicere verum

Quid vetat?

This Partition of our kind into Men and Human Creatures, puts me in mind of another Notion, broached by one of our Club, whom we used to call the Pythagorean.

XXXIII.

He made a threefold Partition of the Human Species, into Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, being of Opinion that the Road of Life lies upwards, in a perpetual Ascent through the Scale of Being: In such sort, that the Souls of Insects after death make their second Appearance, in the Shape of perfect Animals, Birds, Beasts, or Fishes; which upon their death are preferred into Human Bodies, and in the next Stage into beings of a higher and more perfect kind. This Man we considered at first as a sort of Heretic, because his Scheme seemed not to consist with our fundamental Tenet, the Mortality of the Soul: But he justified the Notion to be innocent, inasmuch as it included nothing of Reward or Punishment, and was not proved by any Argument, which supposed or implied either incorporeal Spirit or Providence, being only inferred, by way of Analogy, from what he had observed in Human Affairs, the Court, the Church, and the Army; wherein the Tendency is always upwards from lower Posts to higher. According to this System, the Fishes are those Men who swim in pleasure, such as petits maitres, bons vivans, and honest Fellows. The beasts are dry, drudging, covetous, rapacious Folk, and all those addicted to care and business like Oxen, and other dry land Animals, which spend their lives in labour and fatigue. The Birds are airy notional Men, Enthusiasts, Projectors, Philosophers, and such like: in each Species every Individual retaining a Tincture of his former State, which constitutes what is called Genius. If you ask me which Species of Human Creatures I like best, I answer, The flying Fish; that is, a Man of animal Enjoyment with a mixture of Whim. Thus you see we have our Creeds and our Systems, as well as graver Folks; with this Difference, that they are not straitlaced but sit easy, to be slipped off or on, as humour or occasion serves. And now I can, with the greatest aequanimity imaginable, hear my Opinions argued against, or confuted.

XXXIV.

ALC. It were to be wished, all Men were of that mind. But you shall find a sort of Men, whom I need not name, that cannot bear with the least temper, to have their Opinions examined or their Faults censured. They are against Reason, because Reason is against them. For our parts we are all for Liberty of Conscience. If our Tenets are absurd, we allow them to be freely argued and inspected; and by parity of Reason we might hope to be allowed the same Privilege, with respect to the Opinions of other Men. CRI. O Alciphron, Wares that will not bear the light are justly to be suspected. Whatever therefore moves you to make this Complaint, take my Word I never will: But as hitherto I have allowed your Reason its full scope, so for the future I always shall. And though I cannot approve of railing or declaiming, not even in my self, whenever you have shewed me the way to it: Yet this I will answer for, that you shall ever be allowed to reason as closely and as strenuously as you can. But for the love of Truth, be candid, and do not spend your Strength and our Time, in points of no significancy, or foreign to the purpose, or agreed between us. We allow that Tyranny and Slavery are bad things: but why shou’d we apprehend them from the Clergy at this time? Rites and Ceremonies we own are not Points of chief moment in Religion: but why shou’d we ridicule things in their own Nature, at least Innocent, and which bear the Stamp of supreme Authority? That Men in Divinity, as well as other Subjects, are perplexed with useless Disputes, and are like to be as so long as the World lasts I freely acknowledge: But why must all the Human Weakness and Mistakes of Clergymen be imputed to wicked Designs? Why indiscriminately abuse their Character and Tenets? Is this like Candour, love of Truth, and Free-thinking? It is granted there may be found, now and then, spleen and illbreeding in the Clergy: But are not the same Faults incident to English Laymen, of a retired Education and Country Life? I grant there is infinite Futility in the Schoolmen: but I deny that a Volume of that doth so much Mischief, as a page of Minute Philosophy. That weak or wicked Men shou’d, by favour of the World, creep into Power and high Stations in the Church, is nothing wonderful: and that in such Stations they shou’d behave like themselves, is natural to suppose. But all the while it is evident, that not the Gospel but the World, not the Spirit but the Flesh, not God but the Devil, puts them upon their unworthy Atchievements. We make no difficulty to grant, that nothing is more infamous than Vice and Ignorance in a Clergyman; nothing more base than a Hypocrite, more frivolous than a Pedant, more cruel than an Inquisitor. But it must be also granted by you, Gentlemen, that nothing is more ridiculous and absurd, than for pedantic, ignorant, and corrupt Men to cast the first Stone, at every shadow of their own Defects and Vices in other Men.

XXXV.

ALC. When I consider the detestable State of Slavery and Superstition, I feel my Heart dilate and expand it self to grasp that inestimable blessing of Liberty, absolute Liberty in its utmost unlimited Extent. This is the sacred and high Prerogative, the very life and health of our English Constitution. You must not therefore think it strange, if with a vigilant and curious Eye, we guard it against the minutest Apperance of Evil. You must even suffer us to cut round about, and very deep, and make use of the magnifying Glass, the better to view and extirpate every the least speck, which shall discover it self in what we are careful and jealous to preserve, as the Apple of our Eye. CRI. As for unbounded Liberty I leave it to Savages, among whom alone I believe it is to be found: But, for the reasonable legal Liberty of our Constitution, I most heartily and sincerely wish it may for ever subsist and flourish among us. You and all other Englishmen cannot be too vigilant, or too earnest, to preserve this goodly frame, or to curb and disappoint the wicked Ambition of whoever, Laymen or Ecclesiastic, shall attempt to change our free and gentle Government into a slavish or severe one. But what Pretext can this afford for your Attempts against Religion, or indeed how can it be consistent with them? Is not the Protestant Religion a main part of our Legal Constitution? I remember to have heard a Foreigner remark, that we of this Island were very good Protestans, but no Christians. But whatever Minute Philosophers may wish, or Foreigners say, it is certain our Laws speak a different Language. ALC. This puts me in mind of the wise reasoning of a certain sage Magistrate, who, being pressed by the Raillery and Arguments of an ingenious Man, had nothing to say for his Religion but that, ten Millions of People inhabiting the same Island might, whether right or wrong, if they thought good, establish Laws for the worshipping of God in their Temples, and appealing to him in their Courts of Justice. And that in case ten thousand ingenious Men shou’d publickly deride and trample on those Laws, it might be just and lawful for the said ten Millions, to expel the said ten thousand ingenious Men out of their said Island. EUPH. And pray, what answer wou’d you make to this remark of the sage Magistrate? ALC. The answer is plain. By the Law of Nature, which is superior to all positive Institutions, Wit and Knowledge have a right to command Folly and Ignorance. I say, ingenious Men have by natural Right a Dominion over Fools. EUPH. What Dominion over the Laws and People of Great Britain, Minute Philosophers may be entitled to by Nature, I shall not dispute, but leave to be considered by the Public. ALC. This Doctrine, it must be owned, was never thoroughly understood before our own times. In the last age Hobbes and his Followers, though otherwise very great Men, declared for the Religion of the Magistrate, probably because they were afraid of the Magistrate; but times are changed, and the Magistrates may now be afraid of us. CRI. I allow the Magistrate may well be afraid of you in one sense, I mean, afraid to trust you. This brings to my Thoughts a Passage on the trial of Leander for a capital Offence: That Gentleman having picked out and excluded from his Jury, by peremptory exception, all but some Men of Fashion and Pleasure, humbly moved when Dorcon was going to kiss the Book, that he might be required to declare upon Honour, whether he believed either God or or Gospel. Dorcon, rather than hazard his Reputation as a Man of Honour and Free-thinker, openly avowed, that he believed in neither. Upon which the Court declared him unfit to serve on a Jury. By the same reason, so many were set aside, as made it necessary to put off the Trial. We are very easy, replied Alciphron, about being trusted to serve on Juries, if we can be admitted to serve in lucrative Employments. CRI. But what if the Government shou’d injoin, that every one, before he was sworn into Office, shou’d make the same Declaration which Dorcon was required to make? ALC. God forbid! I hope there is no such Design on foot. CRI. Whatever Designs may be on foot, thus much is certain: The Christian Reformed Religion is a principal Part and Corner-stone of our free Constitution; and I verily think, the only thing that makes us deserving of Freedom, or capable of enjoying it. Freedom is either a Blessing or a Curse as Men Use it. And to me it seems, that if our Religion were once destroy’d from among us, and those Notions, which pass for Prejudices of a Christian Education, erased from the minds of Britons, the best thing that cou’d befal us wou’d be the loss of our Freedom. Surely a People wherein there is such restless Ambition, such high Spirits, such Animosity of Faction, so great Interests in Contest, such unbounded Licence of Speech and Press, amidst so much Wealth and Luxury, nothing but those veteres aviae, which you pretend to extirpate, cou’d have hitherto kept from ruin.

XXXVI.

Under the Christian Religion this Nation hath been greatly improved. From a sort of Savages, we have grown civil, polite, and learned: we have made a decent and noble Figure both at home and abroad. And, as our Religion decreaseth, I am afraid we shall be found to have declined. Why then shou’d we persist in the dangerous Experiment? ALC. One wou’d think, Crito, you had forgot the many Calamities occasioned by Church-men and Religion. CRI. And one wou’d think, you had forgot what was answered this very day to that Objection. But, not to repeat eternally the same things, I shall observe in the first place, That if we reflect on the past State of Christendom, and of our Country in particular, with our Feuds and Factions subsisting while we were all of the same Religion, for instance, that of the White and Red Roses, so violent and bloody and of such long continuance; we can have no assurance that those ill humours, which have since shewn themselves under the masque of Religion, wou’d not have broke out with some other Pretext, if this had been wanting. I observe in the second place, that it will not follow from any Observations you can make on our History, that the Evils, accidentally occasioned by Religion, bear any proportion either to the good Effects it hath really produced, or the Evils it hath prevented. Lastly, I observe, that the best things may by accident be the occasion of Evil; which accidental Effect is not, to speak properly and truly, produced by the good thing it self, but by some evil thing, which, being neither Part, Property, nor Effect of it, happens to be joined with it. But I shou’d be ashamed to insist and enlarge on so plain a Point, and shall only add that, whatever Evils this Nation might have formerly sustained from Superstition, no Man of common sense will say, the Evils felt or apprehended at present are from that Quarter. Priestcraft is not the reigning Distemper at this Day. And surely it will be owned, that a wise Man, who takes upon him to be vigilant for the public Weal, shou’d touch proper things at proper times, and not prescribe for a Surfeit when the Distemper is a Consumption. ALC. I think we have sufficiently discussed the Subject of this day’s Conference. And now, let Lysicles take it as he will, I must in regard to my own Character, as a fair impartial Adversary, acknowledge there is something in what Crito hath said upon the Usefulness of the Christian Religion. I will even own to you that some of our Sect are for allowing it a Toleration. I remember, at a meeting of several ingenious Men, after much debate we came successively to divers Resolutions. The first was, that no Religion ought to be tolerated in the State: But this on more mature thought was judged impracticable. The second was that all Religions shou’d be tolerated, but none countenanced except Atheism: But it was apprehended, that this might breed Contentions among the lower sort of People. We came therefore to conclude in the third place, that some Religion or other shou’d be established for the use of the Vulgar. And after a long Dispute what this Religion shou’d be, Lysis a brisk young Man, perceiving no signs of Agreement, proposed that the present Religion might be tolerated, till a better was found. But allowing it to be expedient, I can never think it true, so long as there lie unanswerable Objections against it, which if you please, I shall take the Liberty to propose at our next meeting. To which we all agreed.

 THE SIXTH DIALOGUE.I. Points agreed. II. Sundry pretences to Revelation. III. Uncertainty of Tradition. IV. Object and Ground of Faith. V. Some Books disputed, others evidently spurious. VI. Stile and composition of Holy Scripture. VII. Difficulties occurring therein. VIII. Obscurity not always a defect. IX. Inspiration neither impossible nor absurd. X. Objections from the form and matter of divine Revelation, considered. XI. Infidelity an effect of narrowness and prejudice. XII. Articles of Christian Faith not unreasonable. XIII. Guilt the Natural Parent of Fear. XIV. Things unknown, reduced to the standard of what Men know. XV. Prejudices against the Incarnation of the Son of God. XVI. Ignorance of the divine Oeconomy, a source of difficulties. XVII. Wisdom of God, foolishness to Man. XVIII. Reason, no blind guide. XIX. Usefulness of Divine Revelation. XX. Prophesies, whence obscure. XXI. Eastern accounts of Time older than the Mosaic. XXII. The humour of Aegyptians, Assyrians, Chaldeans, and other Nations extending their Antiquity beyond Truth, accounted for. XXIII. Reasons confirmingthe Mosaic account. XXIV. Profane Historians inconsistent. XXV. Celsus, Porphyry, and Julian. XXVI. The Testimony of Josephus considered. XXVII. Attestation of Jews and Gentiles to Christianity. XXVIII. Forgeries and Heresies. XXIX. Judgment and attention of Minute Philosophers. XXX. Faith and Miracles. XXXI. Probable arguments a sufficient ground of Faith. XXXII. The Christian Religion able to stand the test of rational Inquiry.

 [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

I.

THE following day being Sunday, our Philosophers lay long in bed, while the rest of us went to Church in the Neighbouring Town, where we dined at Euphranor’s, and after evening Service returned to the two Philosophers, whom we found in the Library. They told us, That, if there was a God, he was present every where, as well as at Church; and that if we had been serving him one way, they did not neglect to do as much another; inasmuch as a free exercise of Reason must be allowed the most acceptable service and Worship, that a rational creature can offer to its Creator. However, said Alciphron, if you, Gentlemen, can but solve the difficulties which I shall propose to-morrow morning, I promise to go to Church next Sunday. After some general conversation of this kind, we sate down to a light Supper, and the next morning assembled at the same place as the day before, where being all seated, I observed, that the foregoing Week our Conferences had been carried on for a longer time, and with less interruption than I had ever known, or well cou’d be, in town, where Mens hours are so broken by visits, business, and amusements, that whoever is content to form his notions from conversation only, must needs have them very shatter’d and imperfect. And what have we got, replied Alciphron, by all these continued Conferences? For my part, I think my self just where I was, with respect to the main point that divides us, the Truth of the Christian Religion. I answered, That so many points had been examined, discussed, and agreed between him and his adversaries, that I hoped to see them come to an intire agreement in the end. For in the first place, said I, the principles and opinions of those who are called Free-thinkers, or Minute Philosophers, have been pretty clearly explained. It hath been also agreed, that Vice is not of that benefit to the Nation, which some Men imagine: That Virtue is highly useful to Mankind: But that the beauty of Virtue is not alone sufficient to engage them in the practice of it: That therefore the belief of a God and Providence ought to be encouraged in the State, and tolerated in good Company, as a useful notion. Further, it hath been proved that there is a God: That it is reasonable to worship him: And that the Worship, Faith, and Principles prescribed by the Christian Religion have a useful tendency. Admit, replied Alciphron, addressing himself to Crito, all that Dion saith to be true: Yet this doth not hinder my being just where I was, with respect to the main point. Since there is nothing in all this that proves the Truth of the Christian Religion: Though each of those particulars enumerated may, perhaps, prejudice in its favour. I am therefore to suspect my self at present for a prejudiced person; prejudiced, I say, in favour of Christianity. This, as I am a lover of Truth, puts me upon my guard against deception. I must therefore look sharp, and well consider every step I take.

II.

CRI. You may remember, Alciphron, you proposed for the subject of our present conference the consideration of certain Difficulties and Objections, which you had to offer against the Christian Religion. We are now ready to hear and consider whatever you shall think fit to produce of that kind. Atheism, and a wrong notion of Christianity, as of something hurtful to Mankind, are great Prejudices; the removal of which may dispose a Man to argue with candor and submit to reasonable proof: But the removing Prejudices against an opinion, is not to be reckoned prejudicing in its favour. It may be hoped therefore, that you will be able to do justice to your cause, without being fond of it. ALC. O Crito! that Man may thank his stars to whom Nature hath given a sublime Soul, who can raise himself above popular opinions, and, looking down on the herd of Mankind, behold them scattered over the surface of the whole earth, divided and subdivided into numberless Nations and Tribes, differing in Notions and Tenets, as in Language, Manners, and Dress. The Man who takes a general view of the World and its Inhabitants, from this lofty stand, above the reach of Prejudice, seems to breathe a purer air, and to see by a clearer light: But how to impart this clear and extensive view to those who are wandering beneath in the narrow dark paths of Error! This indeed is a hard task; but, hard as it is, I shall try if by any means,

Clara tuae possim praepandere lumina menti.

Lucret.

Know then, that all the various Casts or Sects of the sons of Men have each their Faith, and their religious System, germinating and sprouting forth from that common grain of Enthusiasm, which is an original ingredient in the composition of Humane Nature, they shall each tell of intercourse with the invisible World, Revelations from Heaven, divine Oracles, and the like. All which pretensions, when I regard with an impartial eye, it is impossible I shou’d assent to all, and I find within my self something that withholds me from assenting to any of them. For although I may be willing to follow, so far as common Sense, and the light of Nature lead; yet the same reason that bids me yield to rational proof, forbids me to admit opinions without proof. This holds in general against all Revelations whatsoever. And be this my first Objection against the Christian in particular. CRI. As this Objection supposes there is no proof or reason for believing the Christian, if good reason can be assigned for such belief, it comes to nothing. Now I presume you will grant, the authority of the reporter is a true and proper reason for believing reports: And the better this authority, the juster claim it hath to our assent: But the authority of God is on all accounts the best: Whatever therefore comes from God, it is most reasonable to believe.

III.

ALC. This I grant, but then it must be proved to come from God. CRI. And are not Miracles, and the accomplishments of Prophecies, joined with the excellency of its Doctrine, a sufficient proof that the Christian Religion came from God? ALC. Miracles, indeed, wou’d prove something: But what proof have we of these Miracles? CRI. Proof of the same kind that we have or can have of any facts done a great way off, and a long time ago. We have authentic accounts transmitted down to us from eye-witnesses, whom we cannot conceive tempted to impose upon us by any humane Motive whatsoever; inasmuch as they acted therein contrary to their Interests, their Prejudices, and the very Principles in which they had been nursed and educated. These accounts were confirmed by the unparallel’d subversion of the City of Jerusalem, and the dispersion of the Jewish Nation, which is a standing testimony to the Truth of the Gospel, particularly of the Predictions of our blessed Saviour. These accounts, within less than a Century, were spread throughout the World, and believed by great numbers of People. These same accounts were committed to writing, translated into several languages, and handed down with the same respect and consent of Christians in the most distant Churches. Do you not see, said Alciphron, staring full at Crito, that all this hangs by Tradition? And Tradition, take my word for it, gives but a weak hold: It is a chain, whereof the first links may be stronger than steel, and yet the last weak as wax, and brittle as glass. Imagine a picture copied successively by an hundred Painters, one from another; how like must the last copy be to the original! How lively and distinct will an image be, after an hundred reflections between two parallel Mirrours! Thus like, and thus lively do I think a faint vanishing Tradition, at the end of sixteen or seventeen hundred years. Some Men have a false heart, others a wrong head; and where both are true, the memory may be treacherous. Hence there is still something added, something omitted, and something varied from the Truth: And the sum of many such additions, deductions, and alterations, accumulated for several ages, do, at the foot of the account, make quite another thing. CRI. Ancient facts we may know by Tradition, oral or written: And this latter we may divide into two kinds, private and public, as Writings are kept in the hands of particular Men, or recorded in public Archives. Now all these three sorts of Tradition, for ought I can see, concur to attest the genuine antiquity of the Gospels. And they are strengthened by collateral evidence from Rites instituted, Festivals observed, and Monuments erected by ancient Christians, such as Churches, Baptisteries, and Sepulchres. Now allowing your objection holds against oral Tradition, singly taken, yet I can think it no such difficult thing to transcribe faithfully. And things once committed to writing, are secure from slips of memory, and may with common care be preserved intire so long as the Manuscript lasts: And this, experience shews may be above a thousand years. The Alexandrine Manuscript is allowed to be above twelve hundred years old; and it is highly probable there were then extant copies four hundred years old. A Tradition therefore of above sixteen hundred years, need have only two or three links in its chain. And these links, notwithstanding that great length of time, may be very sound and intire. Since no reasonable Man will deny, that an ancient Manuscript may be of much the same credit now, as when it was first written. We have it on good authority, and it seems probable, that the primitive Christians were careful to transcribe copies of the Gospels and Epistles for their private use, and that other copies were preserved as public records, in the several Churches throughout the World, and that portions thereof were constantly read in their assemblies. Can more be said to prove the writings of Classic Authors, or ancient Records of any kind authentic? Alciphron, addressing his discourse to Euphranor, said, It is one thing to silence an adversary, and another to convince him. What do you think, Euphranor? EUPH. Doubtless it is. ALC. But what I want, is to be convinced. EUPH. That point is not so clear. ALC. But if a Man had ever so much mind, he cannot be convinced by probable arguments against Demonstration. EUPH. I grant he cannot.

IV.

ALC. Now it is as evident as demonstration can make it, that no divine Faith can possibly be built upon Tradition. Suppose an honest credulous Countryman catechised and lectured every Sunday by his Parish-Priest: It is plain he believes in the Parson, and not in God. He knows nothing of Revelations, and Doctrines, and Miracles, but what the Priest tells him. This he believes, and this Faith is purely humane. If you say he has the Liturgy and the Bible for the foundation of his Faith, the difficulty still recurs. For as to the Liturgy, he pins his faith upon the civil Magistrate, as well as the Ecclesiastic: neither of which can pretend divine Inspiration. Then for the Bible, he takes both that and his Prayer-Book on trust from the Printer, who, he believes, made true Editions from true Copies. You see then faith, but what faith? Faith in the Priest, in the Magistrate, in the Printer, Editor, Transcriber, none of which can with any pretence be called Divine. I had the hint from Cratylus; it is a shaft out of his quiver, and believe me, a keen one. EUPH. Let me take and make trial of this same shaft in my hands. Suppose then your Countryman hears a Magistrate declare the Law from the Bench, or suppose he reads it in a Statute Book. What think you, is the Printer or the Justice the true and proper object of his Faith and Submission? Or do you acknowledge a higher authority whereon to found those loyal acts, and in which they do really terminate? Again suppose you read a passage in Tacitus that you believe true; wou’d you say you assented to it on the authority of the Printer or Transcriber rather than the Historian? ALC. Perhaps I wou’d, and perhaps I wou’d not. I do not think my self obliged to answer these points. What is this but transferring the question from one subject to another? That which we considered was neither Law nor prophane History, but religious Tradition, and Divine Faith. I see plainly what you aim at, but shall never take fro an answer to one difficulty, the starting of another. CRI. O Alciphron, there is no taking hold of you who expect that others shou’d (as you were pleased to express it) hold fair and stand firm, while you plucked out their prejudices: How shall he argue with you but from your concessions, and how can he know what you grant except you will be pleased to tell him? EUPH. But to save you the trouble, for once I will suppose an answer. My question admits but of two answers; take your Choice. From the one it will follow, that by a parity of reason we can easily conceive, how a Man may have Divine Faith, though he never felt Inspiration or saw a Miracle: inasmuch as it is equally possible for the mind, through whatever conduit, oral or scriptural, divine Revelation be derived, to carry its thought and submission up to the source and terminate its faith, not in Humane but Divine authority: not in the instrument or vessel of conveyance, but in the great origine it self as its proper and true object. From the other answer itwill follow, that you introduce a general scepticism into Humane Knowledge, and break down the hinges on which civil Government, and all the affairs of the World turn and depend: in a word that you wou’d destroy Humane Faith to get rid of Divine. And how this agrees with your professing that you want to be convinced I leave you to consider.

V.

ALC. I shou’d in earnest be glad to be convinced one way or other, and come to some concluclusion. But I have so many objections in store, you are not to count much upon getting over one. Depend on it you shall find me behave like a Gentleman and lover of Truth. I will propose my objections briefly and plainly, and accept of reasonable answers as fast as you can give them. Come, Euphranor, make the most of your Tradition; you can never make that a constant and universal one, which is acknowledged to have been unknown, or at best disputed in the Church for several Ages: And this is the Case of the Canon of the new Testament. For though we have now a Canon as they call it settled; yet every one must see and own that Tradition cannot grow stronger by Age; and that what was uncertain in the primitive times cannot be undoubted in the subsequent. What say you to this, Euphranor? EUPH. I shou’d be glad to conceive your meaning clearly before I return an answer. It seems to me this objection of yours supposeth, that where a Tradition hath been constant and undisputed, such Tradition may be admitted as a proof, but that where the Tradition is defective, the proof must be so too. Is this your meaning? ALC. It is. EUPH. Consequently the Gospels and Epistles of St. Paul, which were universally received in the beginning, and never since doubted of by the Church, must, notwithstanding this objection, be in reason admitted for genuine. And if these Books contain, as they really do, all those points that come into controversy between you and me; what need I dispute with you about the authority of some other Books of the new Testament, which came later to be generally known and received in the Church? If a Man assents to the undisputed Books he is no longer an Infidel; though he shou’d not hold the Revelations, or the Epistle of S. James or Jude, or the latter of S. Peter, or the two last of S. John to be Canonical. The additional authority of these portions of Holy Scripture may have its weight, in particular controversies between Christians, but can add nothing to arguments against an Infidel as such. Wherefore though I believe good reasons may be assigned for receiving these Books, yet these reasons seem now beside our purpose. When you are a Christian it will be then time enough to argue this point. And you will be the nearer being so, if the way be shorten’d by omitting it for the present. ALC. Not so near neither as you perhaps imagine: For, notwithstanding all the fair and plausible things you may say about Tradition, when I consider the Spirit of Forgery which reigned in the primitive times, and reflect on the several Gospels, Acts, and Epistles attributed to the Apostles, which yet are acknowledged to be spurious, I confess, I cannot help suspecting the whole. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, do you suspect all Plato’s Writings for spurious, because the Dialogue upon Death, for instance, is allowed to be so? Or will you admit none of Tully’s Writings to be genuine, because Sigonius imposed a Book of his own writing for Tully’s Treatise de Consolatione, and the imposture passed for some time on the World? ALC. Suppose I admit for the Works of Tully and Plato those that commonly pass for such. What then? EUPH. Why then I wou’d fain know, whether it be equal and impartial in a Free-thinker, to measure the credibility of profane and sacred Books by a different rule. Let us know upon what foot we Christians are to argue with Minute Philosophers; whether we may be allowed the benefit of common maxims in Logic and Criticism? If we may, be pleased to assign a reason why supposititious Writings, which in the style and manner and matter bear visible marks of imposture, and have accordingly been rejected by the Church, can be made an argument against those which have been universally received, and handed down by an unanimous constant Tradition. There have been in all Ages and in all great Societies of Men, many capricious, vain or wicked Impostors, who for different ends have abused the World by spurious Writings, and created work for Critics both in profane and sacred Learning. And it would seem as silly to reject the true Writings of profane Authors for the sake of the spurious, as it wou’d seem unreasonable to suppose, that among the Hereticks and several Sects of Christians, there shou’d be none capable of the like Imposture.

VI.

ALC. But, be the Tradition ever so well attested, and the Books ever so genuine, yet I cannot suppose them wrote by persons divinely inspired, so long as I see in them certain Characters inconsistent with such a supposition. Surely the purest language, the most perfect style, the exactest method, and in a word all the excellencies of good writing, might be expected in a piece composed or dictated by the Spirit of God: But Books, wherein we find the reverse of all this, it were impious, not, to reject, but, to attribute to the Divinity. EUPH. Say, Alciphron, are the Lakes, the Rivers, or the Ocean bounded by straight Lines? Are the Hills and Mountains exact Cones or Pyramids? or the Stars cast into regular figures? ALC. They are not. EUPH. But in the works of Insects, we may observe figures as exact as if they were drawn by the rule and compass. ALC. We may. EUPH. Shou’d it not seem therefore that a regular exactness, or scrupulous attention to what Men call the rules of art, is not observed in the great productions of the Author of Nature? ALC. It shou’d. EUPH. And when a great Prince declareth his Will in Laws and Edicts to his Subjects, is he careful about a pure style or elegant composition? Does he not leave his Secretaries and Clerks to express his sense in their own words? Is not the phrase on such occasions thought proper if it conveys as much as was intended? And wou’d not the divine strain of certain modern Critics be judged affected and improper for such uses? ALC. It must be owned, Laws and Edicts and Grants, for Soloecism and Tautology, are very offensive to the harmonious ears of a fine Writer. EUPH. Why then shou’d we expect in the Oracles of God an exactness, that wou’d be misbecoming and beneath the dignity of an earthly Monarch, and which bears no proportion or resemblance to the magnificent works of the Creation? ALC. But granting that a nice regard to particles and critical rules is a thing too little and mean to be expected in Divine Revelations; and that there is more force and spirit and true greatness in a negligent, unequal style, than in the well-turned periods of a polite writer; Yet what is all this to the bald and flat compositions of those you call the Divine Penmen? I can never be persuaded, the supreme Being wou’d pick out the poorest and meanest of scriblers for his Secretaries. EUPH. O Alciphron, if I durst follow my own judgment, I shou’d be apt to think there are noble beauties in the style of the Holy Scripture: in the narrative parts a strain so simple and unaffected; in the devotional and prophetic, so animated and sublime: and in the doctrinal parts such an air of dignity and authority as seems to speak their original divine. But I shall not enter into a dispute about Taste; much less set up my judgment on so nice a point against that of the wits, and Men of genius, with which your Sect abounds. And I have no temptation to it, inasmuch as it seems to me, the Oracles of God are not the less so for being delivered in a plain dress rather than in the enticing words of Man’s wisdom. ALC. This may perhaps be an apology for some simplicity and negligence in writing.

VII.

But what apology can be made for Nonsense, crude Nonsense? Of which I cou’d easily assign many instances, having once in my Life read the Scripture through with that very view. Look here, said he, opening a Bible, in the forty ninth Psalm, the Author begins very magnificently, calling upon all the inhabitants of the Earth to give ear, and assuring them his mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the meditation of his heart shall be of understanding.

Quid dignum tanto seret hic promissor hiatu?

He hath no sooner done with his Preface, but he puts this senleless question.

Wherefore shou’d I fear in the days of evil; when the wickedness of my heels shall compass me about?

The iniquity of my heels! What Nonsense after such a solemn introduction! EUPH. For my own part, I have naturally weak eyes, and know there are many things that I cannot see, which are nevertheless distinctly seen by others. I do not therefore conclude a thing to be absolutely invisible; because it is so to me: And since it is possible it may be with my understanding, as it is with my eyes, I dare not pronounce a thing to be Nonsense, because I do not understand it. Of this passage many interpretations are given. The word render’d heels may signify fraud or supplantation: By some it is translated past wickedness, the heel being the hinder part of the foot; by others iniquity in the end of my days, the heel being one extremity of the body; by some the iniquity of my Enemies that may supplant me; by others my own faults or iniquities which I have passed over as light matters, and trampled under my feet. Some render it the iniquity of my ways; others my transgressions which are like slips and slidings of the heel: And after all might not this expression so harsh and odd to English ears have been very natural and obvious in the Hebrew Tongue, which, as every other Language, had its idioms? the force and propriety whereof may as easily be conceived lost in a long tract of time, as the signification of some Hebrew words, which are not now intelligible, though no body doubts but they had once a meaning as well as the other words of that Language. Granting therefore that certain passages in the Holy Scripture may not be understood, it will not thence follow that its Penmen wrote Nonsense: For I conceive Nonsense to be one thing and unintelligible another. CRI. An English Gentleman of my acquaintance one day entertaining some Foreigners at his House, sent a Servant to know the occasion of a sudden tumult in the yard, who brought him word, the Horses were fallen together by the ears: his Guests inquiring what the matter was, he translates it literally; Les Chevaux sont tombez ensemble par les oreilles. Which made them stare; what expressed a very plain sense in the original English, being incomprehensible when rendered word for word into French: And I remember to have heard a Man excuse the bulls of his Countrymen, by supposing them so many literal translations. EUPH. But not to grow tedious, I refer to the Critics and and Commentators where you will find the use of this remark, which clearing up several obscure passages you took for Nonsense, may possibly incline you to suspect your own judgment of the rest. In this very Psalm you have pitched on, the good sense and moral contained in what follows, shou’d, methinks, make a candid reader judge favourably of the original sense of the Author, in that part which he cou’d not understand. Say, Alciphron, in reading the Classics, do you forthwith conclude every passage to be Nonsense, that you cannot make sense of? ALC. By no means; difficulties must be supposed to rise from different idioms, old customs, hints and allusions, clear in one time or place, and obscure in another. EUPH. And why will you not judge of Scripture by the same rule. Those sources of obscurity you mention are all common both to sacred and profane Writings: And there is no doubt, but an exacter knowledge in Language and Circumstances wou’d in both, cause difficulties to vanish like shades before the light of the Sun. Jeremiah to describe a furious invader saith; Behold, he shall come up as a Lion from the swelling of Jordan against the habitation of the strong. One wou’d be apt to think this passage odd and improper, and that it had been more reasonable to have said, a Lion from the mountain or the desart. But travellers, as an ingenious Man observes, who have seen the River Jordan bounded by low Lands with many reeds or thickets affording shelter to wild Beasts, (which being suddenly dislodged by a rapid overflowing of the River, rush into the upland Country) perceive the force and propriety of the Comparison; and that the difficulty proceeds, not from Nonsense in the Writer, but from Ignorance in the Reader. It is needless to amass together instances which may be found in every Commentator: I only beg leave to observe, that sometimes Men, looking higher or deeper than they need for a profound or remote sense, overlook the natural obvious sense, lying, if I may so say, at their feet, and so make difficulties instead of finding them. This seems to be the case of that celebrated passage, which hath created so much work in St. Paul’s first Epistle to the Corinthians.

What shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?

I remember to have heard this text explained by Laches the Vicar of our Parish to my Neighbour Lycon, who was much perplexed about its meaning. If it had been translated as it might very justly, baptized for the sake of the dead, I do not see, said Laches, why people shou’d be puzzled about the sense of this passage; for tell me, I beseech you, for whose sake do you think those Christians were baptized? For whose sake, answered Lycon, but their own? How do you mean, for their own sake in this life, or the next? Doubtless in the next, for it was plain they could get nothing by it in this. They were then, replied Laches, baptized not for the sake of themselves while living, but for the sake of themselves when dead; not for the living, but the dead. I grant it. Baptism therefore must have been to them a fruitless thing, if the dead rise not at all. It must. Whence Laches inferred, That St. Paul’s argument was clear and pertinent for the Resurrection: And Lycon allowed it to be argumentum ad hominem to those who had sought Baptism. There is then, concluded Laches, no necessity for supposing, that living Men were in those days baptized instead of those who died without Baptism, or of running into any other odd Suppositions, or strained and far-fetched Interpretations to make sense of this passage. ALC. Here and there a difficult passage may be cleared: But there are many which no art or wit of Man can account for. What say you to those discoveries, made by some of our learned Writers, of false citations from the Old Testament found in the Gospel? EUPH. That some few passages are cited by the Writers of the New Testament, out of the Old, and by the Fathers out of the New, which are not in so many words to be found in them, is no new discovery of Minute Philosophers, but known and observed long before by Christian Writers; who have made no scruple to grant, that some things might have been inserted by careless or mistaken Transcribers into the Text, from the Margin, others left out, and others altered; whence so many various readings. But these are things of small moment, and that all other ancient Authors have been subject to; and upon which no point of Doctrine depends, which may not be proved without them. Nay further, if it be any advantage to your cause, it hath been observed, that the eighteenth Psalm, as recited in the twenty second chapter of the second book of Samuel, varies in above forty places, if you regard every little verbal or literal difference: And that a Critic may now and then discover small variations, is what no body can deny. But to make the most of these concessions, what can you infer from them, more than that the design of the Holy Scripture was not to make us exactly knowing in Circumstantials? and that the Spirit did not dictate every Particle and Syllable, or preserve them from every minute alteration by Miracle? which to believe, wou’d look like Rabinical Superstition. ALC. But what marks of Divinity can possibly be in writings which do not reach the exactness even of Humane Art? EUPH. I never thought nor expected that the Holy Scripture shou’d shew it self divine, by a circumstantial accuracy of Narration, by exactness of Method, by strictly observing the rules of Rhetoric, Grammar, and Criticism, in harmonious Periods, in elegant and choice Expressions, or in technical Definitions and Partitions. These things wou’d look too like a Humane Composition. Methinks there is in that simple, unaffected, artless, unequal, bold, figurative Style of the Holy Scripture, a character singularly great and majestic, and that looks more like divine Inspiration, than any other Composition that I know. But, as I said before, I shall not dispute a point of Criticism with the gentlemen of your Sect, who, it seems, are the modern standard for Wit and Taste. ALC. Well, I shall not insist on small slips, or the inaccuracy of citing or transcribing: And I freely own, that Repetitions, want of Method, or want of Exactness in circumstances, are not the things that chiefly stick with me; no more than the plain patriarchal Manners, or the peculiar Usages and Customs of the Jews and first Christians so different from ours; and that to reject the Scripture on such accounts wou’d be to act like those French Wits, who censure Homer because they do not find in him the Style, Notions and Manners of their own Age and Country. Was there nothing else to divide us, I shou’d make no great difficulty of owning, That a popular uncorrect Style might answer the general ends of Revelation, as well, perhaps, as a more critical and exact one: But the Obscurity still sticks with me. Methinks if the supreme Being had spoke to Man, he wou’d have spoke clearly to him, and that the Word of God shou’d not need a comment.

VIII.

EUPH. You seem, Alciphron, to think Obscurity a defect; but if it shou’d prove to be no defect, there wou’d then be no force in this Objection. ALC. I grant there wou’d not. EUPH. Pray tell me, are not Speech and Style instrumental to convey Thoughts and Notions, to beget Knowledge, Opinion, and Assent? ALC. This is true. EUPH. And is not the perfection of an instrument to be measured by the use to which it is subservient? ALC. It is. EUPH. What therefore is a defect in one instrument, may be none in another. For instance, edged tools are in general designed to cut; but the uses of an Ax and a Razor being different, it is no defect in an Ax, that it hath not the keen edge of a Razor; nor in a Razor, that it hath not the weight or strength of an Ax. ALC. I acknowledge this to be true. EUPH. And may we not say in general, that every instrument is perfect, which answers the purpose or intention of him who useth it? ALC. We may. EUPH. Hence it seems to follow, that no Man’s Speech is defective in point of Clearness, though it shou’d not be intelligible to all Men, if it be sufficiently so to those who, he intended, shou’d understand it; or though it shou’d not in all parts be equally clear, or convey a perfect knowledge, where he intended only an imperfect hint. ALC. It seems so. EUPH. Ought we not therefore to know the intention of the Speaker, to be able to know whether his style be obscure through defect or design? ALC. We ought. EUPH. But is it possible for Man to know all the ends and purposes of God’s Revelations? ALC. It is not. EUPH. How then can you tell, but the obscurity of some parts of Scripture may well consist with the purpose which you know not, and consequently be no argument against its coming from God? The books of Holy Scripture were written in ancient languages, at distant times, on sundry occasions, and very different subjects: Is it not therefore reasonable to imagine, that some parts or passages might have been clearly enough understood by those, for whose proper use they were principally designed, and yet seem obscure to us, who speak another language, and live in other times? Is it at all absurd or unsuitable to the notion we have of God or Man, to suppose that God may reveal, and yet reveal with a reserve, upon certain remote and sublime subjects, content to give us hints and glimpses, rather than views? May we not also suppose from the reason of things, and the analogy of Nature, that some points, which might otherwise have been more clearly explained, were left obscure meerly to encourage our diligence and modesty? Two virtues, which, if it might not seem disrespectful to such great Men, I wou’d recommend to the Minute Philosophers. Lysicles replied, This indeed is excellent: You expect that Men of sense and spirit shou’d in great humility put out their eyes, and blindly swallow all the absurdities and nonsense that shall be offered to them for divine Revelation. EUPH. On the contrary, I wou’d have them open their eyes, look sharply, and try the Spirit, whether it is of God; and not supinely and ignorantly condemn in the gross, all Religions together, Piety with Superstition, Truth for the sake of Error, matters of Fact for the sake of Fictions; a conduct, which at first sight wou’d seem absurd in History, Physick, or any other branch of Humane Inquiry: But to compare the Christian System, or Holy Scriptures, with other pretences to divine Revelation, to consider impartially the Doctrines, Precepts, and Events therein contained; weigh them in the balance with any other religious, natural, moral, or historical accounts; and diligently to examine all those proofs internal and external, that for so many ages have been able to influence and persuade so many wise, learned and inquisitive Men: Perhaps they might find in it certain peculiar characters, which sufficiently distinguish it from all other Religions and pretended Revelations, whereon to ground a reasonable Faith. In which case I leave them to consider, whether it wou’d be right to reject with peremptory scorn a Revelation so distinguished and attested, upon account of Obscurity in some parts of it? and whether it wou’d seem beneath Men of their Sense and Spirit to acknowledge, that, for ought they know, a light inadaequate to things, may yet be adaequate to the purpose of Providence? and whether it might be unbecoming their sagacity and critical skill to own, that literal Translations from Books in an ancient Oriental tongue, wherein there are so many peculiarities, as to the manner of writing, the figures of Speech, and structure of the Phrase, so remote from all our modern Idioms, and in which we have no other coaeval writings extant, might well be obscure in many places, especially such as treat of subjects sublime and difficult in their own nature, or allude to things, customs or events, very distant from our knowledge? And lastly, whether it might not become their character, as impartial and unprejudiced Men, to consider the Bible in the same light they wou’d profane Authors? They are apt to make great allowance for Transpositions, Omissions, and literal Errors of Transcribers in other ancient Books, and very great for the difference of Style and Manner, especially in eastern Writings, such as the remains of Zoroaster and Confucius, and why not in the Prophets? In reading Horace or Persius to make out the sense, they will be at the pains to discover a hidden Drama, and why not in Solomon or St. Paul? I hear there are certain ingenious Men who despise King David’s Poetry, and yet profess to admire Homer and Pindar. If there be no prejudice or affectation in this, let them but make a literal version from those Authors into English Prose, and they will then be better able to judge of the Psalms. ALC. You may discourse and exspatiate; but notwithstanding all you have said or shall say, it is a clear point that a Revelation, which doth not reveal, can be no better than a contradiction in terms. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, do you not acknowledge the light of the Sun to be the most glorious production of Providence in this natural World? ALC. Suppose I do. EUPH. This light, nevertheless, which you cannot deny to be of God’s making, shines only on the surface of things, shines not at all in the Night, shines imperfectly in the twilight, is often interrupted, refracted, and obscured, represents distant things, and small things dubiously, imperfectly, or not at all. Is this true or no? ALC. It is. EUPH. Shou’d it not follow therefore, that to expect in this World a light from God without any mixture of shade or mystery, wou’d be departing from the rule and analogy of the Creation? and that consequently it is no argument the light of Revelation is not Divine, because it may not be so clear and full as you expect. ALC. As I profess my self candid and indifferent throughout this debate, I must needs own you say some plausible things, as a Man of argument will never fail to do in vindication of his prejudices.

IX.

But, to deal plainly, I must tell you once for all, that you may question and answer, illustrate and enlarge for ever, without being able to convince me that the Christian Religion is of Divine Revelation. I have said several things, and have many more to say, which, believe me, have weight not only with my self, but with many great Men my very good friends, and will have weight whatever Euphranor can say to the contrary. EUPH. O Alciphron, I envy you the happiness of such acquaintance. But, as my lot fallen in this remote corner deprives me of that advantage, I am obliged to make the most of this opportunity, which you and Lysicles have put into my hands. I consider you as two able Chirurgeons, and you were pleased to consider me as a Patient, whose cure you have generously undertaken. Now a Patient must have full liberty to explain his case, and tell all his Symptoms, the concealing or palliating of which might prevent a perfect cure. You will be pleased therefore to understand me, not as objecting to, or arguing against, either your Skill or Medicines, but only as setting forth my own case and the effects they have upon me. Say, Alciphron, did you not give me to understand that you wou’d extirpate my prejudices? ALC. It is true: a good Physician eradicates every fibre of the disease. Come, you shall have a patient hearing. EUPH. Pray, was it not the opinion of Plato, that God inspired particular Men, as Organs or Trumpets, to proclaim and sound forth his Oracles to the World? And was not the same opinion also embraced by others the greatest Writers of Antiquity? CRI. Socrates seems to have thought that all true Poets spoke by Inspiration; and Tully, that there was no extraordinary Genius without it. This hath made some of our affected Free-thinkers attempt to pass themselves upon the World for Enthusiasts. ALC. What wou’d you infer from all this? EUPH. I wou’d infer that inspiration shou’d seem nothing impossible or absurd, but rather agreeable to the light of reason and the notions of Mankind. And this, I suppose, you will acknowledge, having made it an Objection against a particular Revelation, that there are so many pretences to it throughout the World. ALC. O Euphranor, he, who looks into the bottom of things, and resolves them into their first principles, is not easily amused with words. The word Inspiration sounds indeed big, but let us, if you please, take an original view of the thing signified by it. To inspire is a word borrowed from the Latin, and strictly taken means no more than to breathe or blow in: nothing therefore can be inspired but what can be blown or breathed, and nothing can be so but wind or vapour, which indeed may fill or puff up Men with fanatical and hypochondriacal ravings. This sort of Inspiration I very readily admit. EUPH. What you say is subtle, and I know not what effect it might have upon me, if your profound discourse did not hinder its own operation. ALC. How so? EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, do you discourse or do you not? To me it seems that you discourse admirably. ALC. Be that as it will, it is certain I discourse. EUPH. But when I endeavour to look into the bottom of things, behold! A scruple riseth in my mind how this can be; for to discourse is a word of Latin derivation, which originally signifies to run about; and a Man cannot run about, but he must change place and move his Legs; so long therefore as you sit on this Bench, you cannot be said to discourse. Solve me this difficulty, and then perhaps I may be able to solve yours. ALC. You are to know, that discourse is a word borrowed from sensible things, to express an invisible action of the mind, reasoning or inferring one thing from another; and in this translated sense, we may be said to discourse, though we sit still. EUPH. And may we not as well conceive, that the term Inspiration might be borrowed from sensible things to denote an action of God, in an extraordinary manner, influencing, exciting, and enlightening the mind of a Prophet or an Apostle? who, in this secondary, figurative, and translated sense, may truly be said to be inspired, though there shou’d be nothing in the case of that wind or vapour implied in the original sense of the word? It seems to me, that we may by looking into our own minds plainly perceive certain instincts, impulses, and tendencies, which at proper periods and occasions spring up unaccountably in the Soul of Man. We observe very visible signs of the same in all other Animals. And these things being ordinary and natural, what hinders but we may conceive it possible for the humane Mind, upon an extraordinary account, to be moved in an extraordinary manner, and its faculties stirred up and actuated by a supernatural Power? That there are and have been, and are likely to be wild visions and hypochondriacal ravings, no body can deny; but to infer from thence, that there are no true Inspirations wou’d be too like concluding, that some Men are not in their senses, because other Men are fools. And though I am no Prophet, and consequently cannot pretend to a clear notion of this matter; yet I shall not therefore take upon me to deny, but a true Prophet or inspired Person, might have had as certain means, of discerning between divine Inspiration and hypochondriacal fancy, as you can between sleeping and waking, till you have proved the contrary. You may meet in the Book of Jeremiah with this passage:

The Prophet that hath a dream let him tell a dream: And he that hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully: what is the chaff to the Wheat, saith the Lord? Is not my word like as a fire, saith the Lord, and like a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces?

*You see here a distinction made between Wheat and Chaff, true and spurious, with the mighty force and power of the former. But I beg pardon for quoting Scripture to you, I make my appeal to the general sense of Mankind, and the Opinion of the wisest Heathens, which seems sufficient to conclude Divine Inspiration possible, if not probable, at least till you prove the contrary.

X.

ALC. The possibility of Inspirations and Revelations I do not think it necessary to deny. Make the best you can of this concession. EUPH. Now what is allowed possible we may suppose in fact. ALC. We may. EUPH. Let us then suppose, that God had been pleased to make a Revelation to Men; and that he inspired some as a means to instruct others. Having supposed this, can you deny, that their inspired Discourses and Revelations might have been committed to Writing, or that being written, after a long tract of time they might become in several places obscure; that some of them might even originally have been less clear than others, or that they might suffer some alteration by frequent transcribing, as other Writings are known to have done? Is it not even very probable that all these things wou’d happen? ALC. I grant it. EUPH. And granting this, with what pretence can you reject the Holy Scriptures as not being divine, upon the account of such signs or marks, as you acknowledge wou’d probably attend a Divine Revelation transmitted down to us through so many Ages? ALC. But allowing all that in reason you can desire, and granting that this may account for some obscurity, may reconcile some small differences, or satisfy us how some difficulties might arise by inserting, omitting or changing here and there a letter, a word, or perhaps a sentence: Yet these are but small matters, in respect of the much more considerable and weighty objections I cou’d produce, against the confessed doctrines, or subject matter of those Writings. Let us see what is contained in these sacred Books, and then judge whether it is probable or possible, such Revelations shou’d ever have been made by God? Now I defy the wit of Man to contrive any thing more extrayagant, than the accounts we there find of Apparitions, Devils, Miracles, God manifest in the flesh, Regeneration, Grace, Self-denial, Resurrection of the dead, and such like aegri somnia: things so odd, unaccountable, and remote from the apprehension of Mankind, you may as soon wash a Blackamore white, as clear them of absurdity. No critical skill can justify them, no tradition recommend them, I will not say for Divine Revelations, but even for the inventions of Men of Sense. EUPH. I had always a great opinion of your sagacity, but now, Alciphron, I consider you as something more than Man; else how shou’d it be possible for you to know, what or how far it may be proper for God to reveal? Methinks it may consist with all due deference to the greatest of Humane Understandings, to suppose them ignorant of many things, which are not suited to their faculties, or lie out of their reach. Even the Counsels of Princes lie often beyond the ken of their Subjects, who can only know so much as is revealed by those at the helm; and are often unqualified to judge of the usefulness and tendency even of that, till in due time the scheme unfolds, and is accounted for by succeeding events. That many points contained in holy Scripture are remote from the common apprehensions of Mankind, cannot be denied. But I do not see, that it follows from thence they are not of Divine Revelation. On the contrary, shou’d it not seem reasonable to suppose, that a Revelation from God shou’d contain something different in kind, or more excellent in degree, than what lay open to the common sense of Men, or cou’d even be discovered by the most sagacious Philosopher? Accounts of separate Spirits, good or bad, Prophesies, Miracles and such things are undoubtedly strange; but I wou’d fain see how you can prove them impossible or absurd. ALC. Some things there are so evidently absurd, that it wou’d be almost as silly to disprove them as to believe them: and I take these to be of that class.

XI.

EUPH. But is it not possible, some Men may shew as much prejudice and narrowness in rejecting all such accounts, as others might easiness and credulity in admitting them? I never durst make my own observation or experience, the rule and measure of things spiritual, supernatural, or relating to another World, because I shou’d think it a very bad one, even for the visible and natural things of this; It wou’d be judging like the Siamese, who was positive it did not freeze in Holland, because he had never known such a thing as hard water or ice in his own Country. I cannot comprehend why any one, who admits the union of the Soul and Body, shou’d pronounce it impossible for the Humane Nature to be united to the Divine, in a manner ineffable and incomprehensible by Reason. Neither can I see any absurdity in admitting, that sinful Man may become regenerate or a new Creature, by the grace of God reclaiming him from a carnal Life to a spiritual Life of Virtue and Holiness. And since, the being governed by Sense and Appetite is contrary to the happiness and perfection of a rational Creature, I do not at all wonder that we are prescribed Selfdenial. As for the Resurrection of the dead, I do not conceive it so very contrary to the Analogy of Nature, when I behold Vegetables left to rot in the earth, rise up again with new Life and Vigour, or a Worm to all appearance dead change its Nature, and that, which in its first being crawled on the Earth, become a new species, and fly abroad with Wings. And indeed when I consider, that the Soul and Body are things so very different and heterogeneous, I can see no reason to be positive, that the one must necessarily be extinguished upon the dissolution of the other; especially since I find in my self a strong natural desire of Immortality, and I have not observed that natural Appetites are wont to be given in vain, or meerly to be frustrated. Upon the whole those points, which you account extravagant and absurd, I dare not pronounce to be so till I see good reason for it.

XII.

CRI. No, Alciphron, your positive airs must not pass for proofs; nor will it suffice to say, things are contrary to common sense, to make us think they are so: By common Sense, I suppose shou’d be meant either the general sense of Mankind, or the improved reason of thinking Men. Now I believe that all those Articles, you have with so much capacity and fire at once summed up and exploded, may be shewn to be not disagreeable, much less contrary to common sense in one or other of these acceptations. That the Gods might appear and converse among Men, and that the Divinity might inhabit Humane Nature, were points allowed by the Heathens; and for this I appeal to their Poets and Philosophers, whose Testimonies are so numerous and clear, that it wou’d be an affront to repeat them to a Man of any Education. And though the notion of a Devil may not be so obvious, or so fully described, yet there appear plain traces of it, either from Reason or Tradition. The latter Platonists, as Porphyry and Iamblichus, are very clear in the point, allowing that evil Daemons delude and tempt, hurt and possess Mankind. That the ancient Greeks, Chaldaeans, and Aegyptians, believed both good and bad Angels, may be plainly collected from Plato, Plutarch, and the Chaldaean Oracles. Origen observes, That almost all the Gentiles, who held the being of Daemons, allowed there were bad ones . There is even something as early as Homer, that is thought by the learned Cardinal Bessarion to allude to the fall of Satan, in the acount of Ate, whom the Poet represents as cast down from Heaven by Jove, and then wandring about the Earth, doing mischief to Mankind. This same Ate is said by Hesiod, to be the Daughter of Discord; and by Euripides, in his Hippolitus, is mentioned as a tempter to evil, And it is very remarkable, that Plutarch, in his Book, De vitando aere alieno, speaks after Empedocles, of certain Daemons that fell from Heaven, and were banished by God. Nor is that less remarkable which is observed by Ficinus from Pherecydes Syrus, That there had been a downfal of Daemons who revolted from God; and that Ophioneus (the old Serpent) was head of that rebellious Crew . Then as to other articles, let any one consider what the Pythagoreans taught of the Purgation, or Deliverance of the Soul: What most Philosophers, but especially the Stoics, of subduing our Passions: What Plato and Hierocles have said of forgiving Injuries: What the acute and sagacious Aristotle writes, in his Ethics to Nicomachus, of the spiritual and divine Life, that Life, which, according to him, is too excellent to be thought Humane; insomuch as Man, so far forth as Man, cannot attain to it, but only so far forth as he hath something divine in him: And particularly, let him reflect on what Socrates taught, to wit, That Virtue is not to be learned from Men, that it is the Gift of God, and that good Men are not good by virtue of Humane Care or Diligence. Let any Man, who really thinks, but consider what other thinking Men have thought, who cannot be supposed prejudiced in favour of Revealed Religion; and he will see cause, if not to think with reverence of the Christian Doctrines of Grace, Self-denial, Regeneration, Sanctification, and the rest, even the most mysterious, at least to judge more modestly and warily, than those who shall, with a confident air, pronounce them absurd, and repugnant to the Reason of Mankind. And in regard to a future State, the common sense of the Gentile World, modern or ancient, and the opinions of the wisest Men of Antiquity, are things so well known, that I need say nothing about them. To me it seems, the Minute Philosophers, when they appeal to Reason and common Sense, mean only the Sense of their own Party: A coin, how current soever among themselves, that other Men will bring to the touchstone, and pass for no more than it is worth. LYS. Be those notions agreeable to what or whose Sense they may, they are not agreeable to mine. And if I am thought ignorant for this, I pity those who think me so.

XIII.

I enjoy my self, and follow my own courses, without remorse or fear; which I should not do, if my Head were filled with Enthusiasm; whether Gentile or Christian, Philosophical or Revealed, it is all one to me. Let others know or believe what they can, and make the best on’t, I, for my part, am happy and safe in my Ignorance. CRI. Perhaps not so safe neither. LYS. Why, surely you won’t pretend that Ignorance is criminal? CRI. Ignorance alone is not a crime. But that wilful Ignorance, affected Ignorance, Ignorance from Sloth, or conceited Ignorance, is a fault, might easily be proved by the testimony of Heathen Writers; and it needs no proof to shew, that if Ignorance be our fault, we cannot be secure in it as an excuse. LYS. Honest Crito seems to hint, that a Man shou’d take care to inform himself, while alive, lest his neglect be punished when he is dead. Nothing is so pusillanimous and unbecoming a Gentleman, as Fear: Nor cou’d you take a likelier course to fix and rivet a Man of honour in Guilt, than by attempting to frighten him out of it. This is the stale, absurd Stratagem of Priests, and that which makes them, and their Religion, more odious and contemptible to me than all the other Articles put together. CRI. I wou’d fain know why it may not be reasonable for a Man of honour, or any Man who has done amiss to fear? Guilt is the natural Parent of fear; and nature is not used to make men fear where there is no occasion. That impious and profane Men shou’d expect divine punishment, doth not seem so absurd to conceive: And that under this expectation they shou’d be uneasy and even afraid, how consistent soever it may or may not be with honour, I am sure consists with reason. LYS. That thing of Hell and eternal Punishment is the most absurd, as well as the most disagreeable thought that ever entered into the head of mortal Man. CRI. But you must own that it is not an absurdity peculiar to Christians, since Socrates, that great Free-thinker of Athens, thought it probable there may be such a thing as impious Men for ever punished in Hell . It is recorded of this same Socrates, that he has been often known to think for four and twenty hours together, fixed in the same posture, and wrapt up in meditation. LYS. Our modern Free-thinkers are a more lively sort of Men. Those old Philosophers were most of them whimsical. They had in my judgment a dry, narrow, timorous way of thinking, which by no means came up to the frank humour of our times. CRI. But I appeal to your own judgment, if a Man, who knows not the nature of the Soul, can be assured by the light of reason, whether it is mortal or immortal?

An simul intereat nobiscum morte perempta,

An tenebras orci visat vastasque lacunas?

LYS. But what if I know the nature of the Soul? What if I have been taught that whole secret by a modern Free-thinker? a Man of science who discovered it not by a tiresome introversion of his faculties, not by amusing himself in a labyrinth of notions, or stupidly thinking for whole days and nights together, but by looking into things and observing the analogy of nature.

XIV.

This great Man is a Philosopher by fire, who has made many processes upon vegetables. It is his opinion that Men and Vegetables are really of the same species; that Animals are moving Vegetables, and Vegetables fixed Animals; that the mouths of the one and the roots of the other serve to the same use, differing only in position; that blossoms and flowers answer to the most indecent and concealed parts in the humane body; that vegetable and animal bodies are both alike organized, and that in both there is Life or a certain motion and circulation of juices through proper Tubes or Vessels. I shall never forget this able Man’s unfolding the nature of the Soul in the following manner. The Soul, said he, is that specific form or principle from whence proceed the distinct qualities or properties of things. Now, as Vegetables are a more simple and less perfect compound, and consequently more easily analysed than Animals, we will begin with the contemplation of the Souls of Vegetables. Know then, that the Soul of any Plant, Rosemary for instance, is neither more nor less than its essential Oil. Upon this depends its peculiar fragrance, taste, and medicinal virtues, or in other words its life and operations. Separate or extract this essential Oil by Chymic art, and you get the Soul of the Plant: what remains being a dead Carcase, without any one property or virtue of the Plant, which is preserved entire in the Oil, a Drachm whereof goes further than several pounds of the Plant. Now this same essential Oil is it self a composition of Sulphur and Salt, or of a gross unctuous substance, and a fine subtile principle or volatile Salt imprisoned therein. This volatile Salt is properly the essence of the Soul of the Plant, containing all its virtue, and the Oil is the vehicle of this most subtile part of the Soul, or that which fixes and individuates it. And as, upon separation of this Oil from the Plant, the Plant died, so a second death or death of the Soul ensues upon the resolution of this essential Oil into its principles; as appears by leaving it exposed for some time to the open air, so that the volatile Salt or Spirit may fly off; after which the Oil remains dead and insipid, but without any sensible diminution of its weight, by the loss of that volatile essence of the Soul, that aethereal aura, that spark of entity, which returns and mixes with the Solar light, the universal Soul of the World, and only source of Life, whether Vegetable, Animal, or Intellectual; which differ only according to the grossness or fineness of the vehicles, and the different textures of the natural Alembics, or in other words, the organized Bodies, where the abovementioned volatile essence inhabits and is elaborated, where it acts and is acted upon. This Chymical System lets you at once into the nature of the Soul, and accounts for all it’s phaenomena. In that compound which is called Man, the Soul or essential Oil is what commonly goes by the name of Animal Spirit: for you must know, it is a point agreed by Chymists, that Spirits are nothing but the more subtile Oils. Now in proportion, as the essential Oil of Man is more subtile than that of other Creatures, the volatile Salt that impregnates it is more at liberty to act, which accounts for those specifick properties and actions of Humane Kind, which distinguish them above other Creatures. Hence you may learn why among the wise ancients, Salt was another name for wit, and in our times a dull Man is said to be insipid or insulse. Aromatic Oils maturated by great length of time turn to Salts: this shews why Humane Kind, grow wiser by age. And what I have said of the twofold death or dissolution, first of the compound, by separating the Soul from the organical Body, and secondly of the Soul it self, by dividing the volatile Salt from the Oil, illustrates and explains that notion of certain ancient Philosophers: that as the Man was a compound of soul and body, so the Soul was compounded of the mind or intellect, and its aethereal vehicle; and that the separation of Soul and Body or death of the Man is, after a long tract of time, succeeded by a second death of the Soul it self, to wit the separation or deliverance of the intellect from its vehicle, and reunion with the Sun. EUPH. O Lysicles your ingenious friend has opened a new Scene, and explained the most obscure and difficult points in the clearest and easiest manner. LYS. I must own this account of things struck my fancy. I am no great lover of Creeds or Systems; but when a notion is reasonable and grounded on experience I know how to value it. CRI. In good earnest, Lysicles, do you believe this account to be true? LYS. Why then in good earnest I don’t know whether I do or no. But I can assure you the ingenious Artist himself has not the least doubt about it. And to believe an Artist in his art is a just maxim and short way to Science. CRI. But what relation hath the Soul of Man to Chymic art? The same reason, that bids me trust a skilful Artist in his art, inclines me to suspect him out of his art. Men are too apt to reduce unknown things to the standard of what they know, and bring a prejudice or tincture from things they have been conversant in, to judge thereby of things in which they have not been conversant. I have known a Fidler gravely teach that the Soul was Harmony; a Geometrician very positive that the Soul must be extended; and a Physician, who having pickled half a doozen embryos and dissected as many Rats and Frogs, grew conceited and affirmed there was no Soul at all, and that it was a vulgar error. LYS. My notions sit easy. I shall not engage in pedantic disputes about them. They who don’t like them may leave them. EUPH. This, I suppose, is said much like a Gentelman.

XV.

But pray, Lysicles, tell me whether the Clergy come within that general rule of yours; that an Artist may be trusted in his art? LYS. By no means. EUPH. Why so? LYS. Because I take my self to know as much of those matters as they do. EUPH. But you allow, that in any other profession, one who hath spent much time and pains may attain more knowledge, than a Man of equal or better parts, who never made it his particular business. LYS. I do. EUPH. And nevertheless in things religious and divine you think all Men equally knowing. LYS. I do not say all Men. But I think all Men of sense competent judges. EUPH. What! are the divine attributes and dispensations to Mankind, the true end and happiness of rational Creatures, with the means of improving and perfecting their Beings, more easy and obvious points than those which make the subject of every common profession? LYS. Perhaps not: but one thing I know, some things are so manifestly absurd, that no authority shall make me give into them. For instance, if all Mankind shou’d pretend to persuade me that the Son of God was born upon earth in a poor Family, was spit upon, buffeted and crucified, lived like a Beggar and died like a Thief, I shou’d never believe one syllable of it. Common sense shews every one, what figure it wou’d be decent for an earthly Prince or Ambassador to make; and the Son of God, upon an ambassy from Heaven, must needs have made an appearance beyond all others of great eclat, and in all respects the very reverse of that which Jesus Christ is reported to have made, even by his own Historians. EUPH. O Lysicles, though I had ever so much mind to approve and applaud your ingenious reasoning, yet I dare not assent to this for fear of Crito. LYS. Why so? EUPH. Because he observed just now, that Men judge of things they do not know, by prejudices from things they do know. And I fear he wou’d object that you, who have been conversant in the grand Monde, having your head filled with a notion of Attendants and Equipage and Liveries, the familiar badges of Humane Grandeur, are less able to judge of that which is truly divine; and that one who had seen less, and thought more, wou’d be apt to imagine a pompous parade of worldly greatness, not the most becoming the Author of a spiritual Religion, that was designed to wean Men from the world, and raise them above it. CRI. Do you think, Lysicles, if a Man shou’d make his entrance into London in a rich suit of Clothes, with a hundred gilt Coaches, and a thousand laced Footmen; that this wou’d be a more divine appearance, and have more of true grandeur in it, than if he had power with a word to heal all manner of diseases, to raise the dead to life, and still the raging of the Winds and Sea? LYS. Without all doubt it must be very agreeable to common sense to suppose, that he cou’d restore others to life who cou’d not save his own. You tell us, indeed, that he rose again from the dead: but what occasion was there for him to die, the just for the unjust, the Son of God for wicked Men? and why in that individual place? Why at that very time above all others? Why did he not make his appearance earlier, and preach in all parts of the World, that the benefit might have been more extensive? Account for all these points and reconcile them, if you can, to the common notions and plain sense of Mankind. CRI. And what if those, as well as many other points, shou’d lie out of the road that we are acquainted with; must we therefore explode them, and make it a rule to condemn every proceeding as senseless, that doth not square with the vulgar sense of Man; If the precepts and certain primary tenets of Religion appear in the eye of Reason good and useful; and if they are also found to be so by their effects; we may, for the sake of them, admit certain other points or doctrines recommended with them, to have a good tendency, to be right and true; although we cannot discern their goodness or truth by the meer light of Humane Reason, which may well be supposed an insufficient judge of the proceedings, counsels, and designs of Providence, and this sufficeth to make our conviction reasonable.

XVI.

It is an allowed point that no Man can judge of this or that part of a machine taken by it self, without knowing the whole, the mutual relation or dependence of its parts, and the end for which it was made. And, as this is a point acknowledged in corporeal and natural things, ought we not by a parity of reason to suspend our judgment of a single unaccountable part of the Divine Oeconomy, till we are more fully acquainted with the moral System, or world of Spirits, and are let into the designs of God’s Providence, and have an extensive view of his dispensations past, present, and future? Alas! Lysicles, what do you know even of your self, whence you come, what you are, or whither you are going? To me it seems, that a Minute Philosopher is like a conceited Spectator, who never looked behind the Scenes, and yet wou’d judge of the machinery; who from a transient glimpse of a part only of some one scene, wou’d take upon him to censure the plot of a Play. LYS. As to the plot I won’t say; but in half a Scene a Man may judge of an absurd Actor. With what colour or pretext can you justify the vindictive, froward, whimsical behaviour of some inspired Teachers or Prophets? Particulars that serve neither for profit nor pleasure I make a shift to forget; but in general the truth of this charge I do very well remember. CRI. You need be at no pains to prove a point I shall neither justify nor deny. That there have been humane passions, infirmities, and defects in persons inspired by God, I freely own; nay, that very wicked Men have been inspired, as Balaam for instance and Caiaphas, cannot denied. But what will you infer from thence? Can you prove it impossible, that a weak or sinful Man shou’d become an instrument to the Spirit of God, for conveying his purpose to other Sinners? Or that Divine Light may not, as well as the light of the Sun, shine on a foul vessel without polluting its rays? LYS. To make short work, the right way wou’d be to put out our eyes, and not judge at all. CRI. I do not say so, but I think it wou’d be right, if some sanguine persons upon certain points suspected their own judgment. ALC. But the very things said to be inspired, taken by themselves and in their own nature, are sometimes so wrong, to say no worse, that a Man may pronounce them not to be divine at first sight; without troubling his head about the System of Providence or Connexion of Events: As one may say that Grass is green, without knowing or considering how it grows, what uses it is subservient to, or how it is connected with the mundane System. Thus for instance, the spoiling of the Aegyptians, and the extirpation of the Canaanites, every one at first glance sees to be cruel and unjust, and may therefore without deliberating pronounce them unworthy of God. CRI. But, Alciphron, to judge rightly of these things, may it not be proper to consider how long the Israelites had wrought under those severe Task-masters of Egypt, what injuries and hardships they had sustained from them, what crimes and abominations the Canaanites had been guilty of, what right God hath to dispose of the things of this World, to punish Delinquents, and to appoint both the manner and the instruments of his Justice? Man, who has not such right over his fellow-creatures, who is himself a fellow-sinner with them, who is liable to error as well as passion, whose views are imperfect, who is governed more by Prejudice, than the Truth of things, may not improbably deceive himself, when he sets up for a judge of the proceedings of the holy, omniscient, impassive Creator and Governor of all things.

XVII.

ALC. Believe me, Crito, Men are never so industrious to deceive themselves, as when they engage to defend their Prejudices. You wou’d fain reason us out of all use of our Reason: Can any thing be more irrational? To forbid us to reason on the Divine Dispensations, is to suppose, they will not bear the test of reason; or, in other words, that God acts without reason, which ought not to be admitted, no, not in any single instance: For if in one, why not in another? Whoever therefore allows a God, must allow that he always acts reasonably. I will not therefore attribute to him Actions and Proceedings that are unreasonable. He hath given me Reason to judge withal; and I will judge by that unerring Light, lighted from the universal lamp of Nature. CRI. O Alciphron! as I frankly own the common remark to be true, That when a Man is against Reason, it is a shrewd sign Reason is against him; so I shou’d never go about to dissuade any one, much less one who so well knew the value of it, from using that noble talent. On the contrary, upon all subjects of moment, in my opinion, a Man ought to use his Reason; but then, whether it may not be reasonable to use it with some deference to superior Reason, it will not, perhaps, be amiss to consider. ALC. It must surely derogate from the Wisdom of God, to suppose his conduct cannot bear being inspected, not even by the twilight of Humane Reason. EUPH. You allow, then, God to be wise? ALC. I do. EUPH. What! infinitely wise? ALC. Even infinitely. EUPH. His Wisdom, then, far exceeds that of Man. ALC. Vastly. EUPH. Probably more than the Wisdom of Man, that of a Child. ALC. Without all question. EUPH. What think you, Alciphron, must not the conduct of a Parent seem very unaccountable to a Child, when its inclinations are thwarted, when it is put to learn the Letters, when it is obliged to swallow bitter Physick, to part with what it likes, and to suffer, and do, and see many things done contrary to its own judgment, however reasonable or agreeable to that of others? ALC. This I grant. EUPH. Will it not therefore follow from hence by a parity of reason, that the little child, Man, when it takes upon it to judge of the Schemes of Parental Providence, and a thing of yesterday, to criticise the Oeconomy of the Ancient of days? will it not follow, I say, that such a judge, of such matters, must be apt to make very erroneous judgments? esteeming those things in themselves unaccountable, which he cannot account for; and concluding of some certain points, from an appearance of arbitrary carriage towards him, which is suited to his infancy and ignorance, that they are in themselves capricious or absurd, and cannot proceed from a wise, just, and benevolent God. This single consideration, if duly attended to, wou’d, I verily think, put an end to many conceited reasonings against Revealed Religion. ALC. You wou’d have us then conclude, that things, to our wisdom unaccountable, may nevertheless proceed from an abyss of Wisdom which our line cannot fathom; and that prospects viewed but in part, and by the broken tinged light of our Intellects, though to us they may seem disproportionate and monstrous, may nevertheless appear quite otherwise to another eye, and in a different situation: In a word, that as Humane Wisdom is but childish Folly, in respect of the divine, so the Wisdom of God may sometimes seem Foolishness to Men.

XVIII.

EUPH. I wou’d not have you make these conclusions, unless in reason you ought to make them: But if they are reasonable, why shou’d you not make them? ALC. Some things may seem reasonable at one time, and not at another: And I take this very apology you make, for Credulity and Superstition, to be one of those things. When I view it in its Principles, it seems naturally to follow from just concessions; but when I consider its consequences, I cannot agree to it. A Man had as good abdicate his Nature, as disclaim the use of Reason. A Doctrine is unaccountable, therefore it must be Divine! EUPH. Credulity and Superstition are qualities so disagreeable and degrading to Humane Nature, so surely an effect of weakness, and so frequently a cause of wickedness, that I shou’d be very much surprised to find a just course of reasoning lead to them. I can never think that Reason is a blind guide to folly, or that there is any connexion between Truth and Falshood, no more than I can think a thing’s being unaccountable a proof that it is Divine: Though at the same time I cannot help acknowledging, it follows from your own avow’d principles, that a thing’s being unaccountable, or incomprehensible to our Reason, is no sure argument to conclude it is not Divine; especially when there are collateral proofs of its being so. A Child is influenced by the many sensible effects it hath felt, of paternal love and care and superior wisdom, to believe and do several things with an implicit faith and obedience: And if we in the same manner, from the truth and reasonableness which we plainly see in so many points within our cognisance, and the advantages which we experience from the seed of the Gospel sown in good ground, were disposed to an implicit Belief of certain other points, relating to schemes we do not know, or subjects to which our Talents are perhaps disproportionate, I am tempted to think it might become our duty without dishonouring our Reason; which is never so much dishonoured as when it is foiled, and never in more danger of being foiled, than by judging where it hath neither means nor right to judge. LYS. I wou’d give a good deal, to see that ingenious Gamester Glaucus have the handling of Euphranor one night at our Club. I own he is a peg too high for me in some of his notions: But then he is admirable at vindicating Humane Reason against the impositions of Priestcraft.

XIX.

ALC. He wou’d undertake to make it as clear as day light, that there was nothing worth a straw in Christianity, but what every one knew, or might know, as well without as with it, before as since Jesus Christ. CRI. That great Man, it seems, teacheth, that common sense alone is the Pole-Star; by which Mankind ought to steer; and that what is called Revelation must be ridiculous, because it is unnecessary and useless, the natural talents of every Man being sufficient, to make him happy, good, and wise, without any further correspondence with Heaven either for light or aid. EUPH. I have already acknowledged how sensible I am, that my situation in this obscure corner of the Country deprives me of many advantages, to be had from the conversation of ingenious Men in Town. To make my self some amends, I am obliged to converse with the dead and my own Thoughts, which last I know are of little weight against the authority of Glaucus, or such like great Men in the Minute Philosophy. But what shall we say to Socrates, for he too was of an opinion very different from that ascribed to Glaucus? ALC. For the present we need not insist on authorities, ancient or modern, or inquire which was the greater Man Socrates or Glaucus. Though, methinks, for so much as authority can signify, the present times, gray and hoary with age and experience, have a manifest advantage over those that are falsly called ancient. But not to dwell on authorities, I tell you in plain English, Euphranor, we do not want your Revelations; and that for this plain reason, those that are clear every body knew before, and those that are obscure no body is the better for. EUPH. Whether it was possible for Mankind to have known all parts of the Christian Religion, besides mysteries and positive institutions, is not the question between us; and that they actually did not know them, is too plain to be denied. This, perhaps, was for want of making a due use of Reason. But, as to the usefulness of Revelation, it seems much the samething whether they cou’d not know, or wou’d not be at the pains to know, the Doctrines revealed. And as for those Doctrines which were too obscure to penetrate, or too sublime to reach, by natural Reason; how far Mankind may be the better for them is more, I had almost said, than even you or Glaucus can tell.

XX.

ALC. But whatever may be pretended as to obscure Doctrines and Dispensations, all this hath nothing to do with Prophecies, which, being altogether relative to Mankind, and the events of this World, to which our faculties are surely well enough proportioned, one might expect shou’d be very clear, and such as might inform instead of puzzling us. EUPH. And yet it must be allowed that as some Prophecies are clear, there are others very obscure; but left to my self, I doubt I shou’d never have inferred from thence that they were not Divine. In my own way of thinking I shou’d have been apt to conclude, that the Prophecies we understand are a proof for Inspiration; but that those we do not understand are no proof against it. Inasmuch as for the latter our ignorance or the reserve of the Holy Spirit may account, but for the other nothing, for ought that I see, can account but Inspiration. ALC. Now I know several sagacious Men, who conclude very differently from you, to wit, that the one sort of Prophecies are nonsense, and the other contrived after the events. Behold the difference between a Man of free thought and one of narrow principles! EUPH. It seems then they reject the Revelations because they are obscure, and Daniel’s Prophecies because they are clear. ALC. Either way a Man of sense sees cause to suspect there has been foul play. EUPH. Your Men of sense are, it seems, hard to please. ALC. Our Philosophers are Men of piercing eyes. EUPH. I suppose such Men never make transient judgments from transient views; but always establish fixed conclusions upon a thorough inspection of things. For my own part, I dare not engage with a Man, who has examined those points so nicely, as it may be presumed you have done: But I cou’d name some eminent writers of our own, now living, whose Books on the subject of Prophecy have given great satisfaction to Gentlemen, who pass for Men of sense and learning, here in the Country. ALC. You must know. Euphranor, I am not at leisure to peruse the learned Writings of Divines, on a subject which a Man may see through with half an eye. To me it is sufficient, that the point it self is odd and out of the road of nature. For the rest, I leave them to dispute and settle among themselves, where to fix the precise time when the Scepter departed from Judah; or whether in Daniel’s Prophecy of the Messiah we shou’d compute by the Chaldaean or the Julian year. My only conclusion concerning all such matters is, that I will never trouble my self about them. EUPH. To an extraordinary genius, who sees things with half an eye, I know not what to say: But for the rest of Mankind, one wou’d think it shou’d be very rash in them to conclude, without much and exact inquiry, on the unsafe side of a question which concerns their chief interest. ALC. Mark it well: a true Genius in pursuit of Truth makes swift advances on the wings of General maxims, while little minds creep and grovel amidst mean particularities. I lay it down for a certain Truth; that by the fallacious arts of Logic and Criticism, straining and forcing, palliating, patching and distinguishing, a Man may justify or make out any thing; and this remark, with one or two about prejudice, saves me a world of trouble. EUPH. You, Alciphron, who soar sublime on strong and free pinions, vouchsafe to lend a helping hand to those whom you behold entangled in the birdlime of prejudice. For my part, I find it very possible to suppose Prophecy may be Divine, although there shou’d be some obscurity at this distance, with respect to dates of time or kinds of years. you your self own Revelation possible; and allowing this I can very easily conceive it may be odd, and out of the road of nature. I can without amazement meet in Holy Scripture divers Prophecies, whereof I do not see the completion, divers texts I do not understand, divers mysteries above my comprehension, and ways of God to me unaccountable. Why may not some Prophecies relate to parts of History I am not well enough acquainted with, or to events not yet come to pass? It seems to me that Prophecies unfathomed by the hearer, or even the speaker himself, have been afterward verified and understood in the event; and it is one of my maxims, That, what hath been may be. Though I rub my Eyes, and do my utmost to extricate my self from prejudice, yet it still seems very possible to me, that, what I do not, a more acute, more attentive, or more learned Man may understand: At least thus much is plain; the difficulty of some points or passages doth not hinder the clearness of others, and those parts of Scripture, which we cannot interpret, we are not bound to know the sense of. What evil or what inconvenience, if we cannot comprehend what we are not obliged to comprehend, or if we cannot account for those things which it doth not belong to us to account for? Scriptures not understood, at one time, or by one person, may be understood at another time, or by other persons. May we not perceive, by retrospect on what is past, a certain progress from darker to lighter, in the series of the Divine Oeconomy towards Man? And may not future events clear up such points as at present exercise the faith of Believers? Now I cannot help thinking (such is the force either of truth or prejudice) that in all this, there is nothing strained or forced, or which is not reasonable and natural to suppose.

XXI.

ALC. Well, Euphranor, I will lend you a helping hand, since you desire it, but think fit to alter my method: For you must know, the main points of Christian Belief have been infused so early, and inculcated so often, by nurses, paedagogues, and priests, that, be the proofs ever so plain, it is a hard matter to convince a mind, thus tinctured and stained, by arguing against revealed Religion from its internal characters. I shall therefore set my self to consider things in another light, and examine your Religion by certain external characters or circumstantials, comparing the system of Revelation with collateral accounts of ancient Heathen writers, and shewing how ill it consists with them. Know then, that the Christian Revelation supposing the Jewish, it follows, that if the Jewish be destroyed the Christian must of course fall to the Ground. Now, to make short work, I shall attack this Jewish Revelation in its head. Tell me, are we not obliged, if we believe the Mosaic account of things, to hold the world was created not quite six thousand years ago? EUPH. I grant we are. ALC. What will you say now, if other ancient records carry up the History of the world many thousand years beyond this period? What if the Aegyptians and Chinese have accounts extending to thirty or forty thousand years? What if the former of these nations have observed twelve hundred eclipses, during the space of forty eight thousand years, before the time of Alexander the great? What if the Chinese have also many observations antecedent to the Jewish account of the Creation? What if the Chaldaeans had been observing the Stars for above four hundred thousand years? And what shall we say if we have Successions of Kings and their Reigns, marked for several thousand years before the beginning of the world, assigned by Moses? Shall we reject the accounts and records of all other nations, the most famous, ancient, and learned in the world, and preserve a blind reverence for the Legislator of the Jews? EUPH. And pray if they deserve to be rejected, why shou’d we not reject them? What if those monstrous Chronologies contain nothing but names without Actions and manifest fables? What if those pretended observations of Aegyptians and Chaldaeans were unknown or unregarded by ancient Astronomers? What if the Jesuits have shewn the inconsistency of the like Chinese pretentions with the Truth of the Ephemerides? What if the most ancient Chinese observations allow’d to be authentic, are those of two fixed Stars, one in the winter Solstice, the other in the Vernal Equinox, in the reign of their King Yao, which was since the Flood? ALC. You must give me leave to observe, the Romish Missionaries are of small credit in this point. EUPH. But what knowledge have we, or can we have, of those Chinese affairs, but by their means? The same persons that tell us of these accounts refute them; if we reject their authority in one case, what right have we to build upon it in another? ALC. When I consider that the Chinese have annals of more than forty thousand years, and that they are a learned ingenious and accute People, very curious, and adicted to Arts and Sciences, I profess I cannot help paying some regard to their accounts of time. EUPH. Whatever advantage their situation and political maxims may have given them, it doth not appear they are so learned or so acute in point of Science as the Europeans. The general character of the Chinese, if we may believe Trigaltius and other writers, is that they are men of a trifling and credulous curiosity, addicted to search after the Philosopher’s Stone, and a Medicine to make Men immortal, to Astrology, Fortune-telling, and Presages of all kinds. Their ignorance in Nature and Mathematics is evident, from the great hand the Jesuits make of that kind of knowledge among them. But what shall we think of those extraordinary annals, if the very Chinese themselves give no credit to them for more than three thousand years before Jesus Christ? If they do not pretend to have begun to write history above four thousand years ago? And if the oldest books they have now extant in an intelligible character, are not above two thousand years old? One wou’d think a Man of your Sagacity, so apt to suspect every thing out of the common road of nature, shou’d not without the clearest proof admit those annals for authentic, which record such strange things as the Sun’s not setting for ten days, and Gold raining three days together. Tell me, Alciphron, can you really believe these things without inquiring by what means the tradition was preserved, through what hands it passed, or what reception it met with, or who first committed it to writing? ALC. To omit the Chinese and their Story, it will serve my purpose as well to build on the authority of Manetho that learned Egyptian Priest, who had such opportunities of searching into the most ancient accounts of time, and copying into his Dynasties the most venerable and authentic records inscribed on the pillars of Hermes. EUPH. Pray, Alciphron, where were those chronological pillars to be seen? ALC. In the Scriadical land. EUPH. And where is that country? ALC. I don’t know. EUPH. How were those records preserved for so many ages down to the time of this Hermes, who is said to have been the first inventor of letters? ALC. I do not know. EUPH. Did any other writers, before or since Manetho, pretend to have seen, or transcribed, or known any thing about these pillars? ALC. Not that I know. EUPH. Or about the place where they are said to have been. ALC. If they did, it is more than I know. EUPH. Do the Greek Authors that went into Aegypt, and consulted the Aegyptian priests, agree with these accounts of Manetho? ALC. Suppose they do not. EUPH. Doth Diodorus, who lived since Manetho, follow, cite, or so much as mention this same Manetho? ALC. What will you infer from all this? EUPH. If I did not know you and your principles, and how vigilantly you guard against imposture, I shou’d infer that you were a very credulous Man. For what can we call it but credulity to believe most incredible things on most slender authority, such as fragments of an obscure writer, disagreeing with all other Historians, supported by an obscure authority of Hermes’s pillars, for which you must take his word, and which contain things so improbable as Successions of Gods and Demi-gods, for many thousand years, Vulcan alone having reigned nine thousand? There is little in these venerable Dynasties of Manetho, besides names and numbers; and yet in that little we meet with very strange things, that wou’d be thought Romantic in another writer: For instance, the Nile overflowing with honey, the Moon grown bigger, a speaking Lamb, seventy Kings who reigned as many days one after another, a King a day . If you are known Alciphron, to give credit to these things, I fear you will lose the honour of being thought incredulous. ALC. And yet these ridiculous fragments, as you wou’d represent them, have been thought worth the pains and lucubrations of very learned Men. How can you account for the work that the great Joseph Scaliger and Sir John Marsham make about them? EUPH. I do not pretend to account for it. To see Scaliger add another Julian period to make room for such things as Manetho’s Dynasties, and Sir John Marsham take so much learned pains to piece, patch, and mend those obscure fragments, to range them in Synchronisms, and try to adjust them with sacred Chronology, or make them consistent with themselves and other accounts, is to me very strange and unaccountable. Why they, or Eusebius, or yourself, or any other learned Man shou’d imagine those things deserve any regard I leave you to explain.

XXII.

ALC. After all it is not easy to conceive what shou’d move, not only Manetho, but also other Aegyptian Priests, long before his time, to set up such great pretences to antiquity, all which however differing from one another, agree in this, that they overthrow the Mosaic History? How can this be accounted for without some real foundation? What point of pleasure or profit, or power, cou’d set Men on forging Successions of ancient names, and periods of time for ages before the world began? EUPH. Pray, Alciphron, is there any thing so strange or singular in this vain humour of extending the antiquity of nations beyond the Truth? Hath it not been observed in most parts of the world? Doth it not even in our own times shew it self, especially among those dependent and subdued people, who have little else to boast of. To pass over others of our Fellow-subjects, who, in proportion as they are below their neighbours in wealth and power, lay claim to a more remote antiquity; are not the pretensions of Irish men in this way known to be very great? If I may trust my Memory O Flaherty, in his Ogygia, mentions some transactions in Ireland before the Flood. The same humour, and from the same cause, appears to have prevailed in Sicily, a Country for some Centuries past, subject to the Dominion of Foreigners: During which time, the Sicilians have published divers fabulous accounts, concerning the original and antiquity of their cities, wherein they vye with each other. It is pretended to be proved by ancient Inscriptions, whose existence or authority seems on a level with that of Hermes’s Pillars, that Palermo was founded in the days of the Patriarch Isaac by a colony of Hebrews, Phoenicians and Syrians, and that a Grandson of Esau had been Governor of a tower subsisting within these two hundred years in that city . The antiquity of Messina hath been carried still higher, by some who wou’d have us think it was enlarged by Nimrod. The like pretensions are made by Catania, and other Towns of that Island, who have found Authors of as good credit as Manetho to support them. Now I shou’d be glad to know why the Aegyptians, a subdued people, may not probably be supposed to have invented fabulous accounts from the same motive, and like others valued themselves on extravagant pretensions to Antiquity, when in all other respects they were so much inferior to their Masters? That people had been successively conquered by Ethiopians, Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians, and Grecians, before it appears that those wonderful Dynastics of Manetho and the Pillars of Hermes were ever heard of; as they had been by the two first of those Nations before the time of Solon himself, the earliest Greek that is known to have consulted the Priests of Aegypt: Whose accounts were so extravagant that even the Greek Historians, though unacquainted with Holy Scripture, were far from given an intire credit to them. Herodotus making a report upon their authority, saith, Those to whom such things seem credible may make the best of them, for himself declaring that it was his purpose to write what he heard . And both he and Diodorus do, on divers occasions, shew the same Diffidence in the narratives of those Aegyptian Priests. And as we observed of the Aegyptians, it is no less certain that the Phoenicians, Assyrians and Chaldaeans were each a conquered and reduced People, before the rest of the world appear to have heard any thing of their pretensions to so remote Antiquity. CRI. But what occasion is there to be at any pains to account for the humour of fabulous Writers? Is it not sufficient to see that they relate Absurdities; that they are unsupported by any foreign Evidence; that they do not appear to have been in Credit, even among their own Countrymen, and that they are inconsistent one with another? That Men shou’d have the Vanity to impose on the World by false accounts, is nothing strange; it is much more so, that after what hath been done towards undeceiving the world by so many learned Crities, there shou’d be Men found capable of being abused by those paltry scraps of Manetho, Berosus, Ctesias, or the like fabulous or Counterfeit Writers. ALC. Give me leave to observe, those learned Critics may prove to be Ecclesiastics, perhaps some of them Papists. CRI. what do you think of Sir Isaac Newton, was he either Papist or Ecclesiastic? Perhaps you may not allow him to have been in Sagacity, or Force of mind, equal to the great Men of the Minute Philosophy: But it cannot be denied that he had read and thought much upon the subject, and that the result of his inquiry was a perfect contempt of all those celebrated Rivals to Moses. ALC. It hath been observed by Ingenious Men, that Sir Isaac Newton, though a Layman, was deeply prejudiced, witness his great regard to the Bible. CRI. And the same may be said of Mr. Locke, Mr. Boyle, Lord Bacon, and other famous Laymen, who, however knowing in some points, must nevertheless be allowed not to have attained that keen Discernment, which is the peculiar distinction of your Sect.

XXIII.

But perhaps there may be other reasons beside prejudice, to incline a Man to give Moses the preference, on the Truth of whose History the Government, Manners, and Religion of his Countrymen were founded and framed; of whose History there are manifest traces in the most ancient books and traditions of the Gentiles, particularly of the Brachmans and Persees; whose history is confirmed by the late Invention of arts and sciences, the gradual Peopling of the world, the very Names of antient nations, and even by the Authority and Arguments of that renowned Philosopher Lucretius, who, on other points, is so much admired and followed by those of your Sect. Not to mention that the continual Decrease of fluids, the Sinking of hills, and the Diminution of Planetary motions afford so many Natural Proofs, which shew this world had a beginning; as the Civil or Historical proofs abovementioned do plainly point out, this beginning to have been about the time assigned in Holy Scripture. After all which I beg leave to add one Observation more. To any one who considers that, on digging into the earth, such quantities of shells, and, in some places, bones and horns of animals are found, sound and intire after having lain there in all probability some thousands of years; it shou’d seem probable, that Gems, Medals, and Implements in metal or stone, might have lasted intire, buried under ground forty or fifty thousand years, if the world had been so old. How comes it then to pass that no remains are found, no antiquities of those numerous ages preceding the Scripture accounts of time; no fragments of buildings, no publick monuments, no intaglias, cammeos, statues, basso relievos, medals, inscriptions, utensils, or artificial works of any kind are ever discover’d, which may bear testimony to the existence of those mighty Empires, those Successions of Monarchs, Heroes, and Demi-gods, for so many thousand years? Let us look forward and suppose ten or twenty thousand years to come, during which time we will suppose, that plagues, famines, wars, and earthquakes shall have made great havock in the world, is it not highly probable that at the end of such a period, Pillars, Vases, and Statues now in being of Granite, or Porphyry, or Jasper, (Stones of such hardness, as we know them to have lasted two thousand years above ground, without any considerable alteration) wou’d bear record of these and past ages? or that some of our current Coins might then be dug up, or old Walls and the foundations of Buildings shew themselves, as well as the shells and stones of the Primaeval World are preserved down to our times. To me it seems to follow from these considerations, which common sense and experience make all men judges of, that we may see good reason to conclude, the world was created about the time recorded in Holy Scripture. And if we admit a thing so extraordinary as the Creation of this World, it shou’d seem that we admit something strange, and odd, and new to Humane Apprehension, beyond any other miracle whatsoever.

XXIV.

Alciphron sate musing and made no answer, whereupon Lysicles expressed himself in the following manner. I must own I shou’d rather suppose with Lucretius, that the world was made by chance, and that Men grew out of the earth, like Pompions, than pin my faith on those wretched fabulous fragments of Oriental History. And as for the learned Men, who have taken pains to illustrate and piece them together, they appear to me no better than so many musty Pedants. An ingenious Free-thinker may perhaps now and then make some use of their Lucubrations, and play one absurdity against another. But you are not therefore to think, he pays any real regard to the authority of such apocryphal Writers, or believes one syllable of the Chinese, Babylonian, or Egyptian Traditions. If we seem to give them a preference before the Bible, it is only because they are not established by Law. This is my plain sense of the matter, and I dare say it is the general sense of our Sect; who are too rational to be in earnest on such trifles, though they sometime give hints of deep Erudition, and put on a grave face to divert themselves with Bigots. ALC. Since Lysicles will have it so, I am content not to build on accounts of time preceding the Mosaic. I must nevertheless beg leave to observe, there is another point of a different nature, against which there do not lie the same exceptions, that deserves to be considered, and may serve our purpose as well. I presume it will be allowed that Historians, treating of times within the Mosaic account, ought by impartial Men to be placed on the same foot with Moses. It may therfore be expected, that those, who pretend to vindicate his Writings, shou’d reconcile them with parallel accounts of other Authors, treating of the same times, things, and persons. And, if we are not attached singly to Moses, but take our notions from other Writers, and the probability of things, we shall see good cause to believe, the Jews were only a crew of leprous Aegyptians, driven from their Country on account of that loathsome Distemper; and that their Religion, pretended to have been delivered from Heaven at mount Sinai, was in truth learned in Egypt, and brought from thence. CRI. Not to insist, on what cannot be denied, that an Historian writing of his own times is to be believed, before others who treat of the same subject several ages after, it seems to me that it is absurd to expect we shou’d reconcile Moses with profane Historians, till you have first reconciled them one with another. In answer therefore to what you observe, I desire you wou’d consider in the first place, that Manetho, Chaeremon, and Lysimachus had published inconsistent accounts of the Jews, and there going forth from Aegypt: In the second place, that their Language is a plain proof they were not of Aegyptian, but either of Phoenician, of Syrian, or of Chaldaean, original: and in the third place, that it doth not seem very probable to suppose, their Religion, the Basis or Fundamental principle of which was the Worship of one only Supreme God, and the principal Design of which was to abolish Idolatry, cou’d be derived from Aegypt, the most Idolatrous of all nations. It must be owned, the separate situation and institutions of the Jews occasioned, their being treated by some Foreigners, with great ignorance and contempt of them and their original. But Strabo, who is allowed to have been a judicious and inquisitive Writer, though he was not acquainted with their true History, makes more honourable mention of them. He relates that Moses, with many other Worshippers of one Infinite God, not approving the Image worship of the Egyptians and other nations, went out from Aegypt and settled in Jerusalem, where they built a Temple to one only God without Images .

XXV.

ALC. We who assert the cause of Liberty against Religion, in these later ages of the world, lie under great disadvantages, from the loss of ancient Books, which cleared up many points to the eyes of those great Men, Celsus, Porphyry, and Julian, which at a greater distance and with less help cannot so easily be made out by us: but, had we those Records, I doubt not we might demomolish the whole System at once. CRI. And yet I make some doubt of this; because those great Men, as you call them, with all those advantages cou’d not do it. ALC. That must needs have been owing to the Dulness and Stupidity of the world in those days, when the art of reasoning was not so much known and cultivated as of late: But those Men of true genius saw through the deceit themselves, and were very clear in their opinion, which convinces me they had good reason on their side. CRI. And yet that great Man Celsus seems to have had very slight and inconstant notions: One while, he talks like a thorough Epicurean; another, he admits Miracles, Prophesies, and a future state of rewards and punishments. What think you, Alciphron, is it not something capricious in so great a Man, among other advantages which he ascribes to Brutes above Humane Kind, to suppose they are Magicians and Prophets; that they have a nearer commerce and union with the Divinity; that they know more than Men; and that Elephants, in particular, are of all others most religious animals and strict observers of an Oath . ALC. A great genius will be sometimes whimsical. But what do you say to the Emperor Julian, was not he an extraordinary Man? CRI. He seems by his writings to have been lively and satyrical. Further, I make no difficulty of owning that he was a generous, temperate, gallant, and facetious Emperor: But at the same time it must be allow’d, because his own Heathen Panegyrist Ammianus Marcellinus allows it, that he was a prating, light, vain, superstitious sort of Man. And therefore his Judgment or Authority can be but of small weight with those, who are not prejudiced in his favour. ALC. But of all the great Men who wrote against Revealed Religion, the greatest without question was that truly great Man Porphyry, the loss of whose invaluable work can never be sufficiently lamented. This profound Philosopher went to the bottom and original of things. He most learnedly confuted the Scriptures, shew’d the Absurdity of the Mosaic accounts, undermined and exposed the Prophesies, and ridiculed allegorical Interpretations . The moderns, it must be owned, have done great things and shewn themselves able Men; yet I cannot but regret the loss of what was done by a person of such vast abilities, and who lived so much nearer the Fountain-head; though his authority survives his writings, and must still have its weight with impartial Men, in spight of the enemies of Truth. CRI.Porphyry, I grant was a thorough Infidel, though he appears by no means to have been incredulous. It seems he had a great opinion of Wizards and Necromancers, and believed the Mysteries, Miracles, and Prophesies of Theurgists and Egyptian priests. He was far from being an enemy to obscure Jargon; and pretended to extraordinary Extasies. In a word this great Man appears to have been as unintelligible as a Schoolman, as superstitious as a Monk, and as fanatical as any Quietist or Quaker; and, to compleat his character as a Minute Philosopher, he was under strong temptations to lay violent hands on himself. We may frame a notion of this Patriarch of Infidelity, by his judicious way of thinking upon other points as well as the Christian Religion. So sagacious was he as to find out, that the Souls of insects, when separated from their bodies, become rational: That Daemons of a thousand shapes assist in making Philtrums and Charms, whose spiritual bodies are nourished and fattened by the Steams of libations and sacrifices: that the Ghosts of those, who died violent deaths, use to haunt and appear about their Sepulchres. This same egregious Philosopher adviseth a wise Man not to eat flesh, lest the impure Soul of the Brute that was put to violent death shou’d enter, along with the flesh, into those who eat it. He adds, as a matter of fact confirmed by many experiments, that those who wou’d insinuate into themselves the Souls of such animals, as have the gift of foretelling things to come, need only eat a principal part, the heart for instance of a Stag or a Mole, and so receive the Soul of the animal, which will prophesy in them like a God . No wonder if Men whose minds were preoccupied by Faith and Tenets of such a peculiar kind shou’d be averse from the reception of the Gospel. Upon the whole, we desire to be excused if we do not pay the same deference to the judgment of men, that appear to us whimsical, superstitious, weak and visionary, which those impartial Gentlemen do, who admire their Talents, and are proud to tread in their Footsteps. ALC. Men see things. in different views: what one admires another contemns; it is even possible for a prejudiced mind, whose attention is turned towards the Faults and Blemishes of things, to fansy some shadow of defect in those great Lights which in our own days have enlightened, and still continue to enlighten the world.

XXVI.

   But pray tell me, Crito, what you think of Josephus? He is allowed to have been a Man of learning and judgment. He was himself an asserter of revealed Religion. And Christians, when his authority serves their turn, are used to cite him with respect. CRI. All this I acknowledge. ALC. Must it not then seem very strange, and very suspicious to every impartial Inquirer, that this learned Jew writing the History of his own Country, of that very place, and those very times, where and when Jesus Christ made his appearance, shou’d yet say nothing of the character, miracles, and doctrine of that Extraordinary Person? Some ancient Christians were so sensible of this, that, to make amends, they inserted a famous Passage in that Historian; which imposture hath been sufficiently detected by able Critics in the last age. CRI. Though there are not wanting able Critics on the other side of the question, yet, not to enter upon the discussion of that celebrated passage, I am content to give you all you can desire, and suppose it not genuine, but the pious fraud of some wrong-headed Christian, who cou’d not brook the omission in Josephus: But this will never make such omission a real objection against Christianity. Nor is there, for ought I can see, any thing in it whereon to ground either admiration or suspicion; inasmuch as it shou’d seem very natural, supposing the Gospel account exactly true, for Josephus to have said nothing of it; considering that the view of that writer was to give his country some figure in the eye of the World, which had been greatly prejudiced against the Jews, and knew little of their history, to which end the Life and Death of our Saviour wou’d not in any wise have conduced; considering that Josephus cou’d not have been an eye-witness of our Saviour or his Miracles; considering that he was a Pharisee of Quality and Learning, foreign as well as Jewish, one of great Employment in the State, and that the Gospel was preached to the poor; that the first Instruments of spreading it, and the first Converts to it were mean and illiterate, that it might not seem the work of Man, or beholding to Humane interest or power; considering the general prejudice of the Jews, who expected in the Messiah a temporal and conquering Prince, which prejudice was so strong, that they chose rather to attribute our Saviour’s miracles to the Devil, than acknowledge him to be the Christ: Considering also the hellish Disorder and Confusion of the Jewish State in the Days of Josephus, when Mens minds were filled and astonished with unparallel’d wars, dissensions, massacres, and seditions of that devoted people. Laying all these things together, I do not think it strange, that such a man, writing with such a view, at such a time, and in such circumstances, shou’d omit to describe our Blessed Saviour’s life and death, or to mention his miracles, or to take notice of the State of the Christian Church, which was then as a grain of Mustard seed beginning to take Root and germinate. And this will seem still less strange, if it be considered, that the Apostles in a few years after our Saviour’s death departed from Jerusalem, setting themselves to convert the Gentiles, and were dispersed throughout the world; that the Converts in Jerusalem were, not only of the meanest of the people, but also few; the three thousand, added to the Church in one day upon Peter’s preaching in that city, appearing to have been not Inhabitants but Strangers from all parts assembled to celebrate the feast of Pentecost; and that all the time of Josephus and for several years after, during a Succession of fifteen Bishops, the Christians at Jerusalem observed the Mosaic Law , and were consequently, in outward appearance, one people with the rest of the Jews, which must have made them less observable. I wou’d fain know what reason we have to suppose, that the Gospel, which in its first Propagation seemed to overlook the great or considerable men of this world, might not also have been overlooked by them, as a thing not suited to their apprehensions and way of thinking? Besides, in those early times might not other learned Jews, as well as Gamaliel, suspend their judgment of this new way, as not knowing what to make or say of it, being on one hand unable to quit the Notions and Traditions in which they were brought up, and, on the other, not daring to resist or speak against the Gospel, lest they shou’d be found to fight against God? Surely at all events, it cou’d never be expected, that an unconverted Jew shou’d give the same account of the Life, Miracles, and Doctrine of Jesus Christ, as might become a Christian to have given; nor on the other hand was it at all improbable, that a Man of sense shou’d beware to lessen or traduce what, for ought he knew, might have been a heavenly Dispensation, between which two courses the middle was to say nothing, but pass it over in a doubtful or a respectful silence. And it is observable, that where this Historian occasionally mentions Jesus Christ in his account of St. James’s death, he doth it without any reflection, or saying either good or bad, though at the same time he shews a regard for the Apostle. It is observable, I say, that speaking of Jesus his expression is, who was called the Christ, not who pretended to be the Christ, or who was falsly called the Christ, but simply  [image "img79.png" file=Image00078.gif]  . It is evident Josephus knew there was such a Man as Jesus, and that he was said to be the Christ, and yet he condemns neither him nor his followers; which to me seems an Argument in their favour. Certainly if we suppose Josephus to have known or been persuaded that he was an Impostor, it will be difficult to account for his not saying so in plain terms. But if we suppose him in Gamaliel’s way of thinking, who suspended his judgment, and was afraid of being found to fight against God, it shou’d seem natural for him to behave in that very manner, which according to you makes against our Faith, but I verily think makes for it. But what if Josephus had been a Bigot, or even a Sadducee, an Infidel, an Atheist? What then! we readily grant there might have been Persons of Rank, Politicians, Generals, and Men of Letters, then as well as now, Jews as well as Englishmen, who believed no revealed Religion: And that some such persons might possibly have heard of a man in low life, who performed miracles by Magic, without informing themselves, or perhaps ever inquiring, about his Mission and Doctrine. Upon the whole, I cannot comprehend, why any Man shou’d conclude against the Truth of the Gospel, from Josephus’s omitting to speak of it, any more than from his omitting to embrace it. Had the first Christians been Chief Priests and Rulers, or Men of science and learning, like Philo and Josephus, it might perhaps with better colour have been objected, that their Religion was of Humane Contrivance, than now that it hath pleased God by weak things to confound the Strong. This I think sufficiently accounts, why in the beginning the Gospel might overlook or be overlooked by Men of a certain rank and character.

XXVII.

 ALC. And yet it seems an odd argument in proof of any Doctrine, that it was preached by simple people to simple people. CRI. Indeed if there was no other attestation to the Truth of the Christian Religion, this must be owned a very weak one. But if a Doctrine begun by instruments, mean as to all Humane Advantages, and making its first progress among those, who had neither wealth nor Art nor power to grace or encourage it, shou’d in a short time by it’s own innate Excellency, the mighty force of Miracles, and the demonstration of the Spirit, not only without, but against, all worldly Motives spread through the world, and subdue Men of all ranks and conditions of life, wou’d it not be very unreasonable to reject or suspect it, for the want of humane means? And might not this with much better reason be thought an Argument of its coming from God? ALC. But still an inquisitive Man will want the Testimony of Men of learning and knowledge. CRI. But from the first Century onwards, there was never wanting the testimony of such Men, who wrote learnedly in defence of the Christian Religion, who lived, many of them, when the memory of things was fresh, who had abilities to judge and means to know, and who gave the clearest proofs of their conviction and sincerity. ALC. But all the while these Men were Christians, prejudiced Christians, and therefore their Testimony is to be suspected. CRI. It seems then you wou’d have Jews or Heathens attest the Truths of Christianity. ALC. That is the very thing I want. CRI. But how can this be? or if it cou’d, wou’d not any rational Man be apt to suspect such Evidence, and ask, how it was possible for a Man really to believe such things himself and not become a Christian? the Apostles and first Converts were themselves Jews, and brought up in a veneration for the Law of Moses, and in all the prejudices of that people: many Fathers, Christian Philosophers, and learned Apologists for the Faith, who had been bred Gentiles, were without doubt imbued with prejudices of Education: and if the finger of God and force of Truth converted both the one and the other from Judaism or Gentilism, in spight of their prejudices to Christianity, is not their Testimony so much the stronger? You have then the suffrages of both Jews and Gentiles, attesting to the Truth of our Religion in the earliest ages. But to expect or desire the attestation of Jews remaining Jews, or of Gentiles remaining Gentiles, seems unreasonable: nor can it be imagined that the Testimony of Men, who were not converted themselves, shou’d be the likeliest to convert others. We have indeed the Testimony of Heathen Writers to prove, That about the time of our Saviour’s birth, there was a general expectation in the east of a Messiah or Prince, who shou’d found a new Dominion: That there were such people as Christians: That they were cruelly persecuted and put to death: That they were innocent and holy in life and worship: And that there did really exist in that time, certain persons and facts mentioned in the New Testament: And for other points, we have learned Fathers, several of whom had been, as I already observed, bred Heathens, to attest their Truth. ALC. For my part I have no great opinion of the capacity or learning of the Fathers, and many learned Men, especially of the reformed Churches abroad, are of the same mind, which saves me the trouble of looking my self into their voluminous Writings. CRI. I shall not take upon me to say, with the Minute Philosopher Pomponatius, that Origen, Basil, Augustin, and divers other Fathers, were equal to Plato, Aristotle, and the greatest of the Gentiles in Humane Knowledge. But, if I may be allowed to make a judgment from what I have seen of their writings, I shou’d think several of them Men of great parts, eloquence, and learning, and much superior to these who seem to undervalue them. Without any affront to certain modern Critics or Translators, Erasmus may be allowed a man of fine taste, and a fit judge of sense and good writing, though his judgment in this point was very different from theirs. Some of our reformed Brethern, because the Romanists attribute too much, seem to have attributed too little to them, from a very usual, though no very judicious opposition; which is apt to lead men to remark defects, without making proper allowances, and to say things which neither piety, candour, nor good sense require them to say.

XXVIII.

ALC. But though I shou’d acknowledge, that a concurring Testimony of many learned and able Men throughout the first ages of Christianity may have its weight, yet when I consider the great number of Forgeries and Heresies that sprung up in those times, it very much weakens their credit. CRI. Pray, Alciphron, wou’d it be allowed a good Argument in the mouth of a Papist against the Reformation, that many absurd Sects sprung up at the same time with it? Are we to wonder, that when good seed is sowing, the enemy shou’d sow tares? But at once to cut off several Objections, let us suppose in fact, what you do not deny possible, that there is a God, a Devil, and a Revelation from Heaven committed to writing many Centuries ago. Do but take a view of Humane Nature, and consider, what wou’d probably follow upon such a supposition; and whether it is not very likely there shou’d be Halfbelievers, mistaken Bigots, holy Frauds, ambitious, interested, disputing, conceited, schismatical, haeretical, absurd Men among the Professors of such revealed Religion, as well as after a course of ages, various readings, omissions, transpositions, and obscurities in the text of the sacred Oracles? And if so, I leave you to judge, whether it be reasonable to make those events an Objection against the being of a thing, which wou’d probably and naturally follow upon the Supposal of its Being. ALC. After all, say what you will, this variety of Opinions must needs shake the faith of a reasonable Man. Where there are so many different Opinions on the same point, it is very certain they cannot all be true, but it is certain they may all be false. And the means to find out the Truth! when a Man of sense sets about this Inquiry, he finds himself on a sudden startled and amused with hard words and knotty questions. This makes him abandon the pursuit, thinking the game not worth the chase. CRI. But wou’d not this Man of sense do well to consider, it must argue want of discernment, to reject divine Truths for the sake of Humane Follies? Use but the same candour and impartiality in treating of Religion, that you wou’d think proper on other subjects. We desire no more, and expect no less. In Law, in Physic, in Politics, whereever men have refined, is it not evident they have been always apt to run into disputes and chicane? But will that hinder you from admitting, there are many good rules and just notions, and useful truths in all those professions. Physicians may dispute, perhaps vainly and unintelligibly, about the Animal System: they may assign different causes of Distempers, some explaining them by the elementary qualities, hot and cold, moist and dry, yet this doth not hinder, but the Bark may be good for an Ague, and Rhubarb for a Flux. Nor can it others by chymical, others by mechanical principles, be inferred from the different sects, which from time to time have sprung up in that profession, the Dogmatic, for instance, Empiric, Methodic, Galenic, Paracelsian, or the hard words and knotty questions and idle theories which have grown from them, or been engrafted on them, that, therefore, we shou’d deny the Circulation of the Blood, or reject their excellent rules about Exercise, Air, and Diet. ALC. It seems you wou’d screen Religion by the example of other professions, all which have produced Sects and Disputes as well as Christianity, which may in itself be true and useful, notwithstanding many false and fruitless Notions engrafted on it by the wit of Man. Certainly if this had been observed or believed by many acute Reasoners, they wou’d never have made the multiplicity of Religious Opinions and Controversies an Argument against Religion in general. CRI. How such an obvious Truth shou’d escape Men of sense and inquiry I leave you to account: But I can very easily account for gross mistakes in those, who pass for Free-thinkers without ever thinking; or, if if they do think, whose meditations are employ’d on other points of a very different nature, from a serious and impartial Inquiry about Religion.

XXIX.

But to return: what or where is the profession of Men, who never split into schisms, or never talk nonsense? Is it not evident, that out of all the kinds of knowledge, on which the Humane mind is employ’d, there grow certain excrescences, which may be pared off, like the clippings of hair or nails in the body, and with no worse consequence. Whatever Bigots or Enthusiasts, whatever notional or scholastic Divines may say or think, it is certain the Faith derived from Christ and his Apostles, was not a piece of empty Sophistry; they did not deliver and transmit down to us [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] but [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT]  , to use the expression of a holy Confessor . And, to pretend to demolish their foundation for the sake of Humane Superstructure, be it hay or stubble or what it will, is no Argument of just thought or reason; any more than it is of fairness, to suppose a doubtful sense fixed, and argue from one side of the question in disputed points. Whether, for instance, the beginning of Genesis is to be understood in a literal or allegorical sense? Whether the Book of Job be an History or a Parable? Being points disputed between Christians, an Infidel can have no right to argue from one side of the Question, in those or the like cases. This or that Tenet of a Sect, this or that contraverted Notion is not what we contend for at present, but the general Faith taught by Christ and his Apostles, and preserved by universal and perpetual Tradition in all the Churches down to our own times. To tax or strike at this Divine Doctrine, on account of things foreign and adventitious, the speculations and disputes of curious Men, is in my mind an absurdity of the same kind, as it wou’d be to cut down a fine tree yielding Fruit and Shade, because its leaves afforded nourishment to Caterpillars, or because Spiders may now and then weave cobwebs among the branches. ALC. To divide and distinguish wou’d take time. We have several Gentlemen very capable of judging in the gross, but that want of attention for irksome and dry Studies or minute Inquiries. To which as it would be very hard to oblige Men against their will, so it must be a great wrong to the world, as well as themselves, to debar them from the Right of deciding according to their natural sense of things. CRI. It were to be wished those capable Men wou’d employ their judgment and attention on the same objects. If theological Inquiries are unpalatable, the field of nature is wide. How many Discoveries to be made! how many Errors to be corrected in arts and sciences! how many Vices to be reformed in life and manners! Why do men single out such points as are innocent and useful, when there are so many pernicious mistakes to be amended? Why set themselves to destroy the hopes of Humane Kind and encouragements to Virtue? Why delight to judge where they disdain to inquire? Why not employ their noble Talents on the Longitude or Perpetual Motion? ALC. I wonder you shou’d not see the difference between points of Curiosity and Religion. Those employ only Men of a genius or humour suited to them; but all Mankind have a right to censure, and are concerned to judge of these, except they will blindly submit to be governed, by the stale wisdom of their Ancestors and the established Laws of their Country. CRI. It shou’d seem, if they are concerned to judge, they are not less concerned to examine before they judge. ALC. But after all the examination and inquiry that mortal Man can make about Revealed Religion, it is impossible to come at any rational sure footing.

XXX.

There is, indeed, a deal of specious talk about Faith founded upon Miracles; but when I examine this matter throughly, and trace Christian Faith up to its original, I find it rests upon much darkness and scruple and uncertainty. Instead of points evident or agreeable to Humane Reason, I find a wonderful narrative of the Son of God tempted in the wilderness by the Devil, a thing utterly unaccountable, without any end, or use or reason whatsoever. I meet with strange Histories of Apparitions of Angels and Voices from Heaven, with surprising accounts of Daemoniacs, things quite out of the road of common Sense or Observation, with several incredible feats said to have been done by Divine Power, but more probably the Inventions of Men; nor the less likely to be so, because I cannot pretend to say with what view they were invented. Disigns deeply laid are dark, and the less we know the more we suspect: But, admitting them for true, I shall not allow them to be miraculous, until I thoroughly know the power of what are called second causes and the force of Magic. CRI. You seem, Alciphron, to analyse, not Faith, but Infidelity, and trace it to its Principles; which, from your own account, I collect to be dark and doubtful scruples and surmises, hastiness in judging, and narrowness in thinking, grounded on a fanciful notion which over-rates the little scantling of your own Experience, and on real ignorance of the views of Providence, and of the qualities, operations, and mutual respects of the several kinds of beings, which are, or may be, for ought you know, in the Universe. Thus obscure, uncertain, conceited, and conjectural are the Principles of Infidelity. Whereas on the other hand, the Principles of Faith seem to be points plain and clear. It is a clear point, that this Faith in Christ was spread abroad throughout the world soon after his death. It is a clear point, that this was not effected by humane Learning, Politics, or Power. It is a clear point, that in the early times of the Church there were several men of Knowledge and Integrity, who embraced this Faith not from any, but against all, temporal motives. It is a clear point, that, the nearer they were to the fountain-head, the more opportunity they had to satisfy themselves, as to the Truth of these facts which they believed. It is a clear point, that the less interest there was to persuade, the more need there was of Evidence to convince them. It is a clear point, that they relied on the Authority of those who declared themselves Eye-witnesses of the Miracles and Resurrection of Christ. It is a clear point, that those professed Eye-witnesses suffered much for this their Attestation, and finally sealed it with their Blood. It is a clear point, that these Witnesses, weak and contemptible as they were, overcame the world, spread more light, preached purer morals, and did more benefit to Mankind, than all the Philosophers and Sages put together. These points appear to me clear and sure, and, being allow’d such, they are plain, just, and reasonable motives of assent; they stand upon no fallacious ground, they contain nothing beyond our sphere, neither supposing more knowledge nor other faculties than we are really masters of; and if they shou’d not be admitted for morally certain, as I believe they will by fair and unprejudiced Inquirers, yet the allowing them to be only probable is sufficient to stop the mouth of an Infidel. These plain points, I say, are the Pillars of our Faith, and not those obscure ones by you supposed, which are in truth the unsound, uncertain Principles of Infidelity, to a rash, prejudiced, and assuming Spirit. To raise an Argument, or answer an objection, from hidden powers of Nature or Magic is groping in the dark; but by the evident light of sense men might be sufficiently certified of sensible Effects, and matters of Fact, such as the Miracles and Resurrection of Christ: and the Testimony of such Men may be transmitted to After-ages, with the same moral certainty as other Historical Narrations: and those same miraculous Facts, compared by Reason with the Doctrines they were brought to prove, do afford to an unbiassed mind strong Indications of their coming from God, or a superior Principle, whose Goodness retrieved the Moral World, whose Power commanded the Natural, and whose Providence extended over both. Give me leave to say, that nothing dark, nothing incomprehensible, or mysterious, or unaccountable, is the ground or motive, the principle or foundation, the proof or reason of our Faith, although it may be the object of it. For it must be owned, that, if by clear and sure principles we are rationally led to believe a point less clear, we do not therefore reject such point, because it is mysterious to conceive, or difficult to account for, nor wou’d it be right so to do. As for Jews and Gentiles, anciently attributing our Saviour’s Miracles to Magic, this is so far from being a proof against them, that to me it seems rather a Proof of the Facts, without disproving the Cause to which we ascribe them, As we do not pretend to know the Nature and Operations of Daemons, the History, Laws, and System of rational Beings, and the Schemes or Views of Providence, so far as to account for every action and appearance recorded in the Gospel; so neither do you know enough of those things, to be able from that Knowledge of yours to object against Accounts so well attested. It is an easy matter to raise Scruples upon many authentic parts of Civil History, which, requiring a more perfect knowledge of Facts, Circumstances, and Councils, than we can come at to explain them, must be to us inexplicable. And this is still more easy with respect to the History of Nature, in which, if Surmises were admitted for Proofs against things odd, strange, and unaccountable, if our scanty Experience were made the rule and measure of Truth, and all those Phaenomena rejected, that we, through ignorance of the Principles, and Laws, and System of Nature, cou’d not explain, we shou’d indeed make Discoveries, but it wou’d be only of our own Blindness and Presumption. And why Men that are so easily and so often gravell’d in common Points, in things natural and visible, shou’d yet be so sharpsighted and dogmatical about the invisible World, and its Mysteries, is to me a point utterly unaccountable by all the Rules of Logic and good Sense. Upon the whole, therefore, I cannot help thinking there are Points sufficiently plain, and clear, and full, whereon a Man may ground a reasonable Faith in Christ: but that the attacks of Minute Philosophers against this faith are grounded upon Darkness, Ignorance, and Presumption. ALC. I doubt I shall still remain in the dark as to the Proofs of the Christian Religion, and always presume there is nothing in them.

XXXI.

 For how is it possible, at this remote distance, to arrive at any Knowledge, or frame any Demonstration about it? CRI. What then? Knowledge, I grant, in a strict sense cannot be had without Evidence or Demonstration; but probable Arguments are a sufficient ground of Faith. Who ever supposed that scientifical Proofs were necessary to make a Christian? Faith alone is required; and provided that, in the main and upon the whole, Men are persuaded, this saving Faith may consist with some degrees of Obscurity, Scruple, and Error. For although the Light of Truth be unchangeable, and the same in its eternal Source, the Father of Lights: Yet, with respect to us, it is variously weakened and obscured, by passing through a long Distance or gross Medium, where it is intercepted, distorted, or tinctured by the Prejudices and Passions of Men. But all this notwithstanding, he that will use his Eyes may see enough for the purposes either of Nature, or of Grace; though by a light, dimmer indeed, or clearer, according to the Place, or the Distance, or the Hour, or the Medium. And it will be sufficient, if such Analogy appears between the Dispensations of Grace and Nature, as may make it probable (although much shou’d be unaccountable in both) to suppose them derived from the same Author, and the workmanship of one and the same Hand. ALC. Those who saw and touched and handled Jesus Christ after his Resurrection, if there were any such, may be said to have seen by a clear Light: But to us the Light is very dim, and yet it is expected we shou’d believe this Point as well as they. For my part, I believe, with Spinosa, that Christ’s Death was Literal, but his Resurrection Allegorical . CRI. And for my part, I can see nothing in this celebrated Infidel, that shou’d make me desert matters of Fact, and moral Evidence, to adopt his Notions. Though I must needs own I admit an allegorical Resurrection that proves the real, to wit, a Resurrection of Christ’s Disciples from Weakness to Resolution, from Fear to Courage, from Despair to Hope, of which, for ought I can see, no rational Account can be given, but the sensible Evidence that our Lord was truly, really, and literally risen from the dead: But as it cannot be denied that his Disciples, who were Eye-witnesses of his Miracles and Resurrection, had stronger Evidence than we can have of those Points: So it cannot be denied, that such Evidence was then more necessary, to induce Men to embrace a new Institution, contrary to the whole System of their Education, their Prejudices, their Passions, their Interests, and every Humane Motive. Though to me it seems, the moral Evidence and probable Arguments within our reach, are abundantly sufficient to make prudent thinking Men adhere to the Faith, handed down to us from our Ancestors, established by the Laws of our Country, requiring Submission in Points above our Knowledge, and for the rest recommending Doctrines the most agreeable to our Interest and our Reason. And, however strong the Light might have been at the Fountain-head, yet its long Continuance and Propagation, by such unpromising Instruments throughout the World, have been very wonderful. We may now take a more comprehensive View of the Connexion, Order, and Progress of the divine Dispensations, and, by a retrospect on a long Series of past Ages, perceive a Unity of Design running throughout the whole, a gradual disclosing and fulfilling the purposes of Providence, a regular Progress from Types to Antitypes, from things Carnal to things Spiritual, from Earth to Heaven. We may behold Christ crucified, that stumbling-block to the Jews, and foolishness to the Greeks, putting a final Period to the Temple Worship of the one, and the Idolatry of the other, and that Stone, which was cut out of the Mountain without Hands, and brake in Pieces all other Kingdoms, become it self a great Mountain.

XXXII.

If a due Reflection on these things be not sufficient to beget a Reverence for the Christian Faith in the Minds of Men, I shou’d rather impute it to any other Cause, than a wise and cautious Incredulity: When I see their easiness of Faith in the common concerns of Life, where there is no Prejudice or Appetite to bias or disturb their natural Judgment: When I see those very Men that in Religion will not stir a step without Evidence, and at every turn exspect Demonstration, trust their Health to a Physician, and their Lives to a Sailor with an implicit Faith, I cannot think they deserve the honour of being thought more incredulous than other Men, or that they are more accustom’d to know, and for this reason less inclined to believe. On the contrary, one is tempted to suspect, that Ignorance hath a greater share than Science in our modern Infidelity, and that it proceeds more from a wrong Head, or an irregular Will, than from deep Researches. LYS. We do not, it must be owned, think that Learning or deep Researches are necessary to pass right Judgments upon things. I sometimes suspect that Learning is apt to produce and justify Whims, and sincerely believe we shou’d do better without it. Our Sect are divided on this Point, but much the greater part think with me. I have heard more than once very observing Men remark, that Learning was the true humane Means which preserved Religion in the World, and that, if we had it in our power to prefer Blockheads in the Church, all wou’d soon be right. CRI. Men must be strangely in love with their Opinions, to put out their Eyes rather than part with them. But it has been often remarked, by observing Men that there are no greater Bigots than Infidels. LYS. What a Free-thinker and a Bigot, impossible! CRI. Not so impossible neither, that an Infidel shou’d be bigoted to his Infidelity. Methinks I see a Bigot, wherever I see a Man over-bearing and positive without knowing why, laying the greatest stress on Points of smallest moment, hasty to judge of the Conscience, Thoughts, and inward Views of other Men, impatient of reasoning against his own Opinions, and choosing them with Inclination rather than Judgment, an Enemy to Learning, and attached to mean Authorities. How far our Modern Infidels agree with this Description, I leave to be considered by those who really consider and think for themselves. LYS. We are no Bigots, we are Men that discover Difficulties in Religion, that tie Knots and raise Scruples, which disturb the Repose and interrupt the golden Dreams of Bigots, who therefore cannot endure us. CRI. They who cast about for Difficulties, will be sure to find or make them upon every subject: But he that wou’d, upon the foot of Reason, erect himself into a Judge, in order to make a wise Judgment on a Subject of that nature, will not only consider the doubtful and difficult Parts of it, but take a comprehensive View of the whole, consider it in all its Parts and Relations, trace it to its Original, examine its Principles, Effects, and Tendencies, its Proofs internal and external; he will distinguish between the clear Points and the obscure, the certain and the uncertain, the essential and circumstantial, between what is genuine and what foreign: he will consider the different sorts of Proof, that belong to different things, where Evidence is to be expected, where Probability may suffice, and where it is reasonable to suppose there shou’d be Doubts and Scruples: He will proportion his Pains and Exactness to the Importance of the Inquiry, and check that Disposition of his Mind to conclude all those Notions, groundless Prejudices, with which it was imbued before it knew the Reason of them. He will silence his Passions, and listen to Truth: He will endeavour to untie Knots as well as to tie them, and dwell rather on the light parts of things than the obscure: He will balance the force of his Understanding with the difficulty of the Subject, and to render his Judgment impartial, hear Evidence on all sides, and, so far as he is led by Authority, choose to follow that of the honestest and wisest Men. Now it is my sincere Opinion, the Christian Religion may well stand the Test of such an Inquiry. LYS. But such an Inquiry wou’d cost too much Pains and Time. We have thought of another Method, the bringing Religion to the Test of Wit and Humour: This we find a much shorter, easier, and more effectual Way. And as all Enemies are at liberty to choose their Weapons, we make choice of those we are most expert at: And we are the better pleased with this Choice, having observed that of all things a solid Divine hates a Jest. To consider the whole of the Subject, to read and think on all sides, to object plainly, and answer directly, upon the foot of dry Reason and Argument, wou’d be a very tedious and troublesome Affair. Besides it is attacking Pedants at their own Weapons. How much more delicate and artful is it, to give a hint, to cover one’s self with an Aenigma, to drop a double Entendre, to keep it in one’s Power to recover, and slip aside, and leave his Antagonist beating the Air? This hath been practised with great Success, and I believe it the top Method to gain Proselytes, and confound Pedants. CRI. I have seen several things written in this way, which, I suppose, were copied from the Behaviour of a sly sort of Scorners one may sometimes meet with. Suppose a conceited Man that wou’d pass for witty, tipping the Wink upon one, thrusting out his Tongue at another; one while waggishly smiling, another with a grave Mouth and ludicrous Eyes; often affecting the Countenance of one who smother’d a Jest, and sometimes bursting out in a Horse-laugh: What a Figure wou’d this be, I will not say in the Senate or Council, but in a private Visit among well-bred Men? And yet this is the Figure that certain great Authors, who in this Age wou’d pass for Models, and do pass for Models, make in their polite and elaborate Writings on the most weighty Points. ALC. I who profess my self an Admirer, an Adorer of Reason, am obliged to own, that in some Cases the Sharpness of Ridicule can do more than the Strength of Argument. But if we exert our selves in the use of Mirth and Humour, it is not for want of other Weapons. It shall never be said that a Free-thinker was afraid of Reasoning. No, Crito, we have Reasons in store, the best are yet to come; and if we can find an Hour for another Conference before we set out to morrow morning, I’ll undertake you shall be plied with Reasons, as clear, and home, and close to the Point as you cou’d wish.

 THE SEVENTH DIALOGUE.I. Christian Faith impossible. II. Words stand for Ideas. III. No Knowledge or Faith without Ideas, IV. Grace, no Idea of it. V. Abstract Ideas what and how made. VI. Abstract general Ideas impossible. VII. In what Sense there may be general Ideas. VIII. Suggesting Ideas not the only use of Words. IX. Force as difficult to form an Idea of as Grace. X. Notwithstanding which useful Propositions may be formed concerning it. XI. Belief of the Trinity and other Mysteries not absurd. XII. Mistakes about Faith an occasion of profane Raillery. XIII. Faith its true Nature and Effects. XIV. Illustrated by Science. XV. By Arithmetic in particular. XVI. Sciences conversant about Signs. XVII. The true End of Speech, Reason, Science, and Faith. XVIII. Metaphysical Objections as strong against Humane Sciences as Articles of Faith. XIX. No Religion, because no Humane Liberty. XX. Farther Proof against Humane Liberty. XXI. Fatalism a Consequence of erroneous Suppositions. XXII. Man an accountable Agent. XXIII. Inconsistency, Singularity, and Credulity of Minute Philosopher. XXIV. Untroden Paths and new Light of the Minute Philosophers. XXV. Sophistry of the Minute Philosophers. XXVI. Minute Philosophers ambiguous, aenigmatical, unfathomable. XXVII. Scepticism of the Minute Philosophers. XXVIII. How a Sceptic ought to behave. XXIX. Minute Philosophers why difficult to convince. XXX. Thinking not the epidemical Evil of these times. XXXI. Infidelity not an Effect of Reason or Thought, its true Motives assigned. XXXII. Variety of Opinions about Religion, Effects thereof. XXXIII. Method for proceeding with Minute Philosophers. XXXIV. Want of Thought and want of Education Defects of the present Age.

 [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

I.

THE Philosophers having resolved to set out for London next Morning, we assembled at break of day in the Library. Alciphron began with a Declaration of his Sincerity, assuring us he had very maturely and with a most unbiassed Mind considered all that had been said the day before. He added that upon the whole he cou’d not deny several probable Reasons were produced for embracing the Christian Faith. But, said he, those Reasons being only probable can never prevail against absolute Certainty and Demonstration. If therefore I can demonstrate your Religion to be a thing altogether absurd and inconsistent, your probable Arguments in its defence do from that Moment lose their Force, and with it all Right to be answer’d or considered. The concurring Testimony of sincere and able Witnesses hath without question great weight in humane Affairs. I will even grant that things odd and unaccountable to Humane Judgment or Experience, may sometimes claim our Assent on that sole Motive. And I will also grant it possible, for a Tradition to be convey’d with moral Evidence through many Centuries. But at the same time you will grant to me, that a thing demonstrably and palpably false is not to be admitted on any Testimony whatever, which at best can never amount to Demonstration. To be plain, no Testimony can make Nonsense Sense; no moral Evidence can make Contradictions consistent. Know then, that as the Strength of our Cause doth not depend upon, so neither is it to be decided by any critical Points of History, Chronology, or Languages. You are not to wonder, if the same sort of Tradition and moral Proof, which governs our Assent with respect to Facts in civil or natural History, is not admitted as a sufficient Voucher for metaphysical Absurdities and absolute Impossibilities. Things obscure and unaccountable in humane Affairs, or the Operations of Nature, may yet be possible, and, if well attested, may be assented unto: But religious Assent or Faith can be evidently shewn in its own nature to be impracticable, impossible, and absurd. This is the primary Motive to Infidelity. This is our Citadel and Fortress, which may, indeed, be graced with outworks of various Erudition, but, if those are demolished, remains in it self and of its own proper Strength impregnable. EUPH. This, it must be owned, reduceth our Inquiry within a narrow Compass: Do but make out this, and I shall have nothing more to say. ALC. Know then, that the shallow Mind of the Vulgar, as it dwells only on the outward Surface of things, and considers them in the gross, may be easily imposed on. Hence a blind Reverence for Religious Faith and Mystery. But when an acute Philosopher comes to dissect and analyse these Points, the Imposture plainly appears: And as he has no Blindness, so he has no Reverence for empty Notions, or, to speak more properly, for meer Forms of Speech, which mean nothing, and are of no use to Mankind.

II.

Words are Signs: They do or shou’d stand for Ideas; which so far as they suggest they are significant. But words that suggest no Ideas are insignificant. He who annexeth a clear Idea to every Word he makes use of speaks Sense; but where such Ideas are wanting, the Speaker utters Nonsense. In order therefore to know whether any Man’s Speech be senseless and insignificant, we have nothing to do but lay aside the Words and consider the Ideas suggested by them. Men, not being able immediately to communicate their Ideas one to another, are obliged to make use of sensible Signs or Words; the use of which is to raise those Ideas in the Hearer, which are in the Mind of the Speaker: And if they fail of this End they serve to no Purpose. He who really thinks hath a train of Ideas succeeding each other and connected in his Mind: And when he expresseth himself by Discourse, each Word suggests a distinct Idea to the Hearer or Reader; who by that means hath the same train of Ideas in his, which was in the Mind of the Speaker or Writer. As far as this Effect is produced, so far the Discourse is intelligible, hath sense and meaning. Hence it follows, that whoever can be supposed to understand what he reads or hears must have a train of Ideas raised in his Mind, correspondent to the train of Words read or heard. These plain Truths, to which Men readily assent in Theory, are but little attended to in Practice, and therefore deserve to be enlarged on and inculcated however obvious and undeniable. Mankind are generally averse from thinking though apt enought to entertain Discourse either in themselves or others: the Effect whereof is, that their Minds are rather stored with Names than Ideas, the husk of Science rather than the thing. And yet these Words without meaning do often make Distinctions of Parties, the Subject matter of their Disputes, and the Object of their Zeal. This is the most general Cause of Error, which doth not influence ordinary Minds alone, but even those who pass for acute and learned Philosophers are often employ’d about Names instead of Things or Ideas, and are supposed to know when they only pronounce hard Words without a meaning.

III.

Though it is evident that as Knowledge is the Perception of the Connexion or Disagreement between Ideas, he who doth not distinctly perceive the Ideas marked by the terms, so as to form a mental Proposition answering to the verbal, cannot possibly have Knowledge: No more can he be said to have Opinion or Faith which imply a weaker Assent, but still it must be to a Proposition, the Terms of which are understood as clearly, although the Agreement or Disagreement of the Ideas may not be so evident, as in the case of Knowledge. I say, all degrees of Assent whether founded on Reason or Authority, more or less cogent, are internal Acts of the Mind which alike terminate in Ideas as their proper Object: Without which there can be really no such thing as Knowledge, Faith, or Opinion. We may perhaps raise a Dust and Dispute about Tenets purely verbal; but what is this at bottom more than meer trifling? All which will be easily admitted with respect to Humane Learning and Science; wherein it is an allowed Method to expose any Doctrine or Tenet by stripping them of the Words, and examining what Ideas are underneath, or whether any Ideas at all? This is often found the shortest way to end Disputes, which might otherwise grow and multiply without end, the Litigants neither understanding one another nor themselves. It were needless to illustrate what shines by its own Light, and is admitted by all thinking Men. My endeavour shall be only to apply it in the present Case. I suppose I need not be at any pains to prove, that the same Rules of Reason and good Sense which obtain in all other Subjects ought to take place in Religion. As for those who consider Faith and Reason as two distinct Provinces, and wou’d have us think good Sense has nothing to do where it is most concerned, I am resolved never to argue with such Men, but leave them in quiet Possession of their Prejudices. And now, for the particular Application of what I have said, I shall not single out any nice disputed Points of School Divinity, or those that relate to the Nature and Essence of God, which being allow’d infinite you might pretend to screen them, under the general Notion of Difficulties attending the Nature of Infinity.

IV.

Grace is the main Point in the Christian Dispensation, nothing is oftener mentioned or more considered throughout the New Testament; wherein it is represented as somewhat of a very particular kind, distinct from any thing revealed to the Jews, or known by the light of Nature. This same Grace is spoken of as the Gift of God, as coming by Jesus Christ, as reigning, as abounding, as operating. Men are said to speak through Grace, to believe through Grace. Mention is made of the Glory of Grace, the Riches of Grace, the Stewards of Grace. Christians are said to be Heirs of Grace, to receive Grace, grow in Grace, be strong in Grace, to stand in Grace, and to fall from Grace. And lastly, Grace is said to justify and to save them. Hence Christianity is styled the Covenant of Dispensation of Grace. And it is well known that no Point hath created more Controversy in the Church than this Doctrine of Grace. What Disputes about its Nature, Extent, and Effects, about universal, efficacious, sufficient, preventing, Irrisistible Grace have employ’d the Pens of Protestant as well as Popish Divines, of Jansenists and Molinists, of Lutherans, Calvinists, and Arminians, as I have not the least curiosity to know, so I need not say. It sufficeth to observe, that there have been and are still subsisting great contests upon these Points. Only one thing I shou’d desire to be informed of, to wit, what is the clear and distinct Idea marked by the Word Grace? I presume a Man may know the bare meaning of a Term, without going into the depth of all those learned Inquiries. This surely is an easy Matter, provided there is an Idea annexed to such Term. And if there is not, it can be neither the subject of a rational Dispute, nor the Object of real Faith. Men may indeed impose upon themselves or others, and pretend to argue and believe, when at bottom there is no Argument or Belief, farther than meer verbal trifling. Grace taken in the vulgar Sense, either for Beauty, or Favour, I can easily understand. But when it denotes an active, vital, ruling Principle, influencing and operating on the Mind of Man, distinct from every natural Power or Motive, I profess my self altogether unable to understand it, or frame any distinct Idea of it; and therefore I cannot assent to any Proposition concerning it, nor consequently have any Faith about it: And it is a self evident Truth, that God obligeth no Man to Impossibilities. At the request of a Philosophical Friend, I did cast an Eye on the Writings he shew’d me of some Divines, and talked with others on this Subject, but after all I had read or heard cou’d make nothing of it, having always found whenever I laid aside the Word Grace, and looked into my own Mind, a perfect vacuity or privation of all Ideas. And, as I am apt to think Mens Minds and Faculties are made much alike, I suspect that other Men, if they examined what they call Grace with the same exactness and indifference, wou’d agree with me that there was nothing in it but an empty Name. This is not the only Instance, where a Word often heard and pronounced is believed intelligible, for no other reason but because it is familiar. Of the same kind are many other Points reputed necessary Articles of Faith. That which in the present case imposeth upon Mankind I take to be partly this. Men speak of this holy Principle as of something that acts, moves, and determines, taking their Ideas from corporeal things, from Motion and the Force or Momentum of Bodies, which being of an obvious and sensible Nature they substitute in place of a thing spiritual and incomprehensible, which is a manifest Delusion. For though the Idea of corporeal Force be never so clear and intelligible, it will not therefore follow that the Idea of Grace, a thing perfectly incorporeal, must be so too. And though we may reason distinctly, perceive, assent, and form Opinions about the one, it will by no means follow that we can do so of the other. Thus it comes to pass, that a clear sensible Idea of what is real produceth, or rather is made a pretence for, an imaginary spiritual Faith that terminates in no Object; a thing impossible! For there can be no Assent where there are no Ideas: And where there is no Assent there can be no Faith: And what cannot be, that no Man is obliged to. This is as clear as any thing in Euclid.

V.

 The same Method of Reasoning may be applied by any Man of Sense, to consute all other the most essential Articles of the Christian Faith. You are not therefore to wonder that a Man who proceeds on such solid Grounds, such clear and evident Principles, shou’d be deaf to all you can say from moral Evidence, or probable Arguments, which are nothing in the balance against Demonstration. EUPH. The more Light and Force there is in this Discourse, the more you are to blame for not having produced it sooner. For my part, I shou’d never have said one Word against Evidence. But let me see whether I understand you rightly. You say, every Word in an intelligible Discourse must stand for an Idea; which Ideas as far as they are clearly and distinctly apprehended, so far the Discourse hath meaning, without which it is useless, and insignificant. ALC. I do. EUPH. For instance, when I hear the Words Man, Triangle, Colour, pronounced; they must excite in my Mind distinct Ideas of those things whereof they are Signs, otherwise I cannot be said to understand them. ALC. Right. EUPH. And this is the only true use of Language. ALC. That is what I affirm. EUPH. But every time the Word Man occurs in Reading or Conversation, I am not conscious that the particular distinct Idea of a Man is excited in my mind. For instance, when I read in St. Paul’s Epistle to the Galatians these Words: If a Man thinketh himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself. Methinks I comprehend the Force and Meaning of this Proposition, although I do not frame to my self the particular distinst Idea of a Man. ALC. It is very true, you do not form in your Mind the particular Idea of Peter, James, or John, of a fair or a black, a tall or a low, a fat or a lean, a straight or a crooked, a wise or a foolish, a sleeping or waking Man, but the abstract general Idea of Man, prescinding from, and exclusive of all particular Shape, Size, Complexion, Passions, Faculties, and every individual Circumstance. To explain this Matter more fully, you are to understand there is in the Humane Mind, a Faculty of contemplating the general Nature of things, separate from all those Particularities which distinguish the Individuals one from another. For Example, in Peter, James, and John, you may observe in each a certain Collection of Stature, Figure, Colour, and other peculiar Properties by which they are known asunder, distinguished from all other Men, and, if I may so say, individuated. Now leaving out of the Idea of a Man, that which is peculiar to the Individual, and retaining only that which is common to all Men, you form an abstract universal Idea of Man or Humane Nature, which includes no particular Stature, Shape, Colour, or other quality whether of Mind or Body. After the same manner you may observe particular Triangles to differ one from another, as their sides are equal or unequal, and their Angles greater or lesser; whence they are denominated aequilateral, aequicrural, or scalenum, obtusangular, acutangular, or rectangular. But the Mind excluding out of its Idea, all these peculiar Properties and Distinctions frameth the general abstract Idea of a Triangle; which is neither aequilateral, aequicrural, nor scalenum, neither obtusangular, acutangular, nor rectangular, but all and none of these at once . The same may be said of the general abstract Idea of Colour, which is something distinct from and exclusive of Blue, Red, Green, Yellow, and every other particular Colour, including only that general Essence in which they all agree. And what has been said of these three general Names, and the abstract general Ideas they stand for may be applied to all others. For you must know, that particular Things or Ideas being infinite, if each were marked or signified by a distinct proper Name, Words must have been innumerable, and Language an endless impossible thing. Hence it comes to pass, that appellative or general Names stand, immediately and properly, not for particular but for abstract general Ideas, which they never fail to excite in the mind, as oft as they are used to any significant Purpose. And without this, there cou’d be no Communication or Enlargement of Knowledge, no such thing as universal Science or Theorems of any kind. Now for understanding any Proposition or Discourse, it is sufficient that distinct Ideas are thereby raised in your mind, correspondent to those in the Speaker’s, whether the Ideas so raised are particular or only abstract and general Ideas. Forasmuch, nevertheless, as these are not so obvious and familiar to vulgar minds, it happens that some Men may think they have no Idea at all, when they have not a particular Idea; but the truth is, you had the abstract general Idea of Man, in the instance assigned, wherein you thought you had none. After the same manner, when it is said, that the three Angles of a Triangle are equal to two right ones; or that Colour is the Object of Sight, it is evident the Words do not stand for this or that Triangle or Colour, but for abstract general Ideas, excluding every thing peculiar to the Individuals, and including only the universal Nature common to the whole kind of Triangles or of Colours.

VI.

 EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, are those abstract general Ideas clear and distinct? ALC. They are above all others clear and distinct, being the only proper Object of Science, which is altogether conversant about Universals. EUPH. And do you not think it very possible for any Man to know, whether he has this or that clear and distinct Idea or no? ALC. Doubtless. To know this he needs only examine his own Thoughts and look into his own mind. EUPH. But upon looking into my own mind, I do not find that I have or can have these general abstract Ideas of a Man or a Triangle abovementioned, or of Colour prescinded from all particular Colours . Though I shut mine Eyes, and use mine utmost Efforts, and reflect on all that passeth in my own mind, I find it utterly impossible to form such Ideas. ALC. To reflect with due Attention and turn the mind inward upon it self, is a difficult Task and not every one’s Talent. EUPH. Not to insist on what you allowed, that every one might easily know for himself whether he has this or that Idea or no: I am tempted to think no body else can form those Ideas any more than I can. Pray, Alciphron, which are those things you wou’d call absolutely impossible? ALC. Such as include a Contradiction. EUPH. Can you frame an Idea of what includes a Contradiction? ALC. I cannot. EUPH. Consequently whatever is absolutely impossible you cannot form an Idea of. ALC. This I grant. EUPH. But can a Colour or Triangle, such as you describe their abstract general Ideas, really exist? ALC. It is absolutely impossible such things shou’d exist in Nature. EUPH. Shou’d it not follow then that they cannot exist in your mind, or in other words that you cannot conceive or frame an Idea of them? ALC. You seem Euphranor not to distinguish between pure Intellect and Imagination. Abstract general Ideas I take to be the Object of pure Intellect, which may conceive them although they cannot perhaps be imagined. EUPH. I do not perceive that I can by any Faculty, whether of Intellect or Imagination, conceive or frame an Idea of that which is impossible and includes a Contradiction. And I am very much at a loss to account for your admitting that in common Instances, which you wou’d make an Argument against Divine Faith and Mysteries.

VII.

ALC. There must be some mistake in this. How is it possible there shou’d be general Knowledge without general Propositions, or these without general Names, which cannot be without general Ideas by standing for which they become general? EUPH. But may not words become general, by being made to stand indiscriminately for all particular Ideas, which from a mutual Resemblance belong to the same kind, without the Intervention of any abstract general Idea? ALC. Is there then no such thing as a general Idea? EUPH. May we not admit general Ideas, though we shou’d not admit them to be made by abstraction, or though we shou’d not allow of general abstract Ideas? To me it seems, a particular Idea may become general by being used to stand for or represent other Ideas; and that, general Knowledge is conversant about Signs or general Ideas made such by their signification; and which are considered rather in their relative Capacity, and as substituted for others, than in their own Nature, or for their own sake. A Black Line, for Instance, an Inch long, though in it self particular, may yet become Universal, being used as a Sign to stand for any Line whatsoever. ALC. It is your Opinion then, that words become general by representing an indefinite Number of particular Ideas. EUPH. It seems so to me. ALC. Whenever therefore I hear a general Name, it must be supposed to excite some one or other particular Idea of that Species in my mind. EUPH. I cannot say so neither. Pray, Alciphron, doth it seem to you necessary, that as often as the word Man occurs in Reading or Discourse, you must form in your Mind the Idea of a particular Man? ALC. I own, it doth not: And not finding particular Ideas always suggested by the Words, I was led to think I had abstract general Ideas suggested by them. And this is the Opinion of all Thinking Men who are agreed, the only use of Words is to suggest Ideas. And indeed what other use can we assign them?

VIII.

 EUPH. Be the use of Words or Names what it will, I can never think it is to do things impossible. Let us then inquire what it is? and see if we can make Sense of our daily Practice. Words it is agreed are Signs: It may not therefore be amiss to examine the use of other Signs in order to know that of Words. Counters, for instance, at a Card-Table are used, not for their own sake, but only as Signs substituted for Money as Words are for Ideas. Say now Alciphron, is it necessary every time these Counters are used throughout the whole Progress of a Game, to frame an Idea of the distinct Sum or Value that each represents? ALC. by no means: It is sufficient the Players at first agree on their respective Values, and at last substitute those Values in their stead. EUPH. And in casting up a Sum, where the Figures stand for Pounds, Shillings, and Pence, do you think it necessary, throughout the whole Progress of the Operation, in each Step to form Ideas of Pounds, Shillings, and Pence? ALC. I do not, it will suffice if in the Conclusion those Figures direct our Actions with respect to Things. EUPH. From hence it seems to follow that Words may not be insignificant, although they shou’d not, every time they are used, excite the Ideas they signify in our Minds, it being sufficient, that we have it in our power to substitute Things or Ideas for their Signs when there is occasion. It seems also to follow, that there may be another use of Words, besides that of marking and suggesting distinct Ideas, to wit, the influencing our Conduct and Actions; which may be done either by forming Rules for us to act by, or by raising certain Passions, Dispositions, and Emotions in our Minds. A Discourse, therefore, that directs how to act or excites to the doing or forbearance of an Action may, it seems, be useful and significant, although the Words whereof it is composed shou’d not bring each a distinct Idea into our Minds. ALC. It seems so EUPH. Pray tell me, Alciphron, is not an Idea altogether inactive? ALC. It is. EUPH. An Agent therefore, an active Mind, or Spirit cannot be an Idea or like an Idea. Whence it shou’d seem to follow, that those Words which denote an active Principle, Soul, or Spirit do not, in a strict and proper Sense, stand for Ideas: And yet they are not insignificant neither: since I understand what is signified by the term I, or my self, or know what it means although it be no Idea, nor like an Idea, but that which thinks and wills and apprehends Ideas and operates about them. ALC. What wou’d you infer from this? EUPH. What hath been inferred already, that Words may be significant although they do not stand for Ideas . The contrary whereof having been presumed seems to have produced the Doctrine of abstract Ideas. ALC. Will you not allow then that the Mind can abstract? EUPH. I do not deny it may abstract in a certain sense, inasmuch as those things that can really exist, or be really perceived asunder, may be conceived asunder, or abstracted one from the other; for instance a Man’s Head from his Body, Colour from Motion, Figure from Weight. But it will not thence follow, that the Mind can frame abstract general Ideas, which appear to be impossible. ALC. And yet it is a current Opinion, that every substantive Name marks out and exhibits to the Mind one distinct Idea separate from all others. EUPH. Pray, Alciphron, is not the Word Number such a substantive Name? ALC. It is. EUPH. Do but try now whether you can frame an Idea of Number in abstract exclusive of all Signs, Words and Things number’d. I profess, for my own part I cannot. ALC. Can it be so hard a matter to form a simple Idea of Number, the Object of a most evident demonstrable Science? Hold, let me see, if I can’t abstract the Idea of Number, from the numeral Names and Characters, and all particular numerable things. Upon which Alciphron paused a while and then said; to confess the Truth I do not find that I can. EUPH. But though, it seems, neither you nor I can form distinct simple Ideas of Number, we can nevertheless make a very proper and significant use of numeral Names. They direct us in the disposition and management of our Affairs, and are of such necessary use, that we shou’d not know how to do without them. And yet, if other Mens Faculties may be judged of by mine, to attain a precise simple abstract Idea of Number, is as difficult as to comprehend any Mystery in Religion.

IX.

But to come to your own Instance, let us examine what Idea we can frame of Force abstracted from Body, Motion, and outward sensible Effects. For my self, I do not find that I have or can have any such Idea. ALC. Surely every one knows what is meant by Force. EUPH. And yet I question whether every one can form a distinct Idea of Force. Let me intreat you, Alciphron, be not amused by Terms, lay aside the word Force, and exclude every other thing from your Thoughts, and then see what precise Idea you have of Force. ALC. Force is that in Bodies which produceth Motion and other sensible Effects. EUPH. It is then something distinct from those Effects. ALC. It is. EUPH. Be pleased now to exclude the consideration of its Subject and Effects, and contemplate Force it self in its own precise Idea. ALC. I profess I find it no such easy matter. EUPH. Take your own Advice, and shut your eyes to assist your Meditation. Upon this Alciphron having closed his eyes, and mused a few Minutes, declared he cou’d make nothing of it. And that, replied Euphranor, which it seems neither you nor I can frame an Idea of, by your own Remark of Mens Minds and Faculties being made much alike, we may suppose others have no more an Idea of than we. ALC. We may. EUPH. But, notwithstanding all this, it is certain there are many Speculations, Reasonings, and Disputes, refined Subtilties and nice Distinctions about this same Force. And to explain its Nature, and distinguish the several notions or kinds of it, the Terms Gravity, Reaction, vis inertiae, vis insita, vis impressa, vis mortua, vis viva, impetus, momentum, solicitatio, conatus, and divers other such like Expressions have been used by learned Men: And no small Controversies have arisen about the Notions or Definitions of these terms. It had puzzled Men to know whether Force is spiritual or corporeal, whether it remains after Action, how it is transferred from one Body to another. Strange Paradoxes have been framed about its Nature, Properties, and Proportions: For instance, that contrary Forces may at once subsist in the same quiescent Body: That the Force of Percussion in a small particle is Infinite: For which and other Curiosities of the same sort, you may consult Berellusde vi percussionis, the Lezioni Academiche of Toricelli, the Exercitations of Hermanus, and other Writers. It is well known to the learned World, what a Controversy hath been carried on between Mathematicians, particularly Monsieur Leibnitz and Monsieur Papin in the Leipsic Acta Eruditorum about the Proportion of Forces, whether they be each to other in a Proportion compounded of the simple Proportions of the Bodies and the Celerities, or in one compounded of the simple Proportion of the Bodies and the duplicate Proportion of the Celerities? A Point, it seems, not yet agreed; As indeed the reality of the thing it self is made a Question. Leibnitz distinguisheth between the nisus elementaris, and the impetus, which is formed by a repetition of the nisus elementaris, and seems to think they do not exist in Nature, but are made only by an abstraction of the Mind. The same Author treating of original, active Force, to illustrate his Subject hath recourse to the substantial Forms and Entelecheia of Aristotle. And the ingenious Toricelli saith of Force and Impetus, that they are subtile Abstracts and spiritual Quintessences; and concerning the momentum and the velocity of heavy Bodies falling, he saith they are un certo che, and un non so che, that is in plain English he knows not what to make of them. Upon the whole therefore, may we not pronounce, that excluding Body, Time, Space, Motion and all its sensible Measures and Effects, we shall find it as difficult to form an Idea of Force as of Grace? ALC. I do not know what to think of it.

X.

EUPH. And yet, I presume, you allow there are very evident Propositions or Theorems relating to Force, which contain useful Truths for instance, that a Body with conjunct Forces describes the Diagonal of a Parallelogram, in the same time that it wou’d the Sides with separate. Is not this a Principle of very extensive use? Doth not the Doctrine of the Composition and Resolution of Forces depend upon it, and, in consequence thereof, numberless Rules and Theorems directing Men how to act, and explaining Phaenomena throughout the Mechanics and mathematical Philosophy? And if, by considering this Doctrine of Force, Men arrive at the Knowledge of many Inventions in Mechanics, and are taught to frame Engines, by means of which things difficult and otherwise impossible may be performed, and if the same Doctrine which is so beneficial here below, serveth also as a Key to discover the Nature of the Celestial Motions, shall we deny that it is of use, either in Practice or Speculation, because we have no distinct Idea of Force? Or that which we admit with regard to Force, upon what pretence can we deny concerning Grace? If there are Queries, Disputes, Perplexities, diversity of Notions and Opinions about the one, so there are about the other also: If we can form no precise distinct Idea of the one, so neither can we of the other. Ought we not therefore by a parity of Reason to conclude, there may be divers true and useful Propositions concerning the one as well as the other? And that Grace may be an Object of our Faith, and influence our Life and Actions, as a Principle destructive of evil habits and productive of good ones, although we cannot attain a distinct Idea of it, separate or abstracted from God the Author, from Man the Subject, and from Virtue and Piety its Effects?

XI.

Shall we not admit the same Method of arguing, the same Rules of Logic, Reason, and good Sense to obtain in things Spiritual, and things Corporeal, in Faith and Science, and shall we not use the same Candour, and make the same Allowances, in examining the Revelations of God and the Inventions of Men? For ought I see, that Philosopher cannot be free from Bias and Prejudice, or be said to weigh things in an equal Ballance who shall maintain the Doctrine of Force and reject that of Grace, who shall admit the abstract Idea of a Triangle, and at the same time ridicule the Holy Trinity. But, however partial or prejudiced other Minute Philosophers might be, you have laid it down for a Maxim, that the same Logic which obtains in other Matters must be admitted in Religion. LYS. I think, Alciphron, it wou’d be more prudent to abide by the way of Wit and Humour, than thus to try Religion by the dry Test of Reason and Logic. ALC. Fear not: By all the Rules of right Reason, it is absolutely impossible that any Mystery, and least of all the Trinity shou’d really be the Object of Man’s Faith. EUPH. I do not wonder you thought so, as long as you maintained that no Man cou’d assent to a Proposition, without perceiving or framing in his Mind distinct Ideas marked by the Terms of it. But although Terms are Signs, yet having granted that those Signs may be significant, though they shou’d not suggest Ideas represented by them, provided they serve to regulate and influence our Wills, Passions, or Conduct, you have consequently granted, that the Mind of Man may assent to Propositions containing such Terms, when it is so directed or affected by them, notwithstanding it shou’d not perceive distinct Ideas marked by those Terms. Whence it seems to follow, that a Man may believe the Doctrine of the Trinity, if he finds it revealed in Holy Scripture, That the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are God, and that there is but one God? Although he doth not frame in his Mind, any abstract or distinct Ideas of Trinity, Substance, or Personality, provided, that this Doctrine of a Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier makes proper Impressions on his Mind, producing therein, Love, Hope, Gratitude, and Obedience, and thereby becomes a lively operative Principle influencing his Life and Actions, agreeably to that Notion of saving Faith which is required in a Christian. This I say, whether right or wrong, seems to follow from your own Principles and Concessions. But for further satisfaction, it may not be amiss to inquire, whether there be any thing parallel to this Christian Faith in the Minute Philosophy. Suppose, a fine Gentleman or Lady of Fashion, who are too much employ’d to think for themselves, and are only Free-thinkers at second hand, have the advantage of being betimes initiated in the Principles of your Sect, by conversing with Men of Depth and Genius, who have often declared it to be their Opinion, the World is governed either by Fate or by Chance, it matters not which; will you deny it possible for such Persons to yield their Assent to either of these Propositions? ALC. I will not. EUPH. And may not such their Assent be properly called Faith? ALC. It may. EUPH. And yet it is possible, those Disciples of the Minute Philosophy may not dive so deep, as to be able to frame any abstract, or precise, or any determinate Idea whatsoever, either of Fate or of Chance. ALC. This too I grant. EUPH. So that according to you, this same Gentleman or Lady may be said to believe or have Faith where they have not Ideas. ALC. They may. EUPH. And may not this Faith or Persuasion produce real Effects, and shew it self in the Conduct and Tenor of their Lives, freeing them from the Fears of Superstition, and giving them a true Relish of the World, with a noble Indolence or Indifference about what comes after. ALC. It may. EUPH. And may not Christians, with equal Reason, be allowed to believe the Divinity of our Saviour, or that in him God and Man make one Person, and be verily persuaded thereof, so far as for such Faith or Belief to become a real Principle of Life and Conduct, inasmuch as by Virtue of such Persuasion they submit to his Government, believe his Doctrine, and practise his Precepts, although they frame no abstract Idea of the Union between the Divine and Humane Nature; nor may be able to clear up the Notion of Person to the Contentment of a Minute Philosopher. To me it seems evident, that if none but those who had nicely examined, and cou’d themselves explain, the Principle of Individuation in Man, or untie the Knots and answer the Objections, which may be raised even about Humane Personal Identity, wou’d require of us to explain the Divine Mysteries, we shou’d not be often called upon for a clear and distinct Idea of Person in relation to the Trinity, nor wou’d the Difficulties on that Head be often objected to our Faith. ALC. Methinks, there is no such Mystery in Personal Identity. EUPH. Pray in what do you take it to consist? ALC. In Consciousness. EUPH. Whatever is possible may be supposed. ALC. It may. EUPH. We will suppose now (which is possible in the Nature of Things, and reported to be fact) that a Person, through some violent Accident or Distemper, shou’d fall into such a total Oblivion, as to lose all Consciousness of his past Life, and former Ideas. I ask, is he not still the same Person? ALC. He is the same Man, but not the same Person. Indeed you ought not to suppose that a Person loseth its former Consciousness; for this is impossible, though a Man perhaps may; but then he becomes another Person. In the same Person, it must be owned, some old Ideas may be lost, and some new ones got; but a total Change is inconsistent with Identity of Person. EUPH. Let us then suppose that a Person hath Ideas, and is conscious during a certain space of Time, which we will divide into three equal Parts, whereof the later Terms are marked by the Letters A, B, C. In the first Part of Time, the Person gets a certain Number of Ideas, which are retained in A: During the second Part of Time, he retains one half of his old Ideas, and loseth the other half, in place of which he acquires as many new ones: So that in B his Ideas are half old and half new. And in the third Part, we suppose him to lose the Remainder of the Ideas acquired in the First, and to get new ones in their stead, which are retained in C, together with those acquired in the second Part of Time. Is this a possible fair Supposition? ALC. It is. EUPH. Upon these Premises I am tempted to think, one may demonstrate, that Personal Identity doth not consist in Consciousness. ALC. As how? EUPH. You shall judge; but thus it seems to me. The Persons in A and B are the same, being conscious of common Ideas by supposition. The Person in B is (for the same Reason) one and the same with the Person in C. Therefore the Person in A, is the same with the Person in C, by that undoubted Axiom, Quae conveniunt uni tertio conveniunt inter se. But the Person in C hath no Idea in common with the Person in A. Therefore Personal Indentity doth not consist in Consciousness. What do you think, Alciphron, is not this a plain Inference? ALC. I tell you what I think: You will never assist my Faith, by puzzling my Knowledge.

XII.

 There is, if I mistake not, a practical Faith, or Assent, which sheweth it self in the Will and Actions of a Man, although his Understanding may not be furnished with those abstract, precise, distinct Ideas, which, whatever a Philosopher may pretend, are acknowledged to be above the Talents of common Men; among whom, nevertheless, may be sound, even according to your own Concession, many Instances of such practical Faith, in other matters which do not concern Religion. What shou’d hinder therefore, but that Doctrines relating to Heavenly Mysteries, might be taught in this saving Sense to vulgar Minds, which you may well think incapable of all Teaching and Faith in the Sense you suppose. Which mistaken Sense, said Crito, has given occasion to much profane and misapplied Raillery. But all this may very justly be retorted on the Minute Philosophers themselves, who confound Scholasticism with Christianity, and impute to other Men those Perplexities, Chimaeras, and inconsistent Ideas, which are often the Workmanship of their own Brains, and proceed from their own wrong way of Thinking. Who doth not see that such an ideal abstracted Faith is never thought of by the Bulk of Christians, Husbandmen, for Instance, Artisans or Servants? Or what Footsteps are there in the Holy Scripture to make us think, that the wiredrawing of abstract Ideas was a Task injoined either Jews or Christians? Is there any thing in the Law or the Prophets, the Evangelists or Apostles that looks like it? Every one whose Understanding is not perverted by Science falsly so called, may see, the saving Faith of Christians is quite of another kind, a vital operative Principle, productive of Charity and Obedience. ALC. What are we to think then of the Disputes and Decisions of the famous Council of Nice, and so many subsequent Councils? What was the Intention of those venerable Fathers the Homoousians and the Homoiousians? Why did they disturb themselves and the World with hard Words, and subtile Controversies? CRI. Whatever their Intention was, it cou’d not be to beget nice abstracted Ideas of Mysteries in the Minds of common Christians, this being evidently impossible: Nor doth it appear that the Bulk of Christian Men did in those Days think it any Part of their Duty, to lay aside the Words, shut their Eyes, and frame those abstract Ideas; any more than Men now do of Force, Time, Number, or several other things, about which they nevertheless believe, know, argue and dispute. To me it seems, that, whatever was the Source of these Controversies, and howsoever they were managed, wherein Humane Infirmity must be supposed to have had its Share, the main End was not, on either side, to convey precise positive Ideas to the Minds of Men, by the use of those contested Terms, but rather a negative Sense, tending to exclude Polytheism on the one hand, and Sabellianism on the other . ALC. But what shall we say of so many learned and ingenious Divines, who from time to time have obliged the World with new Explications of Mysteries, who, having themselves professedly laboured to acquire accurate Ideas, wou’d recommend their Discoveries and Speculations to others for Articles of Faith? CRI. To all such Innovators in Religion I wou’d say with Jerome,

Why after so many Centuries do you pretend to teach us what was untaught before? Why explain what neither Peter nor Paul thought necessary to be explained?

And it must be owned, that the Explication of Mysteries in Divinity, allowing the Attempt as fruitless as the Pursuit of the Philosopher’s Stone in Chymistry, or the Perpetual Motion in Mechanics, is no more than they, chargeable on the Profession it self, but only on the wrongheaded Professors of it.

XIII.

It seems, that what hath been now said may be applied to other Mysteries of our Religion. Original Sin, for Instance, a Man may find it impossible to form an Idea of in abstract, or of the manner of its Transmission, and yet the Belief thereof may produce in his Mind a salutary Sense of his own Unworthiness, and the Goodness of his Redeemer: from whence may follow good Habits, and from them good Actions, the genuine Effects of Faith, which considered in its true Light, is a thing neither repugnant nor incomprehensible, as some Men wou’d persuade us, but suited even to vulgar Capacities, placed in the Will and Affections rather than in the Understanding, and producing holy Lives, rather than subtile Theories. Faith, I say, is not an indolent Perception but an operative Persuasion of Mind, which ever worketh some suitable Action, Disposition or Emotion in those who have it; as it were easy to prove and illustrate by innumerable Instances, taken from Humane Affairs. And, indeed, while the Christian Religion is considered as an Institution fitted to ordinary Minds, rather than to the nicer Talents, whether improved or puzzled, of speculative Men; and our Notions about Faith are accordingly taken from the Commerce of the World, and Practice of Mankind, rather than from the peculiar Systems of Refiners; it will, I think, be no difficult Matter to conceive and justify the Meaning and Use of our Belief of Mysteries, against the most confident Assertions and Objections of the Minute Philosophers, who are easily to be caught in those very Snares, which they have spun and spread for others. And that Humour of Controversy, the Mother and Nurse of Heresies, wou’d doubtless very much abate, if it was considered that things are to be rated, not by the Colour, Shape, or Stamp, so truly as by the Weight. If the Moment of Opinions had been by some litigious Divines made the Measure of their Zeal, it might have spared much Trouble both to themselves and others. Certainly one that takes his Notions of Faith, Opinion, and Assent from Common Sense, and Common Use, and has maturely weighed the Nature of Signs and Language, will not be so apt to controvert the Wording of a Mystery, or to break the Peace of the Church, for the sake of retaining or rejecting a Term.

XIV.

ALC. It seems, Euphranor, and you wou’d persuade me into an Opinion, that there is nothing so singularly absurd as we are apt to think, in the Belief of Mysteries; and that a Man need not renounce his Reason to maintain his Religion. But if this were true, how comes it to pass, that, in proportion as Men abound in Knowledge, they dwindle in Faith? EUPH. O Alciphron, I have learned from you, that there is nothing like going to the Bottom of things, and analysing them into their first Principles. I shall therefore make an Essay of this Method, for clearing up the Nature of Faith: with what Success, I shall leave you to determine; for I dare not pronounce my self on my own Judgment, whether it be right or wrong: But thus it seems to me. The Objections made to Faith are by no means an Effect of Knowledge, but proceed rather from an Ignorance of what Knowledge is; which Ignorance may possibly be sound even in those who pass for Masters of this or that particular Branch of Knowledge. Science and Faith agree in this, that they both imply an Assent of the Mind: And, as the Nature of the First is most clear and evident, it shou’d be first considered in order to cast a Light on the other. To trace things from their Original, it seems that the Humane Mind, naturally furnished with the Ideas of things particular and concrete, and being design’d, not for the bare Intuition of Ideas, but for Action or Operation about them, and pursuing her own Happiness therein, stands in need of certain general Rules or Theorems to direct her Operations in this pursuit; the supplying which Want is the true, original, reasonable End of studying the Arts and Sciences. Now these Rules being general, it follows, that they are not to be obtained by the meer Consideration of the original Ideas, or particular Things, but by the means of Marks or Signs, which, being so far forth universal, become the immediate Instruments and Materials of Science. It is not therefore by meer Contemplation of particular Things, and much less of their abstract general Ideas, that the Mind makes her Progress, but by an apposite Choice and skilful Management of Signs: For Instance, Force and Number, taken in concrete with there Adjuncts, Subjects, and Signs, are what every one knows; and considered in abstract, so as making precise Ideas of themselves, they are what no Body can comprehend. That their abstract Nature, therefore, is not the Foundation of Science, is plain: And that barely considering their Ideas in concrete, is not the Method to advance in the respective Sciences, is what every one that reflects may see; nothing being more evident, than that one who can neither write nor read, in common Use understands the meaning of Numeral Words, as well as the best Philosopher or Mathematician.

XV.

But here lies the Difference: the one, who understands the Notation of Numbers, by means thereof is able to express briefly and distinctly all the Variety and Degrees of Number, and to perform with ease and dispatch several arithmetical Operations, by the help of general Rules. Of all which Operations as the Use in Humane Life is very evident, so it is no less evident, that the performing them depends on the aptness of the Notation. If we suppose rude Mankind without the Use of Language, it may be presumed, they wou’d be ignorant of Arithmetic: But the Use of Names, by the Repetition whereof in a certain Order they might express endless Degrees of Number, wou’d be the first Step towards that Science. The next Step wou’d be, to devise proper Marks of a permanent Nature, and visible to the Eye, the Kind and Order whereof must be chose with Judgment, and accommodated to the Names. Which Marking, or Notation, wou’d, in Proportion as it was apt and regular, facilitate the Invention and Application of general Rules, to assist the Mind in reasoning, and judging, in extending, recording, and communicating its Knowledge about Numbers: in which Theory and Operations, the Mind is immediately occupied about the Signs or Notes, by Mediation of which it is directed to act about Things, or Number in concrete (as the Logicians call it) without ever considering the simple, abstract, intellectual, general Idea of Number. I imagine one need not think much to be convinced, that the Science of Arithmetic, in its Rise, Operations, Rules, and Theorems, is altogether conversant about the artificial Use of Signs, Names, and Characters. These Names and Characters are universal, inasmuch as they are Signs. The Names are referred to Things, and the Characters to Names, and both to Operation. The Names being few, and proceeding by a certain Analogy, the Characters will be more useful, the simpler they are, and the more aptly they express this Analogy. Hence the old Notation by Letters was more useful than Words written at length: And the modern Notation by Figures, expressing the Progression or Analogy of the Names by their simple Places, is much preferable to that for Ease and Expedition, as the Invention of Algebraical Symbols is to this for extensive and general Use. As Arithmetic and Algebra are Sciences of great Clearness, Certainty, and Extent, which are immediately conversant about Signs, upon the skilful Use and Management whereof they intirely depend, so a little Attention to them may possibly help us to judge of the Progress of the Mind in other Sciences, which, though differing in Nature, Design, and Object, may yet agree in the general Methods of Proof and Inquiry.

XVI.

If I mistake not, all Sciences, so far as they are universal and demonstrable by Humane Reason, will be found conversant about Signs as their immediate Object, though these in the Application are referred to Things: the Reason whereof is not difficult to comprehend. For as the Mind is better acquainted with some sort of Objects, which are earlier suggested to it, strike it more sensibly, or are more easily comprehended than others, it is naturally led to subtitute, those Objects for such as are more subtile, fleeting, or difficult to conceive. Nothing, I say, is more natural, than to make the Things we know, a Step towards those we do not know; and to explain and represent Things less familiar by others which are more so. Now, it is certain we imagine before we reflect, and we perceive by Sense before we imagine; and of all our Senses the Sight is the most clear, distinct, various, agreeable, and comprehensive. Hence it is natural to assist the Intellect by the Imagination, the Imagination by Sense, and the other Senses by Sight. Hence, Figures, Metaphors, and Types. We illustrate spiritual Things by corporeal; we substitute Sounds for Thoughts, and written Letters for Sounds; Emblems, Symbols, and Hieroglyphics for Things too obscure to strike, and too various or too fleeting to be retained. We substitute Things imaginable, for Things intelligible, sensible Things for imaginable, smaller Things for those that are too great to comprehend easily, and greater Things for such as are too small to be discerned distinctly, present Things for absent, permanent for perishing, and visible for invisible. Hence the Use of Models and Diagrams. Hence right Lines are substituted for Time, Velocity, and other things of very different Natures. Hence we speak of Spirits in a figurative Style, expressing the Operations of the Mind by Allusions and Terms, borrowed from sensible Things, such as apprehend, conceive, reflect, discourse, and such like: And hence those Allegories which illustrate Things intellectual by Visions exhibited to the Fancy. Plato, for Instance, represents the Mind presiding in her Vehicle by the Driver of a winged Chariot, which sometimes moults and droops: this Chariot is drawn by two Horses, the one good and of a good Race, the other of a contrary kind, symbolically expressing the Tendency of the Mind towards the Divinity, as she soars or is born aloft by two Instincts like Wings, the one in the Intellect towards Truth, the other in the Will towards Excellence, which Instincts moult or are weakened by sensual Inclinations, expressing also her alternate Elevations and Depressions, the Struggles between Reason and Appetite, like Horses that go an unequal Pace, or draw different Ways, embarrassing the Soul in her Progress to Perfection. I am inclined to think the Doctrine of Signs a Point of great Importance, and general Extent, which, if duly considered, wou’d cast no small light upon Things, and afford a just and genuine Solution of many Difficulties.

XVII.

Thus much, upon the whole, may be said of all Signs: That they do not always suggest Ideas signified to the Mind, That when they suggest Ideas, they are not general abstract Ideas: That they have other Uses besides barely standing for and exhibiting Ideas, such as raising proper Emotions, producing certain Dispositions or Habits of Mind, and directing our Actions in pursuit of that Happiness, which is the ultimate End and Design, the Primary Spring and Motive, that sets rational Agents at work: That the true End of Speech, Reason, Science, Faith, Assent in all its different Degrees, is not meerly, or principally, or always the imparting or acquiring of Ideas, but rather something of an active, operative Nature, tending to a conceived Good, which may sometimes be obtained, not only although the Ideas marked are not offered to the Mind, but even although there shou’d be no possibility of offering or exhibiting any such Idea to the Mind: For Instance, the Algebraic Mark, which denotes the Root of a negative Square, hath its Use in Logistic Operations, although it be impossible to form an Idea of any such Quantity. And what is true of Algebraic Signs, is also true of Words or Language, modern Algebra being in fact a more short, apposite, and artificial Sort of Language, and it being possible to express by Words at length, though less conveniently, all the Steps of an Algebraical Process. And it must be confessed, that even the Mathematical Sciences themselves, which above all others are reckoned the most clear and certain, if they are considered, not as Instruments to direct our Practice, but as Speculations to employ our Curiosity, will be found to fall short in many Instances of those clear and distinct Ideas, which, it seems, the Minute Philosophers of this Age, whether knowingly or ignorantly, expect and insist upon in the Mysteries of Religion.

XVIII.

Be the Science or Subject what it will, whensoever Men quit Particulars for Generalities, things Concrete for Abstractions, when they forsake practical Views, and the useful Purposes of Knowledge for barren Speculation, considering Means and Instruments as ultimate Ends, and labouring to attain precise Ideas which they suppose indiscriminately annexed to all Terms, they will be sure to embarrass themselves with Difficulties and Disputes. Such are those which have sprung up in Geometry about the Nature of the Angle of Contact, the Doctrine of Proportions, of Indivisibles Infinitesimals, and divers other Points; notwithstanding all which, that Science is very rightly esteemed an excellent and useful one, and is really sound to be so in many Occasions of Humane Life, wherein it governs and directs the Actions of Men, so that by the Aid or Influence thereof those Operations become just and accurate, which wou’d otherwise be faulty and uncertain. And from a parity of Reason, we shou’d not conclude any other Doctrines which govern, influence or direct the Mind of Man to be, any more than that, the less true or excellent, because they afford matter of Controversy and useless Speculation to curious and licentious Wits: Particularly those Articles of our Christian Faith, which, in proportion as they are believed, persuade, and, as they persuade, influence the Lives and Actions of Men. As to the perplexity of Contradictions and abstracted Notions, in all parts whether of Humane Science or Divine Faith, Cavillers may equally object, and unwary Persons incur, while the judicious avoid it. There is no need to depart from the received Rules of Reasoning to justify the Belief of Christians. And if any pious Men think otherwise, it may be supposed an Effect, not of Religion, or of Reason, but only of Humane Weakness. If this Age be singularly productive of Infidels, I shall not therefore conclude it to be more knowing, but only more presuming, than former Ages: And their Conceit, I doubt, is not the Effect of Consideration. To me it seems, that the more thoroughly and extensively any Man shall consider and scan the Principles, Objects, and Methods of proceeding in Arts and Sciences, the more he will be convinced, there is no weight in those plausible Objections that are made against the Mysteries of Faith, which it will be no difficult matter for him to maintain or justify in the received Method of arguing, on the common Principles of Logic, and by numberless avow’d parallel Cases, throughout the several Branches of Humane Knowledge, in all which the Supposition of abstract Ideas creates the same Difficulties.

XIX.

ALC. I will allow, Euphranor, this Reasoning of yours to have all the Force you meant it shou’d have. I freely own there may be Mysteries: That we may believe, where we do not understand: And that Faith may be of use although its Object is not distinctly apprehended. In a word, I grant their may be Faith and Mysteries in other Things but not in Religion: And that for this plain Reason: Because it is absurd to suppose, there shou’d be any such thing as Religion; and if there be no Religion it follows there cannot be Religious Faith or Mysteries. Religion, it is evident, implies the Worship of a God; which Worship supposeth Rewards and Punishments, which suppose Merits and Demerits, Actions good and evil, and these suppose Humane Liberty, a thing impossible; and consequently Religion a thing built thereon must be an unreasonable absurd thing. There can be no rational Hopes or Fears where there is no Guilt, nor any Guilt where there is nothing done, but what unavoidably follows from the Structure of the World and the Laws of Motion. Corporeal Objects strike on the Organs of Sense, whence ensues a Vibration in the Nerves, which, being communicated to the Soul or Animal Spirit in the Brain or Root of the Nerves, produceth therein that Motion called Volition: And this produceth a new Determination in the Spirits, causing them to flow into such Nerves as must necessarily by the Laws of Mechanism produce such certain Actions. This being the Case, it follows that those things which vulgarly pass for Humane Actions are to be esteemed Mechanical, and that they are falsely ascribed to a free Principle. There is therefore no Foundation for Praise or Blame, Fear or Hope, Reward or Punishment, nor consequently for Religion, which, as I observed before, is built upon and supposeth those things. EUPH. You imagine, Alciphron, if I rightly understand you, that Man is a sort of Organ played on by outward Objects, which according to the different shape and texture of the Nerves produce different Motions and Effects therein. ALC. Man may, indeed, be fitly compared to an Organ; but a Puppet is the very Thing. You must know, that certain Particles issuing forth in right Lines from all sensible Objects compose so many Rays, or Filaments, which drive, draw, and actuate every part of the Soul and Body of Man, just as Threads or Wires do the joints of that little wooden Machine vulgarly called a Puppet: With this only difference that the latter are gross and visible to common eyes, whereas the former are too fine and subtile to be discerned by any but a sagacious Free-thinker. This admirably accounts for all those Operations, which we have been taught to ascribe to a thinking Principle within us. EUPH. This is an ingenious Thought, and must be of great use in freeing Men from all Anxiety about Moral Notions, as it transfers the Principle of Action from the Humane Soul to things outward and foreign. But I have my Scruples about it. For you suppose the Mind in a literal sense to be moved and its Volitions to be meer Motions. Now if another shou’d affirm, as it is not impossible some or other may, that the Soul is incorporeal, and that Motion is one thing and Volition another, I wou’d fain know how you cou’d make your Point clear to such a one. It must be owned very clear to those who admit the Soul to be corporeal, and all her Acts to be but so many Motions. Upon this Supposition, indeed, the Light wherein you place Humane Nature is no less true, than it is fine and new. But let any one deny this Supposition, which is easily done, and the whole Superstructure falls to the ground. If we grant the abovementiond Points, I will not deny a fatal Necessity must ensue. But I see no reason for granting them. On the contrary it seems plain, that Motion and Thought are two Things as really and as manifestly distinct as a Triangle and a Sound. It seems therefore, that in order to prove the necessity of Humane Actions, you suppose what wants Proof as much as the very Point to be proved.

XX.

ALC. But supposing the Mind incorporeal, I shall, nevertheless, be able to prove my Point. Not to amuse you with far fetched Arguments, I shall only desire you to look into your own Breast and observe how things pass there, when an Object offers it self to the Mind. First the Understanding considers it: In the next Place the Judgment decrees about it, as a thing to be chosen or rejected, to be omitted or done, in this or that manner: And this Decree of the Judgment doth necessarily determine the Will, whose Office is meerly to execute what is ordained by another Faculty: Consequently there is no such thing as Freedom of the Will: For that which is necessary cannot be free. In Freedom there shou’d be an Indifference to either side of the Question, a Power to act or not to act, without perscription or controul: And without this Indifference and this Power, it is evident the Will cannot be free. But it is no less evident, that the Will is not indifferent in its Actions, being absolutely determined and governed by the Judgment. Now whatever moves the Judgment, whether the greatest present Uneasiness, or the greatest apparent Good, or whatever else it be, it is all one to the Point in hand. The Will being ever concluded and controlled by the Judgment is in all Cases alike under Necessity. There is, indeed, throughout the whole of Humane Nature, nothing like a Principle of Freedom, every Faculty being determined in all its Acts by something foreign to it. The Understanding, for Instance, cannot alter its Idea, but must necessarily see it such as it presents it self. The Appetites by a natural Necessity are carried towards their respective Objects. Reason cannot infer indifferently any thing from any thing, but is limited by the Nature and Connexion of things, and the eternal Rules of Reasoning. And as this is confessedly the Case of all other Faculties, so it equally holds with respect to the Will it self, as hath been already shewn. And if we may credit the Divine Characterizer of our Times, this above all others must be allowed the most slavish Faculty.

Appetite (saith that noble Writer) which is elder Brother to Reason, being the Lad of stronger growth, is sure on every contest to take the Advantage of drawing all to his own side: And Will, so highly boasted, is but at best a Football or Top between those Youngsters who prove very unfortunately matched, till the youngest, instead of now and then a kick or lash bestow’d to little purpose, forsakes the Ball or Top it self, and begins to lay about his elder Brother.

CRI. This beautiful Parable for Style and Manner might equal those of a known English Writer, in low Life renowned for Allegory, were it not a little incorrect, making the weaker Lad find his account in laying about the stronger. ALC. This is helped by supposing the stronger Lad the greater Coward: But, be that as it will, so far as it relates to the Point in hand, this is a clear state of the Case. The same Point may be also proved from the Prescience of God. That which is certainly foreknown will certainly be. And what is certain is necessary. And necessary Actions cannot be the Effect of Free-will. Thus you have this fundamental Point of our Free-thinking Philosophy demonstrated different ways. EUPH. Tell me, Alciphron, do you think it implies a Contradiction, that God shou’d make a Man Free? ALC. I do not. EUPH. It is then possible there may be such a thing. ALC. This I do not deny. EUPH. You can therefore conceive and suppose such a Free Agent. ALC. Admitting that I can; what then? EUPH. Wou’d not such an one think that he acted? ALC. He wou’d. EUPH. And condemn himself for some Actions and approve himself for others? ALC. This too I grant. EUPH. Wou’d he not think he deserved Reward or Punishment? ALC. He wou’d. EUPH. And are not all these Characters actually found in Man? ALC. They are. EUPH. Tell me now, what other Character of your supposed Free Agent may not actually be found in Man? For if there is none such, we must conclude that Man hath all the marks of a Free Agent. ALC. Let me see! I was certainly overseen in granting it possible, even for Almighty Power, to make such a thing as a Free Humane Agent. I wonder how I came to make such an absurd Concession, after what had been, as I observed before, demonstrated so many different ways. EUPH. O Alciphron, it is vulgarly observed that Men judge of others by themselves. But in judging of me by this Rule, you may be mistaken. Many things are plain to one of your Sagacity, which are not so to me, who am often bewildered rather than enlightened by those very Proofs, that with you pass for clear and evident. And, indeed, be the Inference never so just, yet so long as the Premises are not clear, I cannot be thoroughly convinced. You must give me leave therefore to propose some Questions, the Solution of which may perhaps shew what at present I am not able to discern. ALC. I shall leave what hath been said with you, to consider and ruminate upon. It is now time to set out on our Journey; there is, therefore, no room for a long String of Question and Answer.

XXI.

EUPH. I shall then only beg leave in a summary Manner, to make a Remark or two on what you have advanced. In the first place I observe, you take that for granted which I cannot grant, when you assert whatever is certain the same to be necessary. To me, Certain and Necessary seem very different; there being nothing in the former notion that implies Constraint, nor consequently which may not consist with a Man’s being accountable for his Actions. If it is foreseen that such an Action shall be done: May it not also be foreseen that it shall be an Effect of Humane Choice and Liberty? In the next place I observe, that you very nicely abstract and distinguish the Actions of the Mind, Judgment, and Will: That you make use of such Terms as Power, Faculty, Act, Determination, Indifference, Freedom, Necessity, and the like, as if they stood for distinct abstract Ideas: And that this Supposition seems to ensnare the Mind into the same Perplexities and Errors, which, in all other Instances, are observed to attend the Doctrine of Abstraction. It is self evident, that there is such a thing as Motion; and yet there have been found Philosophers, who, by refined Reasoning, wou’d undertake to prove there was no such thing. Walking before them was thought the proper Way to confute those ingenious Men. It is no less evident, that Man is a free Agent: and though by abstracted Reasonings you shou’d puzzle me, and seem to prove the contrary, yet so long as I am conscious of my own Actions, this inward Evidence of plain Fact will bear me up against all your Reasonings, however subtile and refined. The confuting plain Points by obscure ones, may perhaps convince me of the Ability of your Philosophers, but never of their Tenets. I cannot conceive why the acute Cratylus shou’d suppose a Power of Acting in the Appetite and Reason, and none at all in the Will? Allowing, I say, the Distinction of three such Beings in the Mind, I do not see how this cou’d be true. But if I cannot abstract and distinguish so many Beings in the Soul of Man so accurately as you do, I do not find it necessary, since it is evident to me in the gross and concrete that I am a free Agent. Nor will it avail to say, the Will is governed by the Judgment, or determined by the Object, while, in every sudden common Case, I cannot discern nor abstract the Decree of the Judgment from the Command of the Will; while I know the sensible Object to be absolutely inert: And lastly, while I am conscious that I am an active Being, who can and do determine my self. If I shou’d suppose things spiritual to be corporeal, or refine things actual and real into general abstracted Notions, or by metaphysical Skill split things simple and individual into manifold Parts, I do not know what may follow: But if I take things as they are, and ask any plain untutored Man, whether he acts or is free in this or that particular Action, he readily assents, and I as readily believe him from what I find within. And thus, by an Induction of Particulars, I may conclude Man to be a free Agent, although I may be puzzled to define or conceive a Notion of Freedom in general and abstract. And if Man be free he is plainly accountable. But if you shall define, abstract, suppose, and it shall follow that according to your Definitions, Abstractions, and Suppositions, there can be no Freedom in Man, and you shall thence infer that he is not accountable, I shall make bold to depart from your metaphysical abstracted Sense, and appeal to the common Sense of Mankind.

XXII.

If we consider the Notions that obtain in the World of Guilt and Merit, Praise and Blame, Accountable and Unaccountable, we shall find the common Question in order to applaud or censure, acquit or condemn a Man, is, whether he did such an Action? and whether he was himself when he did it? which comes to the same thing. It shou’d seem therefore that in the ordinary Commerce of Mankind, any Person is esteemed accountable simply as he is an Agent. And though you shou’d tell me that Man is inactive, and that the sensible Objects act upon him, yet my own Experience assures me of the contrary. I know I act, and what I act I am accountable for. And if this be true, the Foundation of Religion and Morality remains unshaken. Religion, I say is concerned no farther than that Man shou’d be Accountable: And this he is according to my Sense, and the common Sense of the World, if he acts; and that he doth act is self evident. The Grounds, therefore, and Ends of Religion are secured; whether your philosophic Notion of Liberty agrees with Man’s Actions or no, and whether his Actions are certain or contingent, the Question being not whether he did it with a Free Will, or what determined his Will? not, whether it was certain or foreknown that he wou’d do it? but only whether he did it wilfully? as what must entitle him to the Guilt or Merit of it. ALC. But still, the Question recurs, whether Man bee Free? EUPH. To determine this Question, ought we not first to determine what is meant by the word Free? ALC. We ought. EUPH. In my Opinion, a Man is said to be Free, so far forth as he can do what he will. Is this so or is it not? ALC. It seems so. EUPH. Man therefore acting according to his Will, is to be accounted Free. ALC. This I admit to be true in the Vulgar Sense. But a Philosopher goes higher, and inquires whether Man be free to will? EUPH. That is, whether he can will as he wills? I know not how Philosophical it may be to ask this Question, but it seems very unintelligible. The Notions of Guilt and Merit, Justice and Reward are in the Minds of Men, antecedent to all Metaphysical Disquisitions: And according to those received natural Notions, it is not doubted that Man is accountable, that he acts, and is self-determined.

XXIII.

But a Minute Philosopher shall, in virtue of wrong Suppositions, confound things most evidently distinct; Body, for Instance, with Spirit, Motion with Volition, Certainty with Necessity; and an Abstracter or Refiner shall so analyse the most simple instantaneous Act of the Mind, as to distinguish therein divers Faculties and Tendencies, Principles and Operations, Causes and Effects; and having abstracted, supposed, and reasoned upon Principles gratuitous and obscure, such a one he will conclude it is no Act at all, and Man no Agent but a Puppet, or an Organ play’d on by outward Objects, and his Will a Top or a Foot-ball. And this passeth for Philosophy and Free-thinking. Perhaps this may be what it passeth for, but it by no means seems a natural or just way of Thinking. To me it seems, that if we begin from things particular and concrete, and thence proceed to general Notions and Conclusions, there will be no Difficulty in this Matter. But if we begin with Generalities, and lay our Foundation in abstract Ideas, we shall find our selves entangled and lost in a Labyrinth of our own making. I need not observe, what every one must see, the ridicule of proving Man no Agent, and yet pleading for free Thought and Action, of setting up at once for Advocates of Liberty and Necessity. I have hastily thrown together these Hints or Remarks, on what you call a fundamental Article of the Minute Philosophy, and your Method of proving it, which seems to furnish an admirable Specimen of the Sophistry of abstract Ideas. If in this summary way I have been more dogmatical than became me, you must excuse what you occasioned, by declining a joint and leisurely Examination of the Truth. ALC. I think we have examined Matters sufficiently. CRI. To all you have said against Humane Liberty, it is a sufficient Answer to observe that your Arguments proceed upon an erroneous Supposition, either of the Soul’s being corporeal, or of abstract Ideas. And on the other hand, there is not need of much Inquiry to be convinced of two Points, than which none are more evident, more obvious, and more universally admitted by Men of all sorts, learned or unlearned, in all Times and Places, to wit, that Man acts and is accountable for his Actions. Whatever Abstracters, Refiners, or Men prejudiced to a false Hypothesis may pretend, it is, if I mistake not, evident to every thinking Man of common Sense, that Humane Minds are so far from being Engines or Foot-balls, acted upon and bandied about by corporeal Objects, without any inward Principle of Freedom or Action, that the only original true Notions that we have of Freedom, Agent, or Action, are obtained by reflecting on our selves, and the Operations of our own Minds. The Singularity and Credulity of Minute Philosophers, who suffer themselves to be abused by the Paralogisms of three or four eminent Patriarchs of Infidelity in the last Age, is, I think, not to be matched; there being no Instance of bigotted Superstition, the Ringleaders whereof have been able to seduce their Followers more openly and more widely from the plain Dictates of Nature and common Sense.

XXIV.

ALC. It has been always an Objection against the Discoverers of Truth, that they depart from received Opinions. The Character of Singularity is a Tax on Free-thinking: And as such we most willingly bear it, and glory in it. A Genuine Philosopher is never modest in a false Sense, to the preferring Authority before Reason, or an old and common Opinion before a true one. Which false Modesty, as it discourages Men from treading in untrodden Paths, or striking out new Light, is above all other Qualities the greatest Enemy to Free-thinking. CRI. Authority in disputable Points will have its Weight with a judicious Mind, which yet will follow Evidence wherever it leads. Without preferring we may allow it a good Second to Reason. Your Gentlemen, therefore, of the Minute Philosophy, may spare a World of Common Place upon Reason, and Light, and Discoveries. We are not attached to Authority against Reason, nor afraid of untrodden Paths that lead to Truth, and are ready to follow a new Light when we are sure it is no ignis fatuus. Reason may oblige a Man to believe against his Inclinations; but why shou’d a Man quit salutary Notions for others not less unreasonable than pernicious? Your Schemes and Principles, and boasted Demonstrations have been at large proposed and examined. You have shifted your Notions, successively retreated from one Scheme to another, and in the End renounced them all. Your Objections have been treated in the same Manner, and with the same Event. If we except all that relates to the particular Errors and Faults of private Persons, and Difficulties which, from the Nature of Things, we are not obliged to explain, it is surprising to see, after such magnificent Threats, how little remains, that can amount to a pertinent Objection against the Christian Religion. What you have produced has been tried by the fair Test of Reason; and though you shou’d hope to prevail by Ridicule when you cannot by Reason, yet in the upshot, I apprehend you will find it impracticable to destroy all Sense of Religion. Make your Countrymen ever so vicious, ignorant, and profane, Men will still be disposed to look up to a supreme Being. Religion, right or wrong, will subsist in some Shape or other, and some worship there will surely be either of God or the Creature. As for your Ridicule, can any thing be more ridiculous, than to see the most unmeaning Men of the Age set up for Free-thinkers, Men so strong in Assertion, and yet so weak in Argument, Advocates for Freedom introducing a Fatality, Patriots trampling on the Laws of their Country, and Pretenders to Virtue, destroying the Motives of it? Let any impartial Man but cast an eye on the Opinions of the Minute Philosophers, and then say if any thing can be more ridiculous, than to believe such things, and at the same time laugh at Credulity.

XXV.

LYS. Say what you will, we have the Laughers on our side: And as for your Reasoning I take it to be another Name for Sophistry. CRI. And I suppose by the same Rule you take your own Sophisms for Arguments. To speak plainly, I know no sort of Sophism that is not employ’d by Minute Philosophers against Religion. They are guilty of a Petitio Principii, in taking for granted that we believe Contradictions; of non Causa pro Causa, in affirming that uncharitable Feuds and Discords are the Effects of Christianity; of Ignoratio elenchi, in expecting Demonstration where we pretend only to Faith. If I was not afraid to offend the Delicacy of polite Ears, nothing were easier than to assign Instances of every kind of Sophism, which wou’d shew how skilful your own Philosophers are in the practice of that Sophistry you impute to others. EUPH. For my own part, if Sophistry be the Art or Faculty of deceiving other Men, I must acquit these Gentlemen of it. They seem to have led me a progress through Atheism, Libertinism, Enthusiasm, Fatalism, not to convince me of the Truth of any of them, so much as to confirm me in my own way of Thinking. They have exposed their fairy Ware not to cheat but divert us. As I know them to be professed Masters of Ridicule, so in a serious sense I know not what to make of them. ALC. You do not know what to make of us! I shou’d be sorry you did. He must be a superficial Philosopher that is soon fathomed.

XXVI.

CRI. The ambiguous Character is, it seems, the sure way to Fame and Esteem in the learned World, as it stands constituted at present. When the ingenious Reader is at a loss to determine whether his Author be Atheist or Deist or Polytheist, Stoic or Epicurean, Sceptic or Dogmatist, Infidel or Enthusiast, in jest or in earnest, he concludes him without hesitation to be aenigmatical and profound. In fact, it is true of the most admired Writers of the Age, That no Man alive can tell what to make of them, or what they would be at. ALC. We have among us Moles that dig deep under ground, and Eagles that soar out of sight. We can act all Parts and become all Opinions, putting them on or off with great freedom of Wit and Humour. EUPH. It seems then you are a pair of inscrutable, unfathomable, fashionable Philosophers. ALC. It cannot be denied. EUPH. But, I remember, you set out with an open dogmatical Air, and talked of plain Principles and evident Reasoning, promised to make things as clear as Noon-day, to extirpate wrong Notions and plant right in their stead. Soon after, you began to recede from you first Notions and adopt others: you advanced one while and retreated another, yielded and retracted, said and unsaid: And after having followed you through so many untrodden Paths and intricate Mazes I find my self never the nearer. ALC. Did we not tell you the Gentlemen of our Sect are great Proficients in Raillery? EUPH. But, methinks, it is a vain Attempt, for a plain Man of any settled Belief or Principles to engage with such slippery, fugitive, changeable Philosophers. If seems as it a Man shou’d stand still in the same place, while his Adversary chooses and changes his Situation, has full range and liberty to traverse the Field, and attack him on all sides and in all shapes, from a nearer or farther distance, on Horse-back or on Foot, in light or heavy Armour, in close Fight or with missive Weapons. ALC. It must be owned, a Gentleman hath great Advantage over a straitlaced Pedant or Bigot. EUPH. But after all, what am I the better for the Conversation of two such knowing Gentlemen; I hoped to have unlearned my Errors, and to have learned Truths from you, but, to my great disappointment, I do not find that I am either untaught or taught. ALC. To unteach Men their Prejudices is a difficult task: And this must first be done, before we can pretend to teach them the Truth. Besides, we have at present no time to prove and argue. EUPH. But suppose my Mind white Paper, and without being at any pains to extirpate my Opinions, or prove your own, only say what you wou’d write thereon, or what you wou’d teach me in case I were teacheable. Be for once in earnest, and let me know some one Conclusion of yours before we part; or I shall intreat Crito to violate the Laws of Hospitality towards those who have violated the Laws of Philosophy, by hanging out false Lights to one benighted in Ignorance and Error. I appeal to you (said he turning to Crito) whether these Philosophical Knight-errants shou’d not be confined in this Castle of yours, till they make Reparation. Euphranor has Reason, said Crito, and my Sentence is that you remain here in durance, till you have done something towards satisfying the Engagement I am under, having promised, he shou’d know your Opinions from your selves, which you also agreed to.

XXVII.

ALC. Since it must be so, I will now reveal what I take to be the Sum and Substance, the grand Arcanum and ultimate Conclusion of our Sect, and that in two Words, [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] . CRI. You are then a downright Sceptic. But, Sceptic as you are, you own it, probable there is a God, certain that the Christian Religion is useful, possible it may be true, certain that if it be the Minute Philosophers are in a bad way. This being the Case, how can it be questioned what course a wise Man shou’d take? Whether the Principles of Christians or Infidels are truest may be made a Question, but which are safest can be none. Certainly if you doubt of all Opinions you must doubt of your own; and then, for ought you know, the Christian may be true. The more doubt, the more room there is for Faith, a Sceptic of all Men having the least Right to demand Evidence. But, whatever uncertainty there may be in other Points, thus much is certain: either there is or is not a God: there is or is not a Revelation: Man either is or is not an Agent: The Soul is or is not Immortal. If the Negatives are not sure, the Affirmatives are possible. If the Negatives are improbable, the Affirmatives are probable. In Proportion, as any of your ingenious Men finds himself unable to prove any one of these Negatives, he hath grounds to suspect he may be mistaken. A Minute Philosopher, therefore, that wou’d act a consistent part, shou’d have the Diffidence, the Modesty, and the Timidity, as well as the Doubts, of a Sceptic; not pretend to an Ocean of Light, and then lead us to an Abyss of Darkness. If I have any Notion of Ridicule, this is most ridiculous. But your ridiculing what, for ought you know, may be true, I can make no sense of. It is neither acting as a wise Man with regard to your own Interest, nor as a good Man with regard to that of your Country.

XXVIII.

Tully saith somewhere, aut undique religionem tolle aut usquequaque conserva: Either let us have no Religion at all or let it be respected. If any single Instance can be shewn of a People that ever prospered without some Religion, or if there be any Religion better than the Christian, propose it in the grand Assembly of the Nation to change our Constitution, and either live without Religion, or introduce that new Religion. A Sceptic, as well as other Men, is Member of a Community, and can distinguish between God and Evil, Natural or Political. Be this then his Guide as a Patriot, though he be no Christian. Or, if he doth not pretend even to this discernment, let him not pretend to correct or alter what he knows nothing of: Neither let him that only doubts behave as if he cou’d demonstrate. Timagoras is wont to say, I find my Country in possession of certain Tenets: they appear to have an useful Tendency, and, as such, are encouraged by the Legislature; they make a main part of our Constitution: I do not find these Innovators can disprove them, or substitute things more useful and certain in their stead: out of regard therefore to the Good of Mankind, and the Laws of my Country, I shall acquiesce in them. I do not say Timagoras is a Christian, but I reckon him a Patriot. Not to inquire in a Point of so great concern is folly, but it is still a higher degree of folly to condemn without inquiring. Lysicles seemed heartily tired of this Conversation. It is now late, said he to Alciphron, and all things are ready for our departure. Every one hath his own way of Thinking; and it is as impossible for me to adopt another Man’s, as to make his Complexion and Features mine. Alciphron pleaded that, having complied with Euphranor’s Conditions, they were now at Liberty: And Euphranor answered that, all he desired having been to know their Tenets, he had nothing further to pretend.

XXIX.

  The Philosophers being gone, I observed to Crito how unaccountable it was, that Men so easy to confute shou’d yet be so difficult to convince. This, said Crito, is accounted for by Aristotle, who tells us that Arguments have not an Effect on all Men, but only on them whose Minds are prepared by Education and Custom, as Land is for Seed . Make a Point never so clear, it is great odds, that a Man, whose Habits and the Bent of whose Mind lie a contrary way, shall be unable to comprehend it. So weak a thing is Reason in Competition with Inclination. I replied, this answer might hold with respect to other Persons and other Times: but when the question was of inquisitive Men, in an Age wherein Reason was so much cultivated, and Thinking so much in vogue, it did not seem satisfactory. I have known it remarked, said Crito, by a Man of much Observation, that in the present Age Thinking is more talk’d of but less practised than in ancient times; and that since the Revival of Learning Men have read much and wrote much but thought little: insomuch that with us to think closely and justly is the least part of a learned Man, and none at all of a polite Man. The Free-thinkers, it must be owned, make great Pretensions to Thinking, and yet they shew but little Exactness in it. A lively Man, said he, and what the World calls a Man of sense are often destitute of this Talent, which is not a meer gift of Nature, but must be improved and perfected, by much Attention and Exercise on very different Subjects, a thing of more pains and time than the hasty Men of parts in our Age care to take. Such were the Sentiments of a judicious Friend of mine: And, if you are not already sufficiently convinced of these Truths, you need only cast an eye on the dark and confused, but nevertheless admired, Writers of this famous Sect: And then you will be able to judge, whether those who are led by Men of such wrong Heads can have very good ones of their own. Such, for instance, was Spinosa the great Leader of our modern Infidels, in whom are to be found many Schemes and Notions much admired and followed of late years: such as undermining Religion under the pretence of vindicating and explaining it: The maintaining it not necessary to believe in Christ according to the Flesh: The persuading Men that Miracles are to be understood only in a spiritual and allegorical sense: That Vice is not so bad a thing as we are apt to think: That Men are meer Machines impelled by fatal Necessity. I have heard, said I, Spinosa represented as a Man of close Argument and Demonstration. He did, replied Crito, demonstrate; but it was after such a manner, as any one may demonstrate any thing. Allow a Man the privilege to make his own Definitions of common Words, and it will be no hard matter for him to infer Conclusions, which in one sense shall be true and in another false, at once seeming Paradoxes and manifest Truisms. For example, let but Spinosa define natural Right to be natural Power, and he will easily demonstrate, that whatever a Man can do he hath a right to do . Nothing can be plainer than the folly of this Proceeding: but our Pretenders to the lumen siccum are often so passionately prejudiced against Religion, as to swallow the grossest Nonsense and Sophistry of weak and wicked Writers for Demonstration.

XXX.

And so great a Noise do these Men make, with their thinking, reasoning, and demonstrating, as to prejudice some well-meaning Persons against all Use and improvement of Reason. Honest Demea, having seen a Neighbour of his ruined by the Vices of a Free-thinking Son, contracted such a Prejudice against Thinking, that he wou’d not suffer his own to read Euclid, being told it might teach him to think; till a Friend convinced him the epidemical Distemper was not Thinking, but only the want and affectation of it. I know an eminent Free-thinker, who never goes to bed, without a Gallon of Wine in his Belly, and is sure to replenish before the Fumes are off his Brain, by which means he has not had one sober Thought these seven Years; another, that wou’d not for the World lose the Privilege and Reputation of Free-thinking, who games all Night, and lies in bed all Day: And as for the Outside or Appearance of Thought in that meagre Minute Philosopher Ibycus, it is an Effect, not of thinking, but of carking, cheating, and writing in an Office. Strange, said he, that such Men shou’d set up for Free-thinkers! But it is yet more strange that other Men shou’d be out of Conceit with Thinking and Reasoning, for the sake of such Pretenders. I answered, that some good Men conceived an Opposition between Reason and Religion, Faith and Knowledge, Nature and Grace; and that, consequently, the way to promote Religion was, to quench the light of Nature, and discourage all rational Inquiry.

XXXI.

How right the Intentions of these Men may be, replied Crito, I shall not say; but surely their Notions are very wrong. Can any thing be more dishonourable to Religion, than the representing it as an unreasonable, unnatural, ignorant Institution? God is the Father of all Lights whether natural or revealed. Natural Concupiscence is one thing, and the Light of Nature another. You cannot therefore argue from the Former against the Latter: Neither can you from Science falsly so called, against real Knowledge. Whatever therefore is said of the one in Holy Scripture is not to be interpreted of the other. I insisted, that Humane Learning in the hands of Divines, had from time to time, created great Disputes and Divisions in the Church. As abstracted Metaphysics, replied Crito, have always had a Tendency to produce Disputes among Christians, as well as other Men, so it shou’d seem that genuine Truth and Knowledge wou’d allay this Humour, which makes Men sacrifice the undisputed Duties of Peace and Charity to disputable Notions. After all, said I, whatever may be said for Reason, it is plain, the Sceptics and Infidels of the Age are not to be cured by it. I will not dispute this Point, said Crito; in order to cure a Distemper, you shou’d consider what produced it. Had Men reasoned themselves into a wrong Opinion, one might hope to reason them out of it. But this is not the Case; the Infidelity of most Minute Philosophers seeming an Effect of very different Motives from Thought and Reason, little Incidents, Vanity, Disgust, Humour, Inclination, without the least assistance from Reason, are often known to make Infidels. Where the general Tendency of a Doctrine is disagreeable, the Mind is prepared to relish and improve every thing that with the least Pretence seems to make against it. Hence the coarse Manners of a Country Curate, the polite ones of a Chaplain, the Wit of a Minute Philosopher, a Jest, a Song, a Tale can serve instead of a Reason for Infidelity. Bupalus preferred a Rake in the Church, and then made use of him as an Argument against it. Vice, Indolence, Faction, and Fashion produce Minute Philosophers, and meer Petulancy not a few. Who then can expect a thing so irrational and capricious shou’d yield to Reason? It may, nevertheless, be worth while to argue against such Men, and expose their Fallacies, if not for their own sake, yet for the sake of others; as it may lessen their Credit, and prevent the growth of their Sect, by removing a Prejudice in their Favour, which sometimes inclines others as well as themselves to think they have made a Monopoly of Humane Reason.

XXXII.

The most general Pretext which looks like Reason, is taken from the Variety of Opinions about Religion. This is a resting Stone to a lazy and superficial mind: But one of more Spirit and a juster way of Thinking, makes it a Step whence he looks about, and proceeds to examine, and compare the differing Institutions of Religion. He will observe, which of these is the most sublime and rational in its Doctrines, most venerable in its Mysteries, most useful in its Precepts, most decent in its Worship? Which createth the noblest Hopes, and most worthy Views? He will consider their Rise and Progress; which oweth least to Humane Arts or Arms? Which flatters the Senses and gross Inclinations of Men? Which adorns and improves the most excellent Part of our Nature? Which hath been propagated in the most wonderful Manner? Which hath surmounted the greatest Difficulties, or shew’d the most disinterested Zeal and Sincerity in its Professors? He will inquire, which best accords with Nature and History? He will consider, what savours of the World, and what looks like Wisdom from above? He will be careful to separate Humane Allay from that which is Divine; and upon the whole, form his Judgment like a reasonable Free-thinker. But instead of taking such a rational Course, one of these hasty Sceptics shall conclude without demurring, there is no Wisdom in Politics, no Honesty in Dealings, no Knowledge in Philosophy, no Truth in Religion: And all by one and the same sort of Inference, from the numerous Examples of Folly, Knavery, Ignorance, and Error, which are to be met with in the World. But, as those who are unknowing in every thing else, imagine themselves sharpsighted in Religion, this learned Sophism is oftenest levelled against Christianity.

XXXIII.

In my Opinion, he, that wou’d convince an Infidel who can be brought to Reason, ought in the first place clearly to convince him of the Being of a God, it seeming to me, that any Man who is really a Theist, cannot be an Enemy to the Christian Religion: And that the Ignorance or Disbelief of this fundamental Point, is that which at bottom constitutes the Minute Philosopher. I imagine they, who are acquainted with the great Authors in the Minute Philosophy, need not be told of this. The being of a God is capable of clear Proof, and a proper Object of Humane Reason; whereas the Mysteries of his Nature, and indeed whatever there is of Mystery in Religion, to endeavour to explain, and prove by Reason, is a vain Attempt. It is sufficient if we can shew there is nothing absurd or repugnant in our Belief of those Points, and, instead of framing Hypotheses to explain them, we use our Reason only for answering the Objections brought against them. But on all Occasions, we ought to distinguish the serious, modest, ingenuous Man of Sense, who hath Scruples about Religion, and behaves like a prudent Man in doubt, from the Minute Philosophers, those profane and conceited Men, who must needs proselyte others to their own Doubts. When one of this Stamp presents himself, we shou’d consider what Species he is of: Whether a first or a second-hand Philosopher, a Libertine, Scorner, or Sceptic? Each Character requiring a peculiar Treatment. Some Men are too ignorant to be humble, without which there can be no Docility: But though a Man must in some degree have thought and considered to be capable of being convinced, yet it is possible the most ignorant may be laugh’d out of his Opinions. I knew a Woman of Sense reduce two Minute Philosophers, who had long been a Nusance to the Neighbourhood, by taking her Cue from their predominant Affectations. The one set up for being the most incredulous Man upon Earth, the other for the most unbounded Freedom. She observed to the first, that he who had Credulity sufficient to trust the most valuable Things, his Life and Fortune, to his Apothecary and Lawyer, ridiculously affected the Character of Incredulous, by refusing to trust his Soul, a Thing in his own account but a meer Trifle, to his Parish-Priest. The other, being what you call a Beau, she made sensible how absolute a Slave he was in point of Dress, to him the most important thing in the World, while he was earnestly contending for a Liberty of Thinking, with which he never troubled his Head; and how much more it concerned and became him to assert an Independency on Fashion, and obtain Scope for his Genius, where it was best qualified to exert it self. The Minute Philosophers at first hand are very few, and considered in themselves, of small consequence: But their Followers, who pin their Faith upon them, are numerous, and not less confident than credulous; there being something in the Air and Manner of these second-hand Philosophers, very apt to disconcert a Man of Gravity and Argument, and much more difficult to be born than the Weight of their Objections.

XXXIV.

Crito having made an end, Euphranor declared it to be his Opinion, that it wou’d much conduce to the public Benefit, if, instead of discouraging Free-thinking, there was erected in the midst of this Free Country a Dianoetic Academy, or Seminary for Free-thinkers, provided with retired Chambers, and Galleries, and shady Walks and Groves, where, after seven Years spent in Silence and Meditation, a Man might commence a genuine Free-thinker, and from that time forward, have Licence to think what he pleased, and a Badge to distinguish him from Counterfeits. In good earnest, said Crito, I imagine that Thinking is the great Desideratum of the present Age; and that the real Cause of whatever is amiss, may justly be reckoned the general Neglect of Education, in those who need it most, the People of Fashion. What can be expected where those who have the most Influence, have the least Sense, and those who are sure to be followed, set the worst Example? Where Youth so uneducated are yet so forward? Where Modesty is esteemed Pufillanimity, and a Deference to Years, Knowledge, Religion, Laws, want of Sense and Spirit? Such untimely Growth of Genius wou’d not have been valued or encouraged by the wise Men of Antiquity; whose Sentiments on this Point are so ill suited to the Genius of our Times, that it is to be feared modern Ears cou’d not bear them. But however ridiculous such Maxims might seem to our British Youth, who are so capable and so forward to try Experiments, and mend the Constitution of their Country, I believe it will be admitted by Men of Sense, that if the Governing part of Mankind wou’d in these Days, for Experiment’s sake, consider themselves in that old Homerical Light as Pastors of the People, whose Duty it was to improve their Flock, they wou’d soon find that this is to be done by an Education very different from the Modern, and otherguess Maxims than those of the Minute Philosophy. If our Youth were really inur’d to Thought and Reflexion, and an Acquaintance with the excellent Writers of Antiquity, we shou’d soon see that licentious Humour, vulgarly called Free-thinking, banished from the Presence of Gentlemen, together with Ignorance and ill Taste; which as they are inseparable from Vice, so Men follow Vice for the fake of Pleasure, and fly from Virtue through an abhorrence of Pain. Their Minds therefore betimes shou’d be formed and accustomed to receive Pleasure and Pain from proper Objects, or, which is the same thing, to have their Inclinations and Aversions rightly placed. [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT] . This according to Plato and Aristotle, was the [NON-LATIN ALPHABET TEXT]  , the right Education . And those who, in their own Minds, their Health, or their Fortunes, feel the cursed Effects of a wrong one, wou’d do well to consider, they cannot better make amends for what was amiss in themselves, than by preventing the same in their Posterity. While Crito was saying this, Company came in, which put an end to our Conversation.

 The Theory of Vision (1733) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

OR, VISUAL LANGUAGE, SHEWING THE IMMEDIATE PRESENCE AND PROVIDENCE OF A DEITY, VINDICATED AND EXPLAINED

OXFORD CLARENDON PRESS 1901 TEXT

 CONTENTSEDITOR’S PREFACE TO THE THEORY OF VISION, OR VISUAL LANGUAGE, VINDICATED AND EXPLAINED

 THEORY OF VISION OR VISUAL LANGUAGE, VINDICATED AND EXPLAINED

 

 EDITOR’S PREFACE TO THE THEORY OF VISION, OR VISUAL LANGUAGE, VINDICATED AND EXPLAINED [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

T HIS TRACT , OSTENSIBLY a vindication and explanation of the theory, that in seeing we are interpreting a language which God is continually addressing to our senses, involves a retrospect of principles which Berkeley had been gradually unfolding and applying in his preceding metaphysical works.

More particularly in the Fourth Dialogue in Alciphron, on which the whole discussion in the Minute Philosopher may be said to turn, Euphranor is engaged in shewing that the phenomena perceived in sight are so connected, in the order of Nature, with our tactual, muscular, and locomotive experience, that we can read this experience in terms of what we see: so that the Power immanent in Nature is virtually speaking to us in all visual phenomena, thus giving the same sort of evidence that Supreme Power is living and active Intelligence as a man gives when he addresses us in spoken or written words. This argument may be taken as a development of the Theory of Vision , published more than twenty years before, now freed from the reserve with which it was embarrassed in the earlier work, when Berkeley’s new conception of the reality of the material world was held back. In Alciphron it presents a striking lesson of the omnipresence of God in Nature, and of the immediate dependence of all charges and natural laws upon constant Divine agency and adaptation.

The appearance of Alciphron, with this Fourth Dialogue at its centre, and with the original Essay on Vision of 1709 appended, called forth the following Anonymous Letter, containing articulate objections to his account of Sight as the language of God. The Letter was published in London, in the Daily Post-Boy , on September 9, 1732.

 

A Letter from an Anonymous Writer to the Author of the Minute Philosopher.

REVEREND SIR,

I have read over your treatise called Alciphron , in which the Free-thinkers of the present age, in their various shifted tenets, are pleasantly, elegantly, and solidly confuted. The style is easy, the language plain, and the arguments are nervous. But upon the Treatise annexed thereto, and upon that part where you seem to intimate that Vision is the sole Language of God, I beg leave to make these few observations, and offer them to your’s and your readers’ consideration.

1. Whatever it is without that is the cause of any idea within, I call the object of sense: the sensations arising from such objects , I call ideas . The objects, therefore, that cause such sensations are without us, and the ideas within.

2. Had we but one sense, we might be apt to conclude that there were no objects at all without us, but that the whole scene of ideas which passed through the mind arose from its internal operations; but since the same object is the cause of ideas by different senses, thence we infer its existence. But, though the object be one and the same, the ideas that it produces in different senses have no manner of similitude with one another. Because, 3. Whatever connexion there is betwixt the idea of one sense and the idea of another, produced by the same object, arises only from experience. To explain this a little familiarly, let us suppose a man to have such an exquisite sense of feeling given him that he could perceive plainly and distinctly the inequality of the surface of two objects, which, by its reflecting and refracting the rays of light, produces the ideas of colours. At first, in the dark, though he plainly perceived a difference by his touch, yet he could not possibly tell which was red and which was white, whereas a little experience would make him feel a colour in the dark, as well as see it in the light.

4. The same word in languages stands very often for the object without, and for the ideas it produces within in the several senses. When it stands for any object without, it is the representative of no manner of idea; neither can we possibly have any idea of what is solely without us. Because, 5. Ideas within have no other connexion with the objects without than from the frame and make of our bodies, which is by the arbitrary appointment of God: and, though we cannot well help imagining that the objects without are something like our ideas within, yet a new set of senses, or the alteration of the old ones, would soon convince us of our mistake; and, though our ideas would then be never so different, yet the objects might be the same.

6. However, in the present situation of affairs, there is an infallible certain connexion betwixt the idea and the object; and, therefore, when an object produces an idea in one sense, we know, but from experience only, what idea it will produce in another sense.

7. The alteration of an object may produce a different idea in one sense from what it did before, which may not be distinguished by another sense. But, where the alteration occasions different ideas in different senses, we may, from our infallible experience, argue from the idea of one sense to that of the other; so that, if a different idea arises in two senses from the alteration of an object, either in situation or distance, or any other way, when we have the idea in one sense, we know from use what idea the object so situated will produce in the other.

8. Hence, as the operations of Nature are always regular and uniform, where the same alteration of the object occasions a smaller difference in the ideas of one sense, and a greater in the other, a curious observer may argue as well from exact observations as if the difference in the ideas was equal; since experience plainly teaches us that a just proportion is observed in the alteration of the ideas of each sense, from the alteration of the object. Within this sphere is confined all the judicious observations and knowledge of mankind.

Now, from these observations, rightly understood and considered, your New Theory of Vision must in a great measure fall to the ground, and the laws of Optics will be found to stand upon the old unshaken bottom. For, though our ideas of magnitude and distance in one sense are entirely different from our ideas of magnitude and distance in another, yet we may justly argue from one to the other, as they have one common cause without, of which, as without, we cannot possibly have the faintest idea. The ideas I have of distance and magnitude by feeling are widely different from the ideas I have of them by seeing ; but that something without , which is the cause of all the variety of the ideas within in one sense, is the cause also of the variety in the other: and, as they have a necessary connexion with it, we may very justly demonstrate from our ideas of feeling of the same object what will be our ideas in seeing. And, though to talk of seeing by tangible angles and tangible lines be, I agree with you, direct nonsense, yet to demonstrate from angles and lines in feelings, to the ideas in seeing that arise from the same common object, is very good sense, and so vice versa .

From these observations, thus hastily laid together, and a thorough digestion thereof, a great many useful corollaries in all philosophical disputes might be collected.

I am,

Your humble servant, &c.

 

This Letter was regarded by Berkeley as important enough to draw forth this Vindication and Explanation , also in the form of a Letter, which was published in London in March, 1733, ‘printed for J. Tonson in the Strand.’ It was written in London, where Berkeley, now in indifferent health, had been staying with his family from the time of his return from Rhode Island, early in the preceding year.

The fortune of the Vindication and Explanation of the Theory of Divine Visual Language illustrates the tendency to read superficially and then neglect his cosmical and metaphysical conceptions, which strikes us when we follow their fortunes during his life. This interesting tract was unaccountably excluded from all collected editions of Berkeley’s Works preceding the Oxford edition in 1871. It seems to have been forgotten for nearly a hundred years. It is alluded to in Smith’s Optics, in 1738, and a century later by Sir James Mackintosh in his Dissertation, and by Sir William Hamilton in his Discussions. Its republication in 1860 by Mr. Cowell of King’s College, London, has now made it familiar to students.

 

The eight opening sections of Berkeley’s Answer press with earnestness the importance of ‘Visual Language’ as ‘ a new and unanswerable proof of the existence and immediate operation of God, and the constant care of His Providence,’ against ‘those who called themselves free-thinkers,’ and were by Berkeley charged with a covert atheism, which made them ‘minute’ philosophers. Here especially, and occasionally in Alciphron , his natural impetuosity, added to indignation on account of the exclusive claim of the ‘minute philosophers’ to free employment of reason in religion, tempt him to use language hardly consistent with the philosophical temper. Those whom he charged with atheism were professed theists, engaged with the important question of the nature and resources of what was called ‘natural religion,’ and the duty of reason to investigate this without restraint by ecclesiastical or other authority. This is a question which raises the deepest problems that can engage the human mind. It is true that one cannot rate highly either the religious or the philosophical insight of the deistical free-thinkers who were Berkeley’s contemporaries. Their narrow premises and rapid conclusions were discredited by Berkeley and Butler. But they raised questions which still engross religious thinkers, which were soon afterwards discussed with more insight by Hume and Kant. And one must not forget the warm friendship of John Locke for Anthony Collins, against whom Berkeley directs his strongest invective. ‘ Believe it, my good friend,’ Locke writes to Collins, ‘to love truth for truth’s sake is the principal part of human perfection in this world, and the seed-plot of all other virtues; and if I mistake not, you have as much of it as ever I met with in any body.’ This is the spirit in which Locke speaks of Collins throughout their interesting correspondence ‘.

 

Sect. 9-18 offer some preliminary verbal explanations. In particular, the distinction between objects of perception in the five senses (called also ideas and sensations), on the one hand, and the cause of those appearances on the other hand, is strenuously insisted on, as of prime importance in the discussion. Then, as regards objects , it is ruled that those presented in each of the five senses have nothing in common with those presented in the other senses; and yet they are so connected, under natural law, that objects perceived in one of our senses are made by the Supreme Power, signs of objects perceptible by another sense — the data of one thus forming what is virtually a language which tells us of data provided by the others. But mere appearances presented to our senses, and their significant relations to one another, must not be confounded with metaphysical questions about Power at work in this phenomenal cosmos. A study of the phenomena presented in the different senses should precede the deeper question about the Power that is continually at work throughout the Whole, and of which the Whole is a revelation. The theory of Vision, strictly regarded, is exhausted when it has fully realised the conception, that the objects of sight are signs in what is virtually a language; but this opens the way to the higher conception, that this language is Divine, so that the entire universe of interpretable phenomena presented in sense is really a revelation of the Supreme Power as Active Mind.

Articulate answers to each of the eight objections in the ‘Anonymous Letter’ are given in sect. 19-34, based upon these preliminary explanations.

In sect. 35-47 the ‘New Theory of Vision’ unfolded analytically in the juvenile Essay in 1709, is presented in reverse order, or synthetically. The aim of the previous analysis was to dissolve the prejudice occasioned by the constant association of visual with tactual experience; to exhibit their antethesis as objects; and after that their synthesis as interpretable signs. But in the Vindication the conclusion reached in the early Essay is presupposed at the outset, and then applied to explain our judgments of the situations, sizes, and distances of things, which we seem to see immediately. In all this there is involved the assumption that the human mind is governed by a law of suggestion through previous concomitance of the phenomena involved in the suggestion (sect. 39). Suggestion belongs primarily to sense more than to reason: to be suggested is one thing, to be inferred is another (sect. 42). In Visual Language the objects or signs are light and colour. How it comes to pass that we can apprehend, by the phenomena of light and colour, which are the only proper objects of sight, certain other ideas or objects, which neither resemble them, nor cause them, nor are caused by them, nor have any necessary connexion with them, comprehends in his view the whole theory of Vision (sect. 42). The leading constituents of the theory are, the absolute heterogeneity of objects visible and objects tangible; an assumption of our inability a priori to interpret the tactual meaning of visual objects, in their capacity of visual signs; and the proof that a constant association between the visual and the tangible world in our experience, together with instinctive faith in the uniformity of nature, is sufficient to infuse reliable tactual meaning into the appearances of which we are immediately percipient in seeing (sect. 41-47).

 

In sect. 48-69 this theory is applied synthetically to explain in detail our interpretation of Visual Signs of the tactual Situations, Magnitudes, and Distances of things.

 

The Vindication closes (sect. 70), with an allusion to Chesselden’s notable record, in the Philosophical Transactions, of the case of a youth born blind, and afterwards made to see; in confirmation of the conclusion that our now constantly exercised ability to read the tactual meaning of visual signs is not an inexplicable instinct, but is explicable according to known laws of suggestion, under divinely-maintained relations between objects of sight and objects of touch.

 

The design of this recognition of Visual Language is the practical one of restoring and sustaining faith in the constancy and universality of Divine Agency in the natural world. Sensuous phenomena are thus equivalent to words spoken by God, which we are all daily interpreting; so that man by reflexion finds in them proof that he is always living and moving in a universe that is charged with Providential Intelligence.

  THEORY OF VISION OR VISUAL LANGUAGE, VINDICATED AND EXPLAINED [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

In answer to an Anonymous Writer

l. AN ill state of health, which permits me to apply myself but seldom and by short intervals to any kind of studies, must be my apology, Sir, for not answering your Letter sooner. This would have altogether excused me from a controversy upon points either personal or purely speculative, or from entering the lists with declaimers, whom 1 leave to the triumph of their own passions. And indeed to one of this character, who contradicts himself and misrepresents me, what answer can be made more than to desire his readers not to take his word for what I say, but to use their own eyes, read, examine, and judge for themselves? And to their Common Sense I appeal. For such a writer, such an answer may suffice. But argument, I allow, hath a right to be considered, and, where it doth not convince, to be opposed with reason. And being persuaded that the Theory of Vision , annexed to The Minute Philosopher , affords to thinking men a new and unanswerable proof of the Existence and immediate Operation of God, and the constant condescending care of His Providence, I think myself concerned, as well as I am able, to defend and explain it, at a time wherein Atheism hath made a greater progress than some are willing to own, or others to believe.

2. He who considers that the present avowed enemies of Christianity began their attacks against it under the specious pretext of defending the Christian Church and its rights, when he observes the same men pleading for Natural Religion, will be tempted to suspect their views, and judge of their sincerity in one case from what they have shewed in the other. Certainly the notion of a watchful, active, intelligent, free Spirit, with whom we have to do, and in whom we live and move and have our being, is not the most prevailing in the books and conversation even of those who are called Deists. Besides, as their schemes take effect, we may plainly perceive moral virtue and the religion of nature to decay, and see, both from reason and experience, that the destroying the Revealed Religion must end in Atheism or Idolatry. It must be owned, many minute philosophers would not like at present to be accounted Atheists. But how many, twenty years ago, would have been affronted to be thought Infidels, who would now be much more affronted to be thought Christians! As it would be unjust to charge those with Atheism who are not really tainted with it; so it will be allowed very uncharitable and imprudent to overlook it in those who are, and suffer such men, under specious pretexts, to spread their principles, and in the event to play the same game with Natural Religion that they have done with Revealed.

3. It must, without question, shock some innocent admirers of a certain plausible pretender to Deism and Natural Religion, if a man should say, there are strong signatures of Atheism and irreligion in every sense, natural as well as revealed, to be found even in that admired writer: and yet, to introduce taste instead of duty, to make man a necessary agent, to deride a future judgment, seem to all intents and purposes atheistical, or subversive of all religion whatsoever. And these every attentive reader may plainly discover to be his principles; although it be not always easy to fix a determinate sense on such a loose and incoherent writer. There seems to be a certain way of writing, whether good or bad, tinsel or sterling, sense or nonsense, which, being suited to that size of understanding that qualifies its owners for the Minute Philosophy, doth marvellously strike and dazzle those ingenious men, who are by this means conducted they know not how, and they know not whither. Doubtless that Atheist who gilds, and insinuates, and, even while he insinuates, disclaims his principles, is the likeliest to spread them. What availeth it, in the cause of Virtue and Natural Religion, to acknowledge the strongest traces of wisdom and power throughout the structure of the universe, if this wisdom is not employed to observe, nor this power to recompense our actions; if we neither believe ourselves accountable, nor God our Judge?

4. All that is said of a vital principle, or order, harmony, and proportion; all that is said of the natural decorum and fitness of things; all that is said of taste and enthusiasm, may well consist and be supported, without a grain even of Natural Religion; without any notion of Law or Duty, any belief of a Lord or Judge, or any religious sense of a God: the contemplation of the mind upon the ideas of beauty, and virtue, and order, and fitness, being one thing, and a sense of religion another. So long as we admit no principle of good actions but natural affection, no reward but natural consequences; so long as we apprehend no judgment, harbour no fears, and cherish no hopes of a future state, but laugh at all these things, with the author of the Characteristics, and those whom he esteems the liberal and polished part of mankind, how can we be said to be religious in any sense? Or what is here that an Atheist may not find his account in as well as a Theist? To what moral purpose might not Fate or Nature serve as well as a Deity, on such a scheme? And is not this, at bottom, the amount of all those fair pretences?

5. Certainly that atheistical men, who hold no principles of any religion, natural or revealed, are an increasing number, and this too among people of no despicable rank, hath long since been expressly acknowledged by one who will be allowed a proper judge, even this same plausible pretender himself to Deism and Enthusiasm. But if any well-meaning persons, deluded by artful writers in the Minute Philosophy, or wanting the opportunity of any unreserved conversation with some ingenious men of that sect, should think that Lysides hath overshot the mark, and misrepresented their principles; to be satisfied of the contrary, they need only cast an eye on the Philosophical Dissertation upon Death , lately published by a minute philosopher. Perhaps some man of leisure may think it worth while to trace the progress and unfolding of their principles, down from the writer in defence of the Rights of the Christian Church , to this plain dealer, the admirable author upon Death . During which period of time, I think one may observe a laid design gradually to undermine the belief of the Divine Attributes and Natural Religion; which scheme runs parallel with their gradual, covert, insincere proceedings, in respect of the Gospel.

6. That atheistical principles have taken deeper root, and are farther spread than most people are apt to imagine, will be plain to whoever considers that Pantheism, Materialism, Fatalism are nothing but Atheism a little disguised; that the notions of Hobbes, Spinoza, Leibnitz, and Bayle are relished and applauded; that as they who deny the freedom and immortality of the soul in effect deny its being, even so they do, as to all moral effects and natural religion, deny the being of God, who deny Him to be an observer, judge, and rewarder of human actions; that the course of arguing pursued by infidels leads to Atheism as well as Infidelity.

[An instance of this may be seen in the proceeding of the author of a book intituled, A Discourse of Free-thinking occasioned by the Rise and Growth of a sect called Freethinkers ; who, having insinuated his infidelity, from men’s various pretences and opinions concerning revealed religion, in like manner appears to insinuate his Atheism, from the differing notions of men concerning the nature and attributes of God particularly from the opinion of our knowing God by Analogy (see p. 42 of the mentioned book), as it hath been misunderstood and misinterpreted by some of late years. Such is the ill effect of untoward defences and explanations of our faith; and such advantage do incautious friends give its enemies. If there be any modern well-meaning writer, who (perhaps from not having considered the Fifth Book of Euclid) writes much of Analogy without understanding it, and thereby hath slipped his foot into this snare, I wish him to slip it back again, and, instead of causing scandal to good men and triumph to Atheists, discreetly explain away his first sense, and return to speak of God and His attributes in the style of other Christians; allowing that knowledge and wisdom do, in the proper sense of the words, belong to God, and that we have some notion, though infinitely inadequate, of these Divine attributes, yet still more than a man blind from his birth can have of sight and colours.

But to return, if I see it in their writings, if they own it in their conversation, if their ideas imply it, if their ends are not answered but by supposing it, if their leading author hath pretended to demonstrate Atheism, but thought fit to conceal his Demonstration from the public; if this was known in their clubs, and yet that author was nevertheless followed, and represented to the world as a believer of Natural Religion; if these things are so (and I know them to be so), surely what the favourers of their schemes would palliate, it is the duty of others to display and refute.

7. And although the characters of Divinity are large and legible throughout the whole creation to men of plain sense and common understanding, yet it must be considered that we have other adversaries to oppose, other proselytes to make; men prejudiced to false systems and proof against vulgar arguments, who must be dealt with on a different footing. Conceited, metaphysical, disputing men must be paid in another coin; we must shew that truth and reason in all shapes are equally against them, except we resolve to give them up, what they are very fond of being thought to engross, all pretensions to philosophy, science, and speculation.

8. Meanwhile thus much is evident: those good men who shall not care to employ their thoughts on this Theory of Vision have no reason to find fault. They are just where they were, being left in full possession of all other arguments for a God, none of which are weakened by this. And as for those who shall be at the pains to examine and consider this subject, it is hoped they may be pleased to find, in an age wherein so many schemes of Atheism are restored or invented, a new argument of a singular nature in proof of the immediate Care and Providence of a God, present to our minds, and directing our actions. As these considerations convince me that I cannot employ myself more usefully than in contributing to awaken and possess men with a thorough sense of the Deity inspecting, concerning, and interesting itself in human actions and affairs: so, I hope it will not be disagreeable to you that, in order to this, I make my appeal to reason, from your remarks upon what I have wrote concerning Vision; since men who differ in the means may yet agree in the end, and in the same candour and love of truth.

9. By a sensible object I understand that which is properly perceived by sense. Things properly perceived by sense are immediately perceived. Besides things properly and immediately perceived by any sense, there may be also other things suggested to the mind by means of those proper and immediate objects; which things so suggested are not objects of that sense, being in truth only objects of the imagination, and originally belonging to some other sense or faculty. Thus, sounds are the proper objects of hearing, being properly and immediately perceived by that, and by no other sense. But, by the mediation of sounds or words, all other things may be suggested to the mind; and yet things so suggested are not thought the object of hearing.

10. The peculiar objects of each sense, although they are truly or strictly perceived by that sense alone, may yet be suggested to the imagination by some other sense. The objects therefore of all the senses may become objects of imagination; which faculty represents all sensible things. A colour, therefore, which is truly perceived by sight alone, may, nevertheless, upon hearing the words blue or red, be apprehended by the imagination. It is in a primary and peculiar manner the object of sight; in a secondary manner it is the object of imagination: but cannot properly be supposed the object of hearing.

11. The objects of sense, being things immediately perceived, are otherwise called ideas.

The cause of these ideas, or the power of producing them, is not the object of sense, not being itself perceived, but only inferred by reason from its effects, to wit, those objects or ideas which are perceived by sense. From our ideas of sense the inference of reason is good to power, cause, agent. But we may not therefore infer that our ideas are like unto this Power, Cause, or Active Being. On the contrary, it seems evident that an idea can be only like another idea, and that in our ideas or immediate objects of sense, there is nothing of power, causality, or agency included.

12. Hence it follows that the Power or Cause of ideas is not an object of sense, but of reason. Our knowledge of the cause is measured by the effect; of the power, by our idea. To the absolute nature, therefore, of outward causes or powers, we have nothing to say: they are no objects of our sense or perception. Whenever, therefore, the appellation of sensible object is used in a determined intelligible sense, it is not applied to signify the absolutely existing outward cause or power, but the ideas themselves produced thereby.

13. Ideas which are observed to be connected together are vulgarly considered under the relation of cause and effect, whereas, in strict and philosophic truth, they are only related as the sign to the thing signified. For, we know our ideas, and therefore know that one idea cannot be the cause of another. We know that our ideas of sense are not the cause of themselves. We know also that we do not cause them. Hence we know they must have some other efficient Cause, distinct from them and us.

14. In treating of Vision, it was my purpose to consider the effects and appearances, the objects, perceived by my senses, the ideas of sight as connected with those of touch; to inquire how one idea comes to suggest another belonging to a different sense, how things visible suggest things tangible, how present things suggest things more remote and future, whether by likeness, by necessary connexion, by geometrical inference, or by arbitrary institution.

15. It hath indeed been a prevailing opinion and undoubted principle among mathematicians and philosophers that there were certain ideas common to both senses: whence arose the distinction of primary and secondary qualities. But, I think it hath been demonstrated that there is no such thing as a common object — as an idea, or kind of idea perceived both by sight and touch.

16. In order to treat with due exactness on the nature of Vision, it is necessary in the first place accurately to consider our own ideas; to distinguish where there is a difference; to call things by their right names; to define terms, and not confound ourselves and others by their ambiguous use; the want or neglect whereof hath so often produced mistakes. Hence it is that men talk as if one idea was the efficient cause of another; hence they mistake inferences of reason for perceptions of sense; hence they confound the power residing in somewhat external with the proper object of sense; which is in truth no more than our own idea.

17. When we have well understood and considered the nature of Vision, we may, by reasoning from thence, be better able to collect some knowledge of the external unseen Cause of our ideas; whether it be one or many, intelligent or unintelligent, active or inert, body or spirit. But, in order to understand and comprehend this Theory, and discover the true principles thereof, we should consider the likeliest way is, not to attend to unknown substances, external causes, agents or powers; nor to reason or infer anything about or from things obscure, unperceived, and altogether unknown.

18. As in this inquiry we are concerned with what objects we perceive, or our own ideas, so, upon them our reasonings must proceed. To treat of things utterly unknown as if we knew them, and so lay our beginning in obscurity, would not surely seem the properest means for the discovering of truth. Hence it follows, that it would be wrong if one about to treat of the nature of Vision, should, instead of attending to visible ideas, define the object of sight to be that obscure Cause, that invisible Power or Agent, which produced visible ideas in our minds. Certainly such Cause or Power does not seem to be the object either of the sense or the science of Vision, inasmuch as what we know thereby we know only of the effects. Having premised thus much, I now proceed to consider the principles laid down in your Letter, which I shall take in order as they lie.

19. In your first paragraph or section, you say that ‘whatever it is without which is the cause of any idea within, you call the object of sense’; and you tell us soon after this, ‘that we cannot possibly have an idea of any object without.’ — Hence it follows that by an object of sense you mean something that we can have no manner of idea of. This making the objects of sense to be things utterly insensible seems to me contrary to common sense and the use of language. That there is nothing in the reason of things to justify such a definition is, I think, plain from what has been premised. And that it is contrary to received custom and opinion, I appeal to the experience of the first man you meet, who I suppose will tell you that by an object of sense he means that which is perceived by sense, and not a thing utterly unperceivable and unknown. The Beings, Substances, Powers which exist without may indeed concern a treatise on some other science, and may there become a proper subject of inquiry. But, why they should be considered as objects of the visive faculty, in a treatise of Optics, I do not comprehend.

20. The real objects of sight we see, and what we see we know. And these true objects of sense and knowledge, to wit, our own ideas, are to be considered, compared, distinguished, in order to understand the true Theory of Vision. As to the outward Cause of these ideas, whether it be one and the same, or various and manifold, whether it be thinking or unthinking, spirit or body, or whatever else we conceive or determine about it, the visible appearances do not alter their nature: our ideas are still the same. Though I may have an erroneous notion of the Cause, or though I may be utterly ignorant of its nature, yet this does not hinder my making true and certain judgments about my ideas; my knowing which are the same, and which different; wherein they agree, and wherein they disagree; which are connected together, and wherein this connexion consists; whether it be founded in a likeness of nature, in a geometrical necessity, or merely in experience and custom.

21. In your second section , you say that ‘ if we had but one sense, we might be apt to conclude there were no objects at all without us; but that, since the same object is the cause of ideas by different senses, thence we infer its existence.’ — Now, in the first place, I observe, that I am at a loss concerning the point which is here assumed, and would fain be informed how we come to know that the same object causeth ideas by different senses. In the next place, I must observe that, if I had only one sense, I should nevertheless infer and conclude there was some cause without me (which you, it seems, define to be an object ), producing the sensations or ideas perceived by that sense. For, if I am conscious that I do not cause them, and know that they are not the cause of themselves, both which points seem very clear, it plainly follows that there must be some other third cause distinct from me and them.

22. In your third section , you acknowledge with me that ‘the connexion between ideas of different senses ariseth only from experience.’ — Herein we are agreed.

In your fourth section you say that ‘a word denoting an external object, is the representative of no manner of idea. Neither can we possibly have an idea of what is solely without us. — What is here said of an external unknown object hath been already considered.

23. In the following section of your Letter, you declare that ‘our ideas have only an arbitrary connexion with outward objects, that they are nothing like the outward objects, and that a variation in our ideas doth not imply or infer a change in the objects, which may still remain the same.’ — Now, to say nothing about the confused use of the word ‘object,’ which hath been more than once already observed, I shall only remark that the points asserted in this section do not seem to consist with some others that follow.

24. For, in the sixth section , you say that ‘in the present situation of things, there is an infallible certain connexion between the idea and the object.’ — But how can we perceive this connexion, since, according to you, we never perceive such object, nor can have any idea of it? or, not perceiving it, how can we know this connexion to be infallibly certain?

25. In the seventh section , it is said that ‘ we may, from our infallible experience, argue from our idea of one sense to that of another.’ — But, I think it is plain that our experience of the connexion between ideas of sight and touch is not infallible; since, if it were, there could be no deceptio visus, neither in painting, perspective, dioptrics, nor any otherwise.

26. In the last section, you affirm that ‘experience plainly teaches us that a just proportion is observed in the alteration of the ideas of each sense, from the alteration of the object.’ — Now, I cannot possibly reconcile this section with the fifth; or comprehend how experience should shew us that the alteration of the object produceth a proportionable alteration in the ideas of different senses, or how indeed it should shew us anything at all either from or about the alteration of an object utterly unknown, of which we neither have nor can have any manner of idea. What I do not perceive or know, how can I perceive or know to be altered? And, knowing nothing of its alterations, how can I compute anything by them, deduce anything from them, or be said to have any experience about them?

27. From the observations you have premised, rightly understood and considered, you say it follows that my ‘ New Theory of Vision must in great measure fall to the ground; and the laws of Optics will be found to stand upon the old unshaken bottom.’ — But, though I have considered and endeavoured to understand your remarks, yet I do not in the least comprehend how this conclusion can be inferred from them. The reason you assign for such inference is, because, ‘ although our ideas in one sense are entirely different from our ideas in another, yet we may justly argue from one to the other, as they have one common cause without, of which, as without,’ you say, ‘we cannot possibly have even the faintest idea.’ — Now, my theory nowhere supposeth that we may not justly argue from the ideas of one sense to those of another, by analogy and by experience; on the contrary, this very point is affirmed, proved, or supported throughout.

28. Indeed I do not see how the inferences which we make from visible to tangible ideas include any consideration of one common unknown external cause, or depend thereon, but only on mere custom or habit. The experience which I have had that certain ideas of one sense are attended or connected with certain ideas of a different sense is, I think, a sufficient reason why the one may suggest the other.

29. In the next place, you affirm that ‘ something without , which is the cause of ail the variety of ideas within in one sense, is the cause also of the variety in another: and, as they have a necessary connexion with it, we very justly demonstrate, from our ideas of feeling of the same object, what will be our ideas of seeing.’ — As to which, give me leave to remark that to inquire whether that unknown something be the same in both cases, or different, is a point foreign to Optics; inasmuch as our perceptions by the visive faculty will be the very same, however we determine that point. Perhaps I think that the same Being which causeth our ideas of sight doth cause not only our ideas of touch likewise, but also all our ideas of all the other senses, with all the varieties thereof. But this, I say, is foreign to the purpose.

30. As to what you advance, that our ideas have a necessary connexion with such cause, it seems to me gratis dictum : no reason is produced for this assertion; and I cannot assent to it without a reason. The ideas or effects I grant are evidently perceived: but the cause you say is utterly unknown. How then can you tell whether such unknown cause acts arbitrarily or necessarily? I see the effects or appearances: and I know that effects must have a cause: but I neither see nor know that their connexion with that cause is necessary. Whatever there may be, I am sure I see no such necessary connexion, nor, consequently, can demonstrate by means thereof from ideas of one sense to those of another.

31. You add that ‘although to talk of seeing by tangible angles and lines be direct nonsense, yet, to demonstrate from angles and lines in feelings to the ideas in seeing that arise from the same common object is very good sense.’ — If by this no more is meant than that men might argue and compute geometrically by lines and angles in Optics, it is so far from carrying in it any opposition to my theory that I have expressly declared the same thing. This doctrine, as admitted by me, is indeed subject to certain limitations; there being divers cases wherein the writers of Optics thought we judged by lines and angles, or by a sort of natural geometry, with regard to which I think they were mistaken, and I have given my reasons for it. And those reasons, as they are untouched in your letter, retain their force with me.

32. I have now gone through your reflexions, which the conclusion intimates to have been written in haste, and, having considered them with all the attention I am master of, must now leave it to the thinking reader to judge whether they contain anything that should oblige me to depart from what I have advanced in my Theory of Vision . For my own part, if I were ever so willing, it is not on this occasion in my power to indulge myself in the honest satisfaction it would be frankly to give up a known error; a thing so much more right and reputable to denounce than to defend. On the contrary, it should seem that the Theory will stand secure; since you agree with me that men do not see by lines and angles; since I, on the other hand, agree with you that we may nevertheless compute in Optics by lines and angles, as I have expressly shewed; since all that is said in your Letter about the object, the same object, the alteration of the object, is quite foreign to the Theory, which considereth our ideas as the object of sense, and hath nothing to do with that unknown, unperceived, unintelligible thing which you signify by the word object . Certainly the laws of Optics will not stand on the old, unshaken bottom, if it be allowed that we do not see by geometry; if it be evident that explications of phenomena given by the received theories in Optics are insufficient and faulty; if other principles are found necessary for explaining the nature of vision; if there be no idea, nor kind of idea, common to both senses, contrary to the old received universal supposition of optic writers.

33. We not only impose on others but often on ourselves, by the unsteady or ambiguous use of terms. One would imagine that an object should be perceived . I must own, when that word is employed in a different sense, that I am at a loss for its meaning, and consequently cannot comprehend any arguments or conclusions about it. And I am not sure that, on my own part, some inaccuracy of expression, as well as the peculiar nature of the subject, not always easy either to explain or conceive, may not have rendered my Treatise concerning Vision difficult to a cursory reader. But, to one of due attention, and who makes my words an occasion of his own thinking, I conceive the whole to be very intelligible: and, when it is rightly understood, I scarce doubt but it will be assented to. One thing at least I can affirm, that, if I am mistaken, I can plead neither haste nor inattention, having taken true pains and much thought about it.

34. And had you, Sir, thought it worth while to have dwelt more particularly on the subject, to have pointed out distinct passages in my Treatise, to have answered any of my objections to the received notions, refuted any of my arguments in behalf of mine, or made a particular application of your own; I might without doubt have profited by your reflections. But it seems to me we have been considering, either different things, or else the same things in such different views as the one can cast no light on the other. I shall, nevertheless, take this opportunity to make a review of my Theory, in order to render it more easy and clear; and the rather because, as I had applied myself betimes to this subject, it became familiar; and in treating of things familiar to ourselves, we are too apt to think them so to others.

35. It seemed proper, if not unavoidable, to begin in the accustomed style of optic writers, admitting divers things as true, which, in a rigorous sense, are not such, but only received by the vulgar and admitted as such. There hath been a long and close connexion in our minds between the ideas of sight and touch. Hence they are considered as one thing; which prejudice suiteth well enough with the purpose of life, and language is suited to this prejudice. The work of science and speculation is to unravel our prejudices and mistakes, untwisting the closest connexions, distinguishing things that are different; instead of confused or perplexed, giving us distinct views; gradually correcting our judgment, and reducing it to a philosophical exactness. And, as this work is the work of time, and done by degrees, it is extremely difficult, if at all possible, to escape the snares of popular language, and the being betrayed thereby to say things strictly speaking neither true nor consistent. This makes thought and candour more especially necessary in the reader. For, language being accommodated to the prænotions of men and use of life, it is difficult to express therein the precise - truth of things, which is so distant from their use, and so contrary to our prænotions.

36. In the contrivance of Vision, as that of other things, the wisdom of Providence seemeth to have consulted the operation rather than the theory of man; to the former things are admirably fitted, but, by that very means, the latter is often perplexed. For, as useful as these immediate suggestions and constant connexions are to direct our actions; so is our distinguishing between things confounded, and as it were blended together, no less necessary to the speculation and knowledge of truth.

37. The knowledge of these connexions, relations, and differences of things visible and tangible, their nature, force, and significancy hath not been duly considered by former writers on Optics, and seems to have been the great desideratum in that science, which for want thereof was confused and imperfect. A Treatise, therefore, of this philosophical kind, for the understanding of Vision, is at least as necessary as the physical consideration of the eye, nerve, coats, humours, refractions, bodily nature, and motion of light; or as the geometrical application of lines and angles for praxis or theory, in dioptric glasses and mirrors, for computing and reducing to some rule and measure our judgments, so far as they are proportional to the objects of geometry. In these three lights Vision should be considered, in order to a complete Theory of Optics.

38. It is to be noted that, in considering the Theory of Vision, I observed a certain known method, wherein, from false and popular suppositions, men do often arrive at truth. Whereas in the synthetical method of delivering science or truth already found, we proceed in an inverted order; the conclusions in the analysis being assumed as principles in the synthesis. I shall therefore now begin with that conclusion, that Vision is the Language of the Author of Nature , from thence deducing theorems and solutions of phenomena, and explaining the nature of visible things and the visive faculty. —

39. Ideas which are observed to be connected with other ideas come to be considered as signs, by means whereof things not actually perceived by sense are signified or suggested to the imagination; whose objects they are, and which alone perceives them. And, as sounds suggest other things, so characters suggest other sounds; and, in general, all signs suggest the things signified, there being no idea which may not offer to the mind another idea which hath been frequently joined with it. In certain cases a sign may suggest its correlate as an image, in others as an effect, in others as a cause. But, where there is no such relation of similitude or causality, nor any necessary connexion whatsoever, two things, by their mere coexistence, or two ideas, merely by being perceived together, may suggest or signify one the other, their connexion being all the while arbitrary; for it is the connexion only, as such, that causeth this effect.

40. A great number of arbitrary signs, various and opposite, do constitute a Language. If such arbitrary connexion be instituted by men, it is an artificial language; if by the Author of Nature, it is a natural language. Infinitely various are the modifications of light and sound; whence they are each capable of supplying an endless variety of signs, and, accordingly, have been each employed to form languages; the one by the arbitrary appointment of mankind, the other by that of God Himself. A connexion established by the Author of Nature, in the ordinary course of things, may surely be called natural, as that made by men will be named artificial. And yet this doth not hinder but the one may be as arbitrary as the other. And, in fact, there is no more likeness to exhibit, or necessity to infer, things tangible from the modifications of light, than there is in language to collect the meaning from the sound. But such as the connexion is of the various tones and articulations of voice with their several meanings, the same is it between the various modes of light and their respective correlates, or, in other words, between the ideas of sight and touch.

41. As to light, and its several modes or colours, all thinking men are agreed that they are ideas peculiar only to sight; neither common to the touch, nor of the same kind with any that are perceived by that sense. But herein lies the mistake, that, beside these, there are supposed other ideas common to both senses, being equally perceived by sight and touch, such as Extension, Size, Figure, and Motion. But that there are in reality no such common ideas, and that the objects of sightmarked by these words, are entirely different and heterogeneous from whatever is the object of feeling, marked by the same names, hath been proved in the Theory , and seems by you admitted; though I cannot conceive how you should in reason admit this, and at the same time contend for the received theories, which are so much ruined as mine is established by this main part and pillar thereof.

42. To perceive is one thing; to judge is another. So likewise, to be suggested is one thing, and to be inferred another. Things are suggested and perceived by sense. We make judgments and inferences by the understanding. What we immediately and properly perceive by sight is its primary object — light and colours. What is suggested, or perceived by mediation thereof, are tangible ideas, which may be considered as secondary and improper objects of sight. We infer causes from effects, effects from causes, and properties one from another, where the connexion is necessary. But how comes it to pass that we apprehend by the ideas of sight certain other ideas, which neither resemble them, nor cause them, nor are caused by them, nor have any necessary connexion with them? — the solution of this problem, in its full extent, doth comprehend the whole Theory of Vision. This stating of the matter placeth it on a new foot, and in a different light from all preceding theories.

43. To explain how the mind or soul of man simply sees is one thing, and belongs to Philosophy. To consider particles as moving in certain lines, rays of light as refracted or reflected, or crossing, or including angles, is quite another thing, and appertaineth to Geometry. To account for the sense of vision by the mechanism of the eye is a third thing, which appertaineth to Anatomy and experiments. These two latter speculations are of use in practice, to assist the defects and remedy the distempers of sight, agreeably to the natural laws contained in this mundane system. But the former Theory is that which makes us understand the true nature of Vision, considered as a faculty of the soul. Which Theory, as I have already observed, may be reduced to this simple question, to wit, How comes it to pass that a set of ideas, altogether different from tangible ideas, should nevertheless suggest them to us, there being no necessary connexion between them? To which the proper answer is, That this is done in virtue of an arbitrary connexion , instituted by the Author of Nature.

“. — The proper, immediate object of vision is light, in all its modes and variations, various colours in kind, in degree, in quantity; some lively, others faint; more of some and less of others; various in their bounds or limits; various in their order and situation. A blind man, when first made to see, might perceive these objects, in which there is an endless variety: but he would neither perceive nor imagine any resemblance or connexion between these visible objects and those perceived by feeling. Lights, shades, and colours would suggest nothing to him about bodies, hard or soft, rough or smooth: nor would their quantities, limits, or order suggest to him geometrical figures, or extension, or situation, which they must do upon the received supposition, that these objects are common to sight and touch.

45. All the various sorts, combinations, quantities, degrees, and dispositions of light and colours, would, upon the first perception thereof, be considered in themselves only as a new set of sensations and ideas. As they are wholly new and unknown, a man born blind would not, at first sight, give them the names of things formerly known and perceived by his touch. But, after some experience, he would perceive their connexion with tangible things, and would, therefore, consider them as signs, and give them (as is usual in other cases) the same names with the things signified.

46. More and less, greater and smaller, extent, proportion, interval are all found in Time as in Space; but it will not therefore follow that these are homogeneous quantities. No more will it follow, from the attribution of common names, that visible ideas are homogeneous with those of feeling. It is true that terms denoting tangible extension, figure, location, motion, and the like, are also applied to denote the quantity, relation, and order of the proper visible objects, or ideas of sight. But this proceeds only from experience and analogy. There is a higher and lower in the notes of music; men speak in a high or a low key. And this, it is plain, is no more than metaphor or analogy. So likewise, to express the order of visible ideas, the words situation , high and low, up and down , are made use of; and their sense, when so applied, is analogical.

47. But, in the case of Vision we do not rest in a supposed analogy between different and heterogeneous natures. We suppose an identity of nature, or one and the same object common to both senses. And this mistake we are led into; forasmuch as the various motions of the head, upward and downward, to the right and to the left, being attended with a diversity in the visible ideas, it cometh to pass that those motions and situations of the head, which in truth are tangible, do confer their own attributes and appellations on visible ideas wherewith they are connected, and which by that means come to be termed high and low, right and left , and to be marked by other names betokening the modes of position; which, antecedently to such experienced connexion, would not have been attributed to them, at least not in the primary and literal sense.

48. From hence we may see how the mind is enabled to discern by Sight the Situation of distant objects. Those immediate objects whose mutual respect and order come to be expressed by terms relative to tangible place, being connected with the real objects of touch, what we say and judge of the one, we say and judge of the other, transferring our thought or apprehension from the signs to the things signified; as it is usual, in hearing or reading a discourse, to overlook the sounds or letters, and instantly pass on to the meaning 49. But there is a great difficulty relating to the situation of objects, as perceived by sight. For, since the pencils of rays issuing from any luminous object do, after their passage through the pupil, and their refraction by the crystalline, delineate inverted pictures in the retina, which pictures are supposed the immediate proper objects of sight, how comes it to pass that the objects whereof the pictures are thus inverted do yet seem erect and in their natural situation? For, the objects not being perceived otherwise than by their pictures, it should follow that, as these are inverted, those should seem so too. But this difficulty, which is inexplicable on all the received Principles and theories, admits of a most natural solution, if it be considered that the retina , crystalline, pupil, rays, crossing refracted, and reunited in distinct images, correspondent and similar to the outward objects, are things altogether of a tangible nature.

50. The pictures, so called, being formed by the radious pencils, after their above-mentioned crossing and refraction, are not so truly pictures as images, or figures, or projections — tangible figures projected by tangible rays on a tangible retina, which are so far from being the proper objects of sight that they are not at all perceived thereby, being by nature altogether of the tangible kind, and apprehended by the Imagination alone, when we suppose them actually taken in by the eye. These tangible images on the retina have some resemblance unto the tangible objects from which the rays go forth; and in respect of those objects I grant they are inverted. But then I deny that they are, or can be, the proper immediate objects of sight. This, indeed, is vulgarly supposed by the writers of Optics: but it is a vulgar error; which being removed, the forementioned difficulty is removed with it, and admits a just and full solution, being shewn to arise from a mistake.

51. Pictures, therefore, may be understood in a twofold sense, or as two kinds quite dissimilar and heterogeneous — the one consisting of light, shade, and colours; the other not properly pictures, but images projected on the retina . Accordingly, for distinction, I shall call those pictures , and these images . The former are visible, and the peculiar objects of sight. The latter are so far otherwise, that a man blind from his birth may perfectly imagine, understand, and comprehend them. And here it may not be amiss to observe that figures and motions which cannot be actually felt by us, but only imagined, may nevertheless be esteemed tangible ideas; forasmuch as they are of the same kind with the objects of touch, and as the imagination drew them from that sense.

53. Throughout this whole affair the mind is wonderfully apt to be deluded by the sudden suggestions of Fancy, which it confounds with the Perceptions of Sense, and is prone to mistake a close and habitual connexion between the most distinct and different things for an identity of nature. The solution of this knot about inverted images seems the principal point in the whole Optic Theory; the most difficult perhaps to comprehend, but the most deserving of our attention, and, when rightly understood, the surest way to lead the mind into a thorough knowledge of the true nature of Vision.

53. It is to be noted of these inverted images on the retina that, although they are in kind altogether different from the proper objects of sight or pictures, they may nevertheless be proportional to them; as indeed the most different and heterogeneous things in nature may, for all that, have analogy, and be proportional each to other. And although those images, when the distance is given, should be simply as the radiating surfaces; and although it be consequently allowed that the pictures are in that case proportional to those radiating surfaces, or the tangible real magnitude of things; yet it will not thence follow that in common sight we perceive or judge of those tangible real magnitudes simply by the visible magnitudes of the pictures; for, therein the distance is not given, tangible objects being placed at various distances; and the diameters of the images, to which images the pictures are proportional, are inversely as those distances, which distances are not immediately perceived by sight. And, admitting they were, it is nevertheless certain that the mind, in apprehending the magnitudes of tangible objects of sight, doth not compute them by means of the inverse proportion of the distances, and the direct proportion of the pictures. That no such inference or reasoning attends the common act of seeing, every one’s experience may inform him.

54. To know how we perceive or apprehend by sight the real Magnitude of tangible objects, we must consider the immediate visible objects, and their properties or accidents. These immediate objects are the pictures. These pictures are some more lively, others more faint. Some are higher, others are lower in their own order or peculiar location; which, though in truth quite distinct, and altogether different from that of tangible objects, hath nevertheless a relation and connexion with it, and thence comes to be signified by the same terms, high, low, and so forth. Now, by the greatness of the pictures, their faintness and their situation, we perceive the magnitude of tangible objects — the greater, the fainter, and the upper pictures suggesting the greater tangible magnitude.

55. For better explication of this point, we may suppose a diaphanous plain erected near the eye, perpendicular to the horizon, and divided into small equal squares. A straight line from the eye to the utmost limit of the horizon, passing through this diaphanous plain, will mark a certain point or height to which the horizontal plain, as projected or represented in the perpendicular plain, would rise. The eye sees all the parts and objects in the horizontal plain, through certain corresponding squares of the perpendicular diaphanous plain. Those that occupy most squares have a greater visible extension, which is proportional to the squares. But the tangible magnitudes of objects are not judged proportional thereto. For those that are seen through the upper squares shall appear vastly bigger than those seen through the lower squares, though occupying the same, or a much greater number of those equal squares in the diaphanous plain.

56. Rays issuing from every point of each part or object in the horizontal plain, through the diaphanous plain to the eye, do to the imagination exhibit an image of the horizontal plain and all its parts, delineated in the diaphanous plain, and occupying the squares thereof to a certain height marked out by a right line reaching from the eye to the farthest limit of the horizon. A line drawn through the foremost height or mark, upon the diaphanous plain, and parallel to the horizon, I call the horizontal line. Every square contains an image of some corresponding part of the horizontal plain. And this entire image we may call the horizontal image, and the picture answering to it the horizontal picture. In which representation, the upper images suggest much greater magnitudes than the lower. And these images suggesting the greater magnitudes are also fainter as well as upper. Whence it follows that faintness and situation concur with visible magnitude to suggest tangible magnitude. For the truth of all which I appeal to the experience and attention of the reader who shall add his own reflexion to what I have written.

57. It is true this diaphanous plain, and the images supposed to be projected thereon, are altogether of a tangible nature \ But then there are pictures relative to those images ; and those pictures have an order among themselves, answering to the situation of the images, in respect of which order they are said to be higher and lower. These pictures also are more or less faint; they, and not the images, being in truth the visible objects. Therefore, what hath been said of the images must in strictness be understood of the corresponding pictures, whose faintness, situation, and magnitude, being immediately perceived by sight, do all three concur in suggesting the magnitude of tangible objects, and this only by an experienced connexion.

58. The magnitude of the picture will perhaps be thought by some to have a necessary connexion with that of the tangible object, or (if not confounded with it) to be at least the sole means of suggesting it. But so far is this from being true, that of two visible pictures, equally large, the one, being fainter and upper, shall suggest an hundred times greater tangible magnitude than the other; which is an evident proof that we do not judge of the tangible magnitude merely by the visible, but that our judgment or apprehension is to be rated rather by other things, which yet, not being conceived to have so much resemblance with tangible magnitude, may therefore be overlooked.

59. It is farther to be observed that, beside this magnitude, situation, and faintness of the pictures, our prænotions concerning the kind, size, shape, and nature of things do concur in suggesting to us their tangible magnitudes. Thus, for instance, a picture equally great, equally faint, and in the very same situation, shall in the shape of a man suggest a lesser magnitude than it would in the shape of a tower.

60. Where the kind, faintness, and situation of the horizontal pictures are given, the suggested tangible magnitude will be as the visible. The distances and magnitudes that we have been accustomed to measure by experience of touch, lying in the horizontal plain, it thence comes to pass that situations of the horizontal pictures suggest the tangible magnitudes, which are not in like manner suggested by vertical pictures. And it is to be noted that, as an object gradually ascends from the horizon towards the zenith, our judgment concerning its tangible magnitude comes by degrees to depend more entirely on its visible magnitude. For the faintness is lessened as the quantity of intercepted air and vapours is diminished. And as the object riseth the eye of the spectator is also raised above the horizon: so that the two concurring circumstances, of faintness and horizontal situation, ceasing to influence the suggestion of tangible magnitudes, this same suggestion or judgment doth, in proportion thereto, become the sole effect of the visible magnitude and the prænotions. But it is evident that if several things (for instance, the faintness, situation, and visible magnitude) concur to enlarge an idea, upon the ‘gradual omission of some of those things, the idea will be gradually lessened. This is the case of the moon, when she ascends above the horizon, and gradually diminisheth her apparent dimension, as her altitude increaseth.

61. It is natural for mathematicians to regard the visual angle and the apparent magnitude as the sole or principal means of our apprehending the tangible magnitude of objects. But it is plain from what hath been premised, that our apprehension is much influenced by other things, which have no similitude or necessary connexion therewith.

62. And these same means which suggest the magnitude of tangible things do also suggest their Distance; and in the same manner, that is to say, by experience alone, and not by any necessary connexion or geometrical inference. The faintness, therefore, and vividness, the upper and lower situations, together with the visible size of the pictures, and our prænotions concerning the shape and kind of tangible objects, are the true medium by which we apprehend the various degrees of tangible distance. Which follows from what hath been premised, and will indeed be evident to whoever considers that those visual angles, with their arches or subtenses, are neither perceived by sight, nor by experience of any other sense. Whereas it is certain that the pictures, with their magnitudes, situations, and degrees of faintness, are alone the proper objects of sight; so that whatever is perceived by sight, must be perceived by means thereof. To which perception the prænotions also, gained by experience of touch, or of sight and touch conjointly, do contribute.

63. And indeed we need only reflect on what we see to be assured that the less the pictures are, the fainter they are, and the higher (provided still they are beneath the horizontal line or its picture), by so much the greater will the distance seem to be. And this upper situation of the picture is in strictness what must be understood when, after a popular manner of speech, the eye is said to perceive fields, lakes, and the like, interjacent between it and the distant object, the pictures corresponding to them being only perceived to be lower than that of the object. Now, it is evident that none of these things have in their own nature any necessary connexion with the various degrees of distance. It will also appear, upon a little reflexion, that sundry circumstances of shape, colour, and kind, do influence our judgments or apprehensions of distance; all which follows from our prænotions, which are merely the effect of experience.

64. As it is natural for mathematicians to reduce things to the rule and measure of geometry, they are prone to suppose that the apparent magnitude hath a greater share than we really find, in forming our judgment concerning the distance of things from the eye. And, no doubt, it would be an easy and ready rule to determine the apparent place of an object, if we could say that its distance was inversely as the diameter of its apparent magnitude, and so judge by this alone, exclusive of every other circumstance. But that this would be no true rule is evident, there being certain cases in vision, by refracted or reflected light, wherein the diminution of the apparent magnitude is attended with an apparent diminution of distance.

65. But further to satisfy us that our judgments or apprehensions, either of the greatness or distance of an object, do not depend absolutely on the apparent magnitude, we need only ask the first painter we meet, who, considering Nature rather than Geometry, well knows that several other circumstances contribute thereto: and, since art can only deceive us as it imitates nature, we need but observe pieces of perspective and landscapes to be able to judge of this point.

66. When the object is so near that the interval between the pupils beareth some sensible proportion to it, the sensation which attends the turning or straining of the eyes, in order to unite the two optic axes therein, is to be considered as one means of our perceiving distance. It must be owned, this sensation belongeth properly to the sense of feeling; but, as it waits upon and hath a regular connexion with distinct vision of near distance (the nearer this, the greater that), so it is natural that it should become a sign thereof, and suggest it to the mind. And that it is so in fact follows from that known experiment of hanging up a ring edge-wise to the eyes, and then endeavouring, with one eye shut, by a lateral motion, to insert into it the end of a stick; which is found more difficult to perform than with both eyes open; from the want of this means of judging by the sensation attending the nearer meeting or crossing of the two optic axes.

67. True it is that the mind of man is pleased to observe in nature rules or methods, simple, uniform, general, and reducible to mathematics, as a means of rendering its knowledge at once easy and extensive. But we must not, for the sake of uniformities or analogies, depart from truth and fact, nor imagine that in all cases the apparent place or distance of an object must be suggested by the same means. And, indeed, it answers the end of vision to suppose that the mind should have certain additional means or helps, for judging more accurately of the distance of those objects which are the nearest, and consequently most concern us.

68. It is also to be observed that when the distance is so small that the breadth of the pupil bears a considerable proportion to it, the object appears confused. And this confusion being constantly observed in poring on such near objects, and increasing as the distance lessens, becomes thereby a means of suggesting the place of an object. For, one idea is qualified to suggest another, merely by being often perceived with it. And, if the one increaseth either directly or inversely as the other, various degrees of the former will suggest various degrees of the latter, by virtue of such habitual connexion, and proportional increase or diminution. And thus the gradual changing confusedness of an object may concur to form our apprehension of near distance, when we look only with one eye. And this alone may explain Dr. Barrow’s difficulty, the case as proposed by him regarding only one visible point. And when several points are considered, or the image supposed an extended surface, its increasing confusedness will, in that case, concur with the increasing magnitude to diminish its distance, which will be inversely as both.

69. Our experience in Vision is got by the naked eye. We apprehend or judge from this same experience when we look through glasses. We may not, nevertheless, in all cases, conclude from the one to the other; because that certain circumstances, either excluded or added, by the help of glasses, may sometimes alter our judgments, particularly as they depend upon prænotions.

70. What I have here written may serve as a commentary on my Essay towards a New Theory of Vision; and, I believe, will make it plain to thinking men. In an age wherein we hear so much of thinking and reasoning, it may seem needless to observe, how useful and necessary it is to think, in order to obtain just and accurate notions, to distinguish things that are different, to speak consistently, to know even our own meaning. And yet, for want of this, we may see many, even in these days, run into perpetual blunders and paralogisms. No friend, therefore, to truth and knowledge would lay any restraint or discouragement on thinking. There are, it must be owned, certain general maxims, the result of ages, and the collected sense of thinking persons, which serve instead of thinking for a guide or rule to the multitude, who, not caring to think for themselves, it is fit they should be conducted by the thoughts of others. But those who set up for themselves, those who depart from the public rule, or those who would reduce them to it, if they do not think, what will men think of them? As I pretend not to make any discoveries which another might not as well have made who should have thought it worth his pains: so I must needs say that without pains and thought no man will ever understand the true nature of Vision, or comprehend what I have wrote concerning it.

71. Before I conclude, it may not be amiss to add the following extract from the Philosophical Transactions, relating to a person blind from his infancy, and long after made to see:— ‘When he first saw, he was so far from making any judgment about distances that he thought all objects whatever touched his eyes (as he expressed it) as what he felt did his skin, and thought no objects so agreeable as those which were smooth and regular, though he could form no judgment of their shape, or guess what it was in any object that was pleasing to him. He knew not the shape of anything, nor any one thing from another, how different in shape or magnitude: but upon being told what things were, whose form he before knew from Feeling, he would carefully observe them that he might know them again; but having too many objects to learn at once, he forgot many of them; and (as he said) at first he learned to know, and again forgot, a thousand things in a day. Several weeks after he was couched, being deceived by pictures, he asked which was the lying sense — Feeling or Seeing? He was never able to imagine any lines beyond the bounds he saw. The room he was in, he said, he knew to be part of the house, yet he could not conceive that the whole house could look bigger. He said every new object was a new delight, and the pleasure was so great that he wanted ways to express it.’ — Thus, by fact and experiment, those points of the theory which seem the most remote from common apprehension were not a little confirmed, many years after I had been led into the discovery of them by reasoning.

 The Analyst (1734) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

A DISCOURSE ADDRESSED TO AN INFIDEL MATHEMATICIAN

FIRST EDITION TEXT

THE

ANALYST;

OR, A

DISCOURSE

Addressed to an

Infidel Mathematician.

WHEREIN

It is examined whether the Object, Principles, and Inferences of the modern Analysis are more distinctly conceived, or more evidently deduced, than Religious Mysteries and Points of Faith.

By the Author of The Minute Philosopher.

First cast out the beam out of thine own Eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother’s eye.

S. Matt. c. vii. v. 5.

LONDON:

Printed for J. Tonson in the Strand . 1734.

THE ANALYST: A DISCOURSE ADDRESSED TO AN INFIDEL MATHEMATICIAN [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

I . THOUGH I am a Stranger to your Person, yet I am not, Sir, a Stranger to the Reputation you have acquired, in that branch of Learning which hath been your peculiar Study; nor to the Authority that you therefore assume in things foreign to your Profession, nor to the Abuse that you, and too many more of the like Charader, are known to make of such undue Authority, to the misleading of unwary Persons in matters of the highest Concernment, and whereof your mathematical Knowledge can by no means qualify you to be a competent Judge. Equity indeed and good Sense would incline one to disregard the Judgment of Men, in Points which they have not considered or examined. But several who make the loudest Claim to those Qualities, do, nevertheless, the very thing they would seem to despise, clothing themselves in the Livery of other Mens opinions, and putting on a general deference for the Judgment of you, Gentlement, who are presumed to be of all Men the greatest Masters of Reson, to be most conversant about distinct Ideas, and never to take things upon trust, but always clearly to see your way, as Men whose constant Employment is the deducing Truth by the justest inference from the most evident Principles. With this bias on their Minds, they submit to your Decisions where you have no right to decide. And that this is one short way of making Infidels I am credibly informed.

II. Whereas then it is supposed, that you apprehend more distinctly, consider more closely, infer more justly, conclude more accurately than other men, and that you are therefore less religious because more judicious, I shall claim the privilege of a Free-Thinker; and take the Liberty to inquire into the Object, Principles, and Method of Demonstration admitted by the Mathematicians of the present Age, with the same freedom that you presume to treat the Principles and Mysteries of Religion; to the end, that all Men may see what right you have to lead, or what Encouragement others have to follow you. It hath been an older remark that Geometry is an excellent Logic. And it must be owned, that when the Definitions are clear; when the Postulata cannot be refused, nor the Axioms denied; when from the distinct Contemplation and Comparison of Figures, their Properties are derived, by a perpetual well-connected chain of Consequences, the Objects being still kept in view, and the attention ever fixed upon them; there is acquired an habit of reasoning, close and exact and methodical: which habit strengthens and sharpens the Mind, and being transferred to other Subjects, is of general use in the inquiry after Truth. But how far this is the case of our Geometrical Analysts, it may be worth while to consider.

III. The Method of Fluxions is the general Key, by help whereof the modern Mathematicians unlock the secrets of Geometry, and consequently of Nature. And as it is that which hath enabled them so remarkably to outgo the Ancients in discovering Theorems and solving Problems, the exercise and application thereof is become the main, if not sole, employment of all those who in this Age pass for profound Geometers. But whether this Method be clear or obscure, consistent or repugnant, demonstrative or precarious, as I shall inquire with the utmost impartiality, so I submit my inquiry to your own Judgment, and that of every candid Reader. Lines are supposed to be generated by the motion of Points, Plains by the motion of Lines, and Solids by the motion of Plains. And whereas Quantities generated in equal times are greater or lesser, according to the greater or lesser Velocity, wherewith they increase and are generated, a Method hath been found to determine Quantities from the Velocities of their generating Motions. And such Velocities are called Fluxions: and the Quantities generated are called flowing Quantities. These Fluxions are said to be nearly as the Increments of the flowing Quantities, generated in the least equal Particles of time; and to be accurately in the first Proportion of the nascent, or in the last of the evanescent, Increments. Sometimes, instead of Velocities, the momentaneous Increments or Decrements of undetermined flowing Quantities are considered, under the Appellation of Moments.

IV. By Moments we are not to understand finite Particles. These are said not to be Moments, but Quantities generated from Moments, which last are only the nascent Principles of finite Quantities. It is said, that the minutest Errors are not to be neglected in Mathematics: that the Fluxions are Celerities, not proportional to the finite Increments though ever so small; but only to the Moments or nascent Increments, whereof the Proportion alone, and not the Magnitude, is considered. And of the aforesaid Fluxions there be other Fluxions, which Fluxions of Fluxions are called second Fluxions. And the Fluxions of these second Fluxions are called third Fluxions: and soon, fourth, fifth, sixth, &c. ad infinitum . Now as our Sense is strained and puzzled with the perception of Objects extremely minute, even so the Imagination, which Faculty derives from Sense, is very much strained and puzzled to frame clear Ideas of the least Particles of time, or the least Increments generated therein: and much more so to comprehend the Moments, or those Increments of the flowing Quantities in statu nascenti , in their very first origin or beginning to exist, before they become finite Particles. And it seems still more difficult, to conceive the abstracted Velocities of such nascent imperfect Entities. But the Velocities of the Velocities, the second, third, fourth and fifth Velocities, &c. exceed, if I mistake not, all Humane Underftanding. The further the Mind analyseth and pursueth these fugitive Ideas, the more it is lost and bewildered; the Objects, at first fleeting and minute, soon vanishing out of sight. Certainly in any Sense a second or third Fluxion seems an obscure Mystery. The incipient Celerity of an incipient Celerity, the nascent Augment of a nascent Augment, i. e. of a thing which hath no Magnitude: Take it in which light you please, the clear Conception of it will, if I mistake not, be found impossible, whether it be so or no I appeal to the trial of every thinking Reader. And if a second Fluxion be inconceivable, what are we to think of third, fourth, fifth Fluxions, and so onward without end?

V. The foreign Mathematicians are supposed by some, even of our own, to proceed in a manner, less accurate perhaps and geometrical, yet more intelligible. Instead of flowing Quantities and their Fluxions, they consider the variable finite Quantities, as increasing or diminishing by the continual Addition or Subduction of infinitely small Quantities. Instead of the Velocities wherewith Increments are generated, they consider the Increments or Decrements themselves, which they call Differences, and which are supposed to be infinitely small. The Difference of a Line is an infinitely little Line; of a Plain an infinitely little Plain. They suppose finite Quantities to consist of Parts infinitely little, and Curves to be Polygones, whereof the Sides are infinitely little, which by the Angles they make one with another determine the Curvity of the Line. Now to conceive a Quantity infinitely small, that is, infinitely less than any sensible or imaginable Quantity, or than any the least finite Magnitude, is, I confess, above my Capacity. But to conceive a Part of such infinitely small Quantity, that shall be still infinitely less than it, and consequently though multiply’d infinitely shall never equal the minutest finite Quantity, is, I suspect, an infinite Difficulty to any Man whatsoever; and will be allowed such by those who candidly say what they think; provided they really think and reflect, and do not take things upon trust.

VI. And yet in the calculus differentialis , which Method serves to all the same Intents and Ends with that of Fluxions, our modern Analysts are not content to consider only the Differences of finite Quantities: they also consider the Differences of those Differences, and the Differences of the Differences of the first Differences. And so on ad infinitum . That is, they consider Quantities infinitely less than the least discernible Quantity; and others infinitely less than those infinitely small ones; and still others infinitely less than the preceding Infinitesimals, and so on without end pr limit. Insomuch that we are to admit an infinite succession of Infinitesimals, each infinitely less than the foregoing, and infinitely greater than the following. As there are first, second, third, fourth, fifth, &c. Fluxions, so there are Differences, first, second, third, fourth, &c. in an infinite Progression towards nothing, which you still approach and never arrive at. And (which is most strange) although you should take a Million of Millions of these Infinitesimals, each whereof is supposed infinitely greater than some other real Magnitude, and add them to the least given Quantity, it shall be never the bigger. For this is one of the modest postulata of our modern Mathematicians, and is a Corner-stone or Ground-work of their Speculations.

VII. All these Points, I say, are supposed and believed by certain rigorous Exactors of Evidence in Religion, Men who pretend to believe no further than they can see. That Men, who have been conversant only about clear Points, should with difficulty admit obscure ones might not seem altogether unaccountable. But he who can digest a second or third Fluxion, a second or third Difference, need not, methinks, be squeamish about any Point in Divinity. There is a natural Presumption that Mens Faculties are made alike. It is on this Supposition that they attempt to argue and convince one another. What, therefore, shall appear evidently impossible and repugnant to one, may be presumed the same to another. But with what appearance of Reason shall any Man presume to say, that Mysteries may not be Objects of Faith, at the same time that he himself admits such obscure Mysteries to be the Object of Science?

VIII. It must indeed be acknowledged, the modern Mathematicians do not consider these Points as Mysteries, but as clearly conceived and mastered by their comprehensive Minds. They scruple not to say, that by the help of these new Analytics they can penetrate into Infinity it self: That they can even extend their Views beyond Infinity: that their Art comprehends not only Infinite, but Infinite of Infinite (as they express it) or an Infinity of Infinites. But, notwithstanding all these Assertions and Pretensions, it may be justly questioned whether, as other Men in other Inquiries are often deceived by Words or Terms, so they likewise are not wonderfully deceived and deluded by their own peculiar Signs, Symbols, or Species. Nothing is easier than to devise Expressions or Notations for Fluxions and Infinitesimals of the first, second, third, fourth and subsequent Orders, proceeding in the same regular form without end or limit  [image "img80.png" file=Image00079.gif]  &c. or dx. ddx. dddx. ddddx &c. These Expressions indeed are clear and distinct, and the Mind finds no difficulty in conceiving them to be continued beyond any assignable Bounds. But if we remove the Veil and look underneath, if laying aside the Expressions we set our selves attentively to consider the things themselves, which are supposed to be expressed or marked thereby, we shall discover much Emptiness, Darkness, and Confusion; nay, if I mistake not, direct Impossibilities and Contradictions. Whether this be the case or no, every thinking Reader is intreated to examine and judge for himself.

IX. Having considered the Object, I proceed to consider the Principles of this new Analysis by Momentums, Fluxions, or Infinitesimals; wherein if it shall appear that your capital Points, upon which the rest are supposed to depend, include Error and false Reasoning; it will then follow that you, who are at a loss to conduct your selves, cannot with any decency set up for guides to other Men. The main Point in the method of Fluxions is to obtain the Fluxion or Momentum of the Rectangle or Product of two indeterminate Quantities. Inasmuch as from thence are derived Rules for obtaining the Fluxions of all other Products and Powers; be the Coefficients or the Indexes what they will, integers or fractions, rational or surd. Now this fundamental Point one would think should be very clearly made out, considering how much is built upon it, and that its Influence extends throughout the whole Analysis. But let the Reader judge. This is given for Demonstration. Suppose the Product or Rectangle AB increased by continual Motion: and that the momentaneous Increments of the Sides A and B are a and b . When the Sides A and B were deficient, or lesser by one half of their Moments, the Rectangle was  [image "img81.png" file=Image00080.gif]  . And as soon as the Sides A and B are increased by the other two halves of their Moments, the Rectangle becomes  [image "img82.png" file=Image00081.gif]  From the latter Rectangle subduct the former, and the remaining difference will be aB + bA . Therefore the Increment of the Rectangle generated by the intire Increments a and b is aB + bA . Q.E.D. But it is plain that the direct and true Method to obtain the Moment or Increment of the Rectangle AB , is to take the Sides as increased by their whole Increments, and so multiply them together, A + a by B + b , the Product whereof AB + aB + bA + ab is the augmented Rectangle whence if we subduct AB , the Remainder aB + bA + ab will be the true Increment of the Rectangle, exceeding that which was obtained by the former illegitimate and indirect Method by the Quantity ab . And this holds universally be the Quantities a and b what they will, big or little, Finite or Infinitesimal, Increments, Moments, or Velocities. Nor will it avail to say that ab is a Quantity exceeding small: Since we are told that in rebus mathematicis errores quàm minimi non sunt contemnendi. Such reasoning as this, for Demonstration, nothing but the obscurity of the Subject could have encouraged or induced the great Author of the Fluxionary Method to put upon his Followers, and nothing but an implicit deference to Authority could move them to admit. The Case indeed is difficult. There can be nothing done till you have got rid of the Quantity ab . In order to this the Notion of Fluxions is shifted: It is placed in various Lights: Points which should be clear as first Principles are puzzled’ and Terms which should be steadily used are ambiguous. But notwithstanding all this address and skill the point of getting rid of ab cannot be obtained by legitimate reasoning. If a Man by Methods, not geometrical or demonstrative, shall have satisfied himself of the usefulness of certain Rules; which he afterwards shall propose to his Disciples for undoubted Truths; which he undertakes to demonstrate in a subtile manner, and by the help of nice and intricate Notions; it is not hard to conceive that such his Disciples may, to save themselves the trouble of thinking, be inclined to confound the usefulness of a Rule with the certainty of a Truth, and accept the one for the other; especially if they are Men accustomed rather to compute than to think; earnest rather to go on fast and far, than solicitous to set out warily and see their way distinctly.

XI. The Points or meer Limits of nascent Lines are undoubtedly equal, as having no more magnitude one than another, a Limit as such being no Quantity. If by a Momentum you mean more than the very initial Limit, it must be either a finite Quantity or an Infinitesimal. But all finite Quantities are expresly excluded from the Notion of a Momentum. Therefore the Momentum must be an Infinitesimal. And indeed, though much Artifice hath been employed to escape or avoid the admission of Quantities infinitely small, yet it seems ineffedtual. For ought I see, you can admit no Quantity as a Medium between a finite Quantity and nothing, without admitting Infinitesimals. An Increment generated in a finite Particle of Time, is it self a finite Particle; and cannot therefore be a Momentum. You must therefore take an Infinitesimal Part of Time wherein to generate your Momentum. It is said, the Magnitude of Moments is not considered: And yet these same Moments are supposed to be divided into Parts. This is not easy to conceive, no more than it is why we should take Quantities less than A and B in order to obtain the Increment of AB , of which proceeding it must be owned the final Cause or Motive is very obvious; but it is not so obvious or easy to explain a just and legitimate Reason for it, or shew it to be Geometrical.

XII. From the foregoing Principle so demonstrated, the general Rule for finding the Fluxion of any Power of a flowing Quantity is derived. But, as there seems to have been some inward Scruple or Consciousness of defect in the foregoing Demonstration, and as this finding the Fluxion of a given Power is a Point of primary Importance, it hath therefore been judged proper to demonstrate the same in a different manner independent of the foregoing Demonstration. But whether this other Method be more legitimate and conclusive than the former, I proceed now to examine; and in order thereto shall premise the following Lemma. “If with a View to demonstrate any Proposition, a certain Point is supposed, by virtue of which certain other Points are attained; and such supposed Point be it self afterwards destroyed or rejected by a contrary Supposition; in that case, all the other Points, attained thereby and consequent thereupon, must also be destroyed and rejected, so as from thence forward to be no more supposed or applied in the Demonstration.” This is so plain as to need no Proof.

XIII. Now the other Method of obtaining a Rule to find the Fluxion of any Power is as follows. Let the Quantity x flow uniformly, and be it proposed to find the Fluxion of x n . In the same time that x by flowing becomes x + o , the Power x n becomes  [image "img83.png" file=Image00082.gif]  , i. e. by the Method of infinite Series  [image "img84.png" file=Image00083.gif]  and the Increments o and  [image "img85.png" file=Image00084.gif]  are one to another as  [image "img86.png" file=Image00085.gif]  Let now the Increments vanish, and their last Proportion will be 1 to  [image "img87.png" file=Image00086.gif]  . But it should seem that this reasoning is not fair or conclusive. For when it is said, let the Increments vanish, i. e. let the Increments be nothing, or let there be no Increments, the former Supposition that the Increments were something, or that there were Increments, is destroyed, and yet a Consequence of that Supposition, i. e. an Expression got by virtue thereof, is retained. Which, by the foregoing Lemma, is a false way of reasoning. Certainly when we suppose the Increments to vanish, we must suppose their Proportions, their Expressions, and every thing else derived from the Supposition of their Existence to vanish with them.

XIV. To make this Point plainer, I shall unfold the reasoning, and propose it in a fuller light to your View. It amounts therefore to this, or may in other Words be thus expressed. I suppose that the Quantity x flows, and by flowing is increased, and its Increment I call o , so that by flowing it becomes x + o . And as x increaseth, it follows that every Power of x is likewise increased in a due Proportion. Therefore as x becomes x + o , x n will become  [image "img88.png" file=Image00087.gif]  that is, according to the Method of infinite Series,  [image "img89.png" file=Image00088.gif]  And if from the two augmented Quantities we subduct the Root and the Power respectively, we shall have remaining the two Increments, to wit, o and  [image "img90.png" file=Image00089.gif]  which Increments, being both divided by the common Divisor o , yield the Quotients 1 and  [image "img91.png" file=Image00090.gif]  which are therefore Exponents of the Ratio of the Increments. Hitherto I have supposed that x flows, that x hath a real Increment, that o is something. And I have proceeded all along on that Supposition, without which I should not have been able to have made so much as one single Step. From that Supposition it is that I get at the Increment of x^ n , that I am able to compare it with the Increment of x , and that I find the Proportion between the two Increments. I now beg leave to make a new Supposition contrary to the first, i. e. I will suppose that there is no Increment of x , or that o is nothing; which second Supposition destroys my first, and is inconsistent with it, and therefore with every thing that supposeth it. I do nevertheless beg leave to retain  [image "img92.png" file=Image00091.gif]  which is an Expression obtained in virtue of my first Supposition, which necessarily presupposeth such Supposition, and which could not be obtained without it: All which seems a most inconsistent way of arguing, and such as would not be allowed of in Divinity.

XV. Nothing is plainer than that no just Conclusion can be directly drawn from two inconsistent Suppositions. You may indeed suppose any thing possible: But afterwards you may not suppose any thing that destroys what you first supposed. Or if you do, you must begin de novo . If therefore you suppose that the Augments vanish, i. e. that there are no Augments, you are to begin again, and see what follows from such Supposition. But nothing will follow to your purpose. You cannot by that means ever arrive at your Conclusion, or succeed in, what is called by the celebrated Author, the Investigation of the first or last Proportions of nascent and evanescent Quantities, by instituting the Analysis in finite ones. I repeat it again: You are at liberty to make any possible Supposition: And you may destroy one Supposition by another: But then you may not retain the Consequences, or any part of the Consequences of your first Supposition so destroyed. I admit that Signs may be made to denote either any thing or nothing: And consequently that in the original Notation x + o , o might have signified either an Increment or nothing. But then which of these soever you make it signify, you must argue consistently with such its Signification, and not proceed upon a double Meaning: Which to do were a manifest Sophism . Whether you argue in Symbols or in Words, the Rules of right Reason are still the same. Nor can it be supposed, you will plead a Privilege in Mathematics to be exempt from them.

XVI. If you assume at first a Quantity increased by nothing, and in the Expression x + o , stands for nothing, upon this Supposition as there is no Increment of the Root, so there will be no Increment of the Power; and consequently there will be none except the first, of all those Members of the Series constituting the Power of the Binomial; you will therefore never come at your Expression of a Fluxion legitimately by such Method. Hence you are driven into the fallacious way of proceeding to a certain Point on the Supposition of an Increment, and then at once shifting your Supposition to that of no Increment. There may seem great Skill in doing this at a certain Point or Period. Since if this second Supposition had been made before the common Division by o , all had vanished at once, and you must have got nothing by your Supposition. Whereas by this Artifice of first dividing, and then changing your Supposition, you retain 1 and  [image "img93.png" file=Image00092.gif]  notwithstanding all this address to cover it, the fallacy is still the same. For whether it be done sooner or later, when once the second Supposition or Assumption is made, in the same instant the former Assumption and all that you got by it is destroyed, and goes out together. And this is universally true, be the Subject what it will, throughout all the Branches of humane Knowledge; in any other of which, I believe. Men would hardly admit such a reasoning as this, which in Mathematics is accepted for Demonstration.

XVII. It may not be amiss to observe, that the Method for finding the Fluxion of a Rectangle of two flowing Quantities, as it is set forth in the Treatise of Quadratures, differs from the abovementioned taken from the second Book of the Principles, and is in effect the same with that used in the calculus differentialis . For the supposing a Quantity infinitely diminishied and therefore rejecting it, is in effect the rejecting an Infinitesimal; and indeed it requires a marvellous sharpness of Discernment, to be able to distinguish between evanescent Increments and infinitesimal Differences. It may perhaps be said that the Quantity being infinitely diminished becomes nothing, and so nothing is rejected. But according to the received Principles it is evident, that no Geometrical Quantity, can by any division or subdivision whatsoever be exhausted, or reduced to nothing. Considering the various Arts and Devices used by the great Author of the Fluxionary Method: in how many Lights he placeth his Fluxions: and in what different ways he attempts to demonstrate the same Point: one would be inclined to think, he was himself suspicious of the justness of his own demonstrations; and that he was not enough pleased with any one notion steadily to adhere to it. Thus much at least is plain, that he owned himself satisfied concerning certain Points, which nevertheless he could not undertake to demonstrate to others. Whether this satisfaction arose from tentative Methods or Inductions; which have often been admitted by Mathematicians, (for inftance by Dr. Wallis in his Arithmetic of Infinites ) is what I shall not pretend to determine. But, whatever the Case might have been with respect to the Author, it appears that his Followers have shewn themselves more eager in applying his Method, than accurate in examining his Principles.

XVIII. It is curious to observe, what subtilty and skill this great Genius employs to struggle with an insuperable Difficulty; and through what Labyrinths he endeavours to escape the Doctrine of Infinitesimals; which as it intrudes upon him whether he will or no, so it is admitted and embraced by others without the least repugnance. Leibnitz and his Followers in their calculus differentialis making no manner of scruple, first to suppose, and secondly to reject Quantities infinitely small: with what clearness in the Apprehension and justness in the reasoning, any thinking Man, who is not prejudiced in favour of those things, may easily discern. The Notion or Idea of an infinitesimal Quantity, as it is an Object simply apprehended by the Mind, hath been already considered. I shall now only observe as to the method of getting rid of such Quantities, that it is done without the least Ceremony. As in Fluxions the Point of first importance, and which paves the way to the rest, is to find the Fluxion of a Product of two indeterminate Quantities, so in the calculus differentialis (which Method is supposed to have been borrowed from the former with some small Alterations) the main Point is to obtain the difference of such Product. Now the Rule for this is got by rejecting the Product or Rectangle of the Differences. And in general it is supposed, that no Quantity is bigger or lesser for the Addition or Subduction of its Infinitesimal: and that consequently no error can arise from such rejection of Infinitesimals.

XIX. And yet it should seem that, whatever errors are admitted in the Premises, proportional errors ought to be apprehended in the Conclusion, be they finite or infinitesimal: and that therefore the ἀχρίβεια of Geometry requires nothing should be neglected or rejected. In answer to this you will perhaps say, that the Conclusions are accurately true, and that therefore the Principles and Methods from whence they are derived must be so too. But this inverted way of demonstrating your Principles by your Conclusions, as it would be peculiar to you Gentlemen, so it is contrary to the Rules of Logic. The truth of the Conclusion will not prove either the Form or the Matter of a Syllogism to be true: inasmuch as the Illation might have been wrong or the Premises false, and the Conclusion nevertheless true, though not in virtue of such Illation or of such Premises. I say that in every other Science Men prove their Conclusions by their Principles, and not their Principles by the Conclusions. But if in yours you should allow your selves this unnatural way of proceeding, the Consequence would be that you must take up with the Induction, and bid adieu to Demonstration. And if you submit to this, your Authority will no longer lead the way in Points of Reason and Science.

XX. I have no Controversy about your Conclusions, but only about your Logic and Method. How you demonstrate? What Objects you are conversant with, and whether you conceive them clearly? What Principles you proceed upon; how sound they may be; and how you apply them? It must be remembred that I am not concerned about the truth of your Theorems, but only about the way of coming at them; whether it be legitimate or illegitimate, clear or obscure, scientific or tentative. To prevent all possibility of your mistaking me, I beg leave to repeat and insist, that I consider the Geometrical Analyst as a Logician, i. e. so far forth as he reasons and argues; and his Mathematical Conclusions, not in themselves, but in their Premifes; not as true or false, useful or insignificant, but as derived from such Principles, and by such Inferences. And forasmuch as it may perhaps seem an unaccountable Paradox, that Mathematicians should deduce true Propositions from false Principles, be right in the Conclusion, and yet err in the Premises; I shall endeavour particularly to explain why this may come to pass, and shew how Error may bring forth Truth, though it cannot bring forth Science.

XXI. In order therefore to clear up this Point, we will suppose for instance that a Tangent is to be drawn to a Parabola, and examine the progress of this Affair, as it is performed by infinitesimal Differences.

 [image "img94.png" file=Image00093.gif] 

Let AB be a Curve, the Abscisse AP = x , the ordinate PB = y , the Difference of the Abscisse PM = dx the Difference of the Ordinate RN = dy . Now by supposing the Curve to be a Polygon, and consequently BN , the Increment or Difference of the Curve, to be a straight Line coincident with the Tangent, and the differential Triangle BRN to be similiar to the triangle TPB the Subtangent PT is found a fourth Proportional to RN : RB :PB : that is to dy : dx :y . Hence the Subtangent will be [image "img95.png" file=Image00094.gif]  . But herein there is an error arising from the forementioned false supposition, whence, the value of PT comes out greater than the Truth: for in reality it is not the Triangle RNB but RLB , which is similar to PBT , and therefore (instead of RN ) RL should have been the first term of the Proportion, i. e. RN + NL , i. e. dy + z : whence the true expression for the Subtangent should have been  [image "img96.png" file=Image00095.gif]  . There was therefore an error of defect in making dy the divisor: which error was equal to z , i. e. NL the Line comprehended between the Curve and the Tangent. Now by the nature of the Curve yy = px , supposing p to be the Parameter, whence by the rule of Differences 2ydy = pdx and [image "img97.png" file=Image00096.gif]  . But if you multiply y + dy by it self, and retain the whole Product without rejecting the Square of the Difference, it will then come out, by substituting the augmented Quantities in the Equation of the Curve, that  [image "img98.png" file=Image00097.gif]  truly. There was therefore an error of excess in making  [image "img99.png" file=Image00098.gif]  , which followed from the erroneous Rule of Differences. And the measure of this second error is  [image "img100.png" file=Image00099.gif]  . Therefore the two errors being equal and contrary destroy each other; the first error of defect being corrected by a second error of excess.

XXlI. If you had committed only one error, you would not have come at a true Solution of the Problem. But by virtue of a twofold mistake you arrive, though not at Science, yet at Truth. For Science It cannot be called, when you proceed blindfold, and arrive at the Truth not knowing how or by what means. To demonstrate that z is equal to  [image "img101.png" file=Image00100.gif]  , let BR or dx be m and RN or dy be n . By the thirty third Proposition of the first Book of the Conics of Apollonius , and from similar Triangles, as 2x to y so is m to  [image "img102.png" file=Image00101.gif]  . Likewise from the Nature of the Parabola yy + 2yn + nn = xp + mp , and 2yn + nn = mp : wherefore  [image "img103.png" file=Image00102.gif]  and because yy = px ,  [image "img104.png" file=Image00103.gif]  will be equal to x , Therefore substituting these values instead of m and x we shall have n + z =  [image "img105.png" file=Image00104.gif]  which being reduced gives  [image "img106.png" file=Image00105.gif] 

XXIII. Now I observe in the first place, that the Conclusion comes out right, not because the rejected Square of dy was infinitely small; but because this error was compensated by another contrary and equal error. I observe in the second place, that whatever is rejected, be it ever so small, if it be real and consequently makes a real error in the Premises, it will produce a proportional real error in the Conclusion. Your Theorems therefore cannot be accurately true, nor your Problems accurately solved, in virtue of Premises, which themselves are not accurate, it being a rule in Logic that Conclusio sequitur partem debiliorem . Therefore I observe in the third place, that when the Conclusion is evident and the Premises obscure, or the Conclusion accurate and the Premises inaccurate, we may safely pronounce that such Conclusion is neither evident nor accurate, in virtue of those obscure inaccurate Premises or Principles; but in virtue of some other Principles which perhaps the Demonstrator himself never knew or thought of. I observe in the last place, that in case the Differences are supposed finite Quantities ever so great, the Conclusion will nevertheless come out the same: inasmuch as the rejected Quantities are legitimately thrown out, not for their smallness, but for another reason, to wit, because of contrary errors, which destroying each other do upon the whole cause that nothing is really, though something is apparently thrown out. And this Reason holds equally, with respect to Quantities finite as well as infinitesimal, great as well as small, a Foot or a Yard long as well as the minutest Increment.

XXIV. For the fuller illustration of this Point, I shall consider it in another light, and proceeding in finite Quantities to the Conclusion, I shall only then make use

 [image "img107.png" file=Image00106.gif] 

of one Infinitesimal. Suppose the straight Line MQ cuts the Curve AT in the Points R and S . Suppose LR a Tangent at the Point R , AN the Abscisse, NR and OS Ordinates. Let AN be produced to O , and RP be drawn parallel to NO . Suppofe AN = x , NR = y , NO = v , PS = z , the subsecant MN = S , Let the Equation y = xx express the nature of the Curve: and supposing y and x increased by their finite Increments, we get y + z = xx + 2xv + vv : whence the former Equation being subducted there remains z = 2xv + vv . And by reason of similar Triangles PS : PR :: NR : NM , i.e. z : v :: y : s =  [image "img108.png" file=Image00107.gif]  wherein if for y and z we substitute their values, we get  [image "img109.png" file=Image00108.gif]  . And supposing NO to be infinitely diminished, the subsecant NM will in that case coincide with the subtangent NL , and v as an Infinitesimal may be rejected, whence it follows that  [image "img110.png" file=Image00109.gif]  which is the true value of the Subtangent. And since this was obtained by one only error, i. e. by once rejecting one only Infinitesimal, it should seem, contrary to what hath been said, that an infinitesimal Quantity or Difference may be neglected or thrown away, and the Conclusion nevertheless be accurately true, although there was no double mistake or rectifying of one error by another, as in the first Case. But if this Point be throughly considered, we shall find there is even here a double mistake, and that one compensates or rectifies the other. For in the first place, it was supposed, that when NO is infinitely diminished or becomes an Infinitesimal, then the Subsecant NM becomes equal to the Subtangent NL . But this is a plain mistake, for it is evident, that as a Secant cannot be a Tangent, so a Subsecant cannot be a Subtangent. Be the Difference ever so small, yet still there is a Difference. And if NO be infinitely small, there will even then be an infinitely small Difference between NM and NL . Therefore NM or S was too little for your supposition, (when you supposed it equal to NL ) and this error was compensated by a second error in throwing out v , which last error made s bigger than its true value, and in lieu thereof gave the value of the Subtangent. This is the true State of the Case, however it may be disguised. And to this in reality it amounts, and is at bottom the same thing, if we should pretend to find the Subtangent by having first found, from the Equation of the Curve and similar Triangles, a general Expression for all Subsecants, and then reducing the Subtangent under this general Rule, by considering it as the Subsecant when v vanishes or becomes nothing.

XXV. Upon the whole I observe, First , that v can never be nothing so long as there is a secant. Secondly , That the same Line cannot be both tangent and secant. Thirdly , that when v or NO vanisheth, PS and SR do also vanish, and with them the proportionality of the similar Triangles. Consequently the whole Expression, which was obtained by means thereof and grounded thereupon, vanisheth when v vanisheth. Fourthly , that the Method for finding Secants or the Expression of Secants, be it ever so general, cannot in common sense extend any further than to all Secants whatsoever: and, as it necessarily supposeth similar Triangles, it cannot be supposed to take place where there are not similar Triangles. Fifthly , that the Subsecant will always be less than the Subtangent, and can never coincide with it; which Coincidence to suppose would be absurd; for it would be supposing, the same Line at the same time to cut and not to cut another given Line, which is a manifest Contradiction, such as subverts the Hypothesis and gives a Demonstration of its Falshood. Sixthly , If this be not admitted, I demand a Reason why any other apagogical Demonstration, or Demonstration ad absurdum should be admitted in Geometry rather than this: Or that some real Difference be assigned between this and others as such. Seventhly , I observe that it is sophistical to suppose NO or RP , PS , and SR to be finite real Lines in order to form the Triangle RPS , in order to obtain Proportions by similar Triangles; and afterwards to suppose there are no such Lines, nor consequently similar Triangles, and nevertheless to retain the Consequence of the first Supposition, after such Supposition hath been destroyed by a contrary one. Eighthly , That although, in the present case, by inconsistent Suppositions Truth may be obtained, yet that such Truth is not demonstrated: That such Method is not conformable to the Rules of Logic and right Reason: That, however useful it may be, it must be considered only as a Presumption, as a Knack, an Art or rather an Artifice, but not a scientific Demonstration.

XXVI. The Doctrine premised may be farther illustrated by the following simple and easy Case, wherein I shall proceed by evanescent Increments. Suppofe AB = x ,

 [image "img111.png" file=Image00110.gif] 

BC = y , BD = o , and that xx is equal to the Area ABC : It is proposed to find the Ordinate y or BC . When x by flowing becomes x + o , then xx becomes xx + 2xo + oo : And the Area ABC becomes ADH , and the Increment of xx will be equal to BDHC the Increment of the Area, i. e. to BCFD + CFH . And if we suppose the curvilinear Space CFH to be qoo , then 2xo + oo = yo + qoo which divided by o gives 2x + o = y + qo . And, supposing o to vanish, 2x = y , in which Case ACH will be a ‘straight Line, and the Areas ABC , CFH , Triangles. Now with regard to this Reasoning, it hath been already remarked, that it is not legitimate or logical to suppose o to vanish, i. e. to be nothing, i. e. that there is no Increment, unless we reject at the same time with the Increment it self every Consequence of such Increment, i. e. whatsoever could not be obtained but by supposing such Increment. It must nevertheless be acknowledged, that the Problem is rightly solved, and the Conclusion true, to which we are led by this Method. It will therefore be asked, how comes it to pass that the throwing out o is attended with no Error in the Conclusion? I answer, the true reason hereof is plainly this: Because q being Unite, qo is equal to o : And therefore 2x + o - qo = y = 2x , the equal Quantities qo and o being destroyed by contrary Signs.

XXVII. As on the one hand it were absurd to get rid of o by saying, let me contradict my self: Let me subvert my own Hypothesis: Let me take it for granted that there is no Increment, at the same time that I retain a Quantity, which I could never have got at but by assuming an Increment: So on the other hand it would be equally wrong to imagine, that in a geometrical Demonstration we may be allowed to admit any Error, though ever so small, or that it is possible, in the nature of Things, an accurate Conclusion should be derived from inaccurate Principles. Therefore o cannot be thrown out as an Infinitesimal, or upon the Principle that Infinitesimals may be safely neglected. But only because it is destroyed by an equal Quantity with a negative Sign, whence o - qo is equal to nothing. And as it is illegitimate to reduce an Equation, by subducting from one Side a Quantity when it is not to be destroyed, or when an equal Quantity is not subducted from the other Side of the Equation: So it must be allowed a very logical and just Method of arguing, to conclude that if from Equals either nothing or equal Quantities are subducted, they shall still remain equal. And this is a true Reason why no Error is at last produced by the rejecting of o . Which therefore must not be ascribed to the Doctrine of Differences, or Infinitesimals, or evanescent Quantities, or Momentums, or Fluxions.

XXVIII. Suppose the Case to be general, and that x n is equal to the Area ABC whence by the Method of Fluxions the Ordinate is found  [image "img112.png" file=Image00111.gif]  which we admit for true, and shall inquire how it is arrived at. Now if we are content to come at the Conclusion in a summary way, by supposing that the Ratio of the Fluxions of x and x n are found  to be 1 and  [image "img113.png" file=Image00112.gif]  , and that the Ordinate of the Area is considered as its Fluxion; we shall not so clearly see our way, or perceive how the truth comes out, that Method as we have shewed before being obscure and illogical. But if we fairly delineate the Area and its Increment, and divide the latter into two Parts BCFD and CFH and proceed regularly by Equations between the algebraical and geometrical Quantities, the reason of the thing will plainly appear. For as as x n is equal to the Area ABC so is the Increment of x n equal to the Increment of the Area, i. e. to BDHC ; that is, to say, [image "img114.png" file=Image00113.gif]  . And only the first Members, on each Side of the Equation being retained,  [image "img115.png" file=Image00114.gif]    And dividing both Sides by o or BD , we shall get  [image "img116.png" file=Image00115.gif]  . Admitting, therefore, that the curvilinear Space CFH is equal to the rejectaneous Quantity  [image "img117.png" file=Image00116.gif]  and that when this is rejected on one Side, that is rejected on the other, the Reasoning becomes just and the Conclusion true. And it is all one whatever Magnitude you allow to BD , whether that of an infinitesimal Difference or a finite Increment ever so great. It is therefore plain, that the supposing the rejectaneous algebraical Quantity to be an infinitely small or evanescent Quantity, and therefore to be neglected, must have produced an Error, had it not been for the curvilinear Spaces being equal thereto, and at the same time subducted from the other Part or Side of the Equation agreeably to the Axiom, If from Equals you subduct Equals, the Remainders will be equal . For those Quantities which by the Analysts are said to be neglected, or made to vanish, are in reality subducted. If therefore the Conclusion be true, it is absolutely necessary that the finite Space CFH be equal to the Remainder of the Increment expressed by  [image "img118.png" file=Image00117.gif]  &c. equal I say to the finite Remainder of a finite Increment.

XXIX. Therefore, be the Power what you please, there will arise on one Side an algebraical Expression, on the other a geometrical Quantity, each of which naturally divides it self into three Members: The algebraical or fluxionary Expression, into one which includes neither the Expression of the Increment of the Absciss nor of any Power thereof, another which includes the Expression of the Increment it self, and a third including the Expression of the Powers of the Increment. The geometrical Quantity also or whole increased Area consists of three Parts or Members, the first of which is the given Area, the second a Rectangle under the Ordinate and the Increment of the Absciss, and the third a curvilinear Space, And, comparing the homologous or correspondent Members on both Sides, we find that as the first Member of the Expression is the Expression of the given Area, so the second Member of the Expression will express the Rectangle or second Member of the geometrical Quantity; and the third, containing the Powers of the Increment, will express the curvilinear Space, or third Member of the geometrical Quantity. This hint may, perhaps, be further extended and applied to good purpose, by those who have leisure and curiosity for such Matters. The use I make of it is to shew, that the Analysis cannot obtain in Augments or Differences, but it must also obtain in finite Quantities, be they ever so great, as was before observed.

XXX. It seems therefore upon the whole that we may safely pronounce, the Conclusion cannot be right, if in order thereto any Quantity be made to vanish, or be neglected, except that either one Error is redressed by another; or that secondly, on the same Side of an Equation equal Quantities are destroyed by contrary Signs, so that the Quantity we mean to reject is first annihilated; or lastly, that from the opposite Sides equal Quantities are subducted. And therefore to get rid of Quantities by the received Principles of Fluxions or of Differences is neither good Geometry nor good Logic. When the Augments vanish, the Velocities also vanish. The Velocities or Fluxions are said to primò and ultimò , as the Augments nascent and evanescent. Take therefore the Ratio of the evanescent Quantities, it is the same with that of the Fluxions. It will therefore answer all Intents as well. Why then are Fluxions introduced? Is it not to shun or rather to palliate the Use of Quantities infinitely small? But we have no Notion whereby to conceive and measure various Degrees of Velocity, beside Space and Time, or when the Times are given, beside Space alone. We have even no Notion of Velocity prescinded from Time and Space. When therefore a Point is supposed to move in given Times, we have no Notion of greater or lesser Velocities or of Proportions between Velocities, but only of longer or shorter Lines, and of Proportions between such Lines generated in equal Parts of Time.

XXXI. A Point may be the limit of a Line: A Line may be the limit of a Surface: A Moment may terminate Time. But how can we conceive a Velocity by the help of such Limits? It necessarily implies both Time and Space, and cannot be conceived without them. And if the Velocities of nascent and evanescent Quantities, i. e. abstracted from Time and Space, may not be comprehended, how can we comprehend and demonstrate their Proportions? Or consider their rationes primæ and ultimæ . For to consider the Proportion or Ratio of Things implies that such Things have Magnitude: That such their Magnitudes may be measured, and their Relations to each other known. But, as there is no measure of Velocity except Time and Space, the Proportion of Velocities being only compounded of the direct Proportion of the Spaces, and the reciprocal Proportion of the Times; doth it not follow that to talk of investigating, obtaining, and considering the Proportions of Velocities, exclusively of Time and Space, is to talk unintelligibly?

XXXII. But you will say that, in the use and application of Fluxions, Men do not overstrain their Faculties to a precise Conception of the abovementioned Velocities, Increments, Infinitesimals, or any other such like Ideas of a Nature so nice, subtile, and evanescent. And therefore you will perhaps maintain, that Problems may be solved without those inconceivable Suppositions: and that, consequently, the Doctrine of Fluxions, as to the practical Part, stands clear of all such Difficulties. I answer, that if in the use or application of this Method, those difficult and obscure Points are not attended to, they are nevertheless supposed. They are the Foundations on which the Moderns build, the Principles on which they proceed, in solving Problems and discovering Theorems. It is with the Method of Fluxions as with all other Methods, which presuppose their respective Principles and are grounded thereon. Although the Rules may be practised by Men who neither attend to, nor perhaps know the Principles. In like manner, therefore, as a Sailor may practically apply certain Rules derived from Astronomy and Geometry, the Principles whereof he doth not understand: And as any ordinary Man may solve divers numerical Questions, by the vulgar Rules and Operations of Arithmetic, which he performs and applies without knowing the Reasons of them: Even so it cannot be denied that you may apply the Rules of the fluxionary Method: You may compare and reduce particular Cases to general Forms: You may operate and compute and solve Problems thereby, not only without an actual Attention to, or an actual Knowledge of, the Grounds of that Method, and the Principles whereon it depends, and whence it is deduced, but even without having ever considered or comprehended them.

XXXIII. But then it must be remembred, that in such Case although you may pass for an Artist, Computist, or Analyst, yet you may not be justly esteemed a Man of Science and Demonstration. Nor should any Man, in virtue of being conversant in such obscure Analytics, imagine his rational Faculties to be more improved than those of other Men, which have been exercised in a different manner, and on different Subjects; much less erect himself into a Judge and an Oracle, concerning Matters that have no sort of connexion with, or dependence on those Species, Symbols or Signs, in the Management whereof he is so converfant and expert. As you, who are a skilful Computist or Analyst, may not therefore be deemed skilful in Anatomy: or vice versa , as a Man who can dissect with Art, may, nevertheless, be ignorant in your Art of computing Even so you may both, notwithstanding your peculiar Skill in your respective Arts, be alike unqualified to decide upon Logic, or Metaphysics, or Ethics, or Religion. And this would be true, even admitting that you understood your own Principles and could demonstrate them.

XXXIV. If it is said, that Fluxions may be expounded or expressed by finite Lines proportional to them: Which finite Lines, as they may be distinctly conceived and known and reasoned upon, so they may be substituted for the Fluxions, and their mutual Relations or Proportions be considered as the Proportions of Fluxions: By which means the Doctrine becomes clear and useful. I answer that if, in order to arrive at these finite Lines proportional to the Fluxions, there be certain Steps made use of which are obscure and inconceivable, be those finite Lines themselves ever so clearly conceived, it must nevertheless be acknowledged, that your proceeding is not clear nor your method scientific. For instance, it is supposed that AB being the Absciss, BC the Ordinate,

 [image "img119.png" file=Image00118.gif] 

and VCH a Tangent of the Curve AC , Bb or CE the Increment of the Absciss, Ec the Increment of the Ordinate, which produced meets VH in the Point T , and Cc the Increment of the Curve. The right Line Cc being produced to K , there are formed three small Triangles, the Rectilinear CEc , the Mixtilinear CEc , and the Rectilinear Triangle CET . It is evident these three Triangles are different from each other, the Rectilinear CEc being less than the Mixtilinear CEc , whose Sides are the three Increments abovementioned, and this still less than the Triangle CET . It is supposed that the Ordinate bc moves into the place BC , so that the Point c is coincident with the Point C ; and the right Line CK , and consequently the Curve Cc , is coincident with the Tangent CH . In which case the mixtilinear evanescent Triangle CEc will, in its last form, be similar to the Triangle CET : And its evanescent Sides CE , Ec , and Cc will be porportional to CE , ET , and CT the Sides of the Triangle CET . And therefore it is concluded, that the Fluxions of the Lines AB , BC , and AC , being in the last Ratio of their evanescent Increments, are proportional to the Sides of the Triangle CET , or, which is all one, of the Triangle VBC similar thereunto.  It is particularly remarked and insisted on by the great Author, that the Points C and c must not be distant one from another, by any the least Interval whatsoever: But that, in order to find the ultimate Proportions of the Lines CE , Ec , and Cc (i. e. the Proportions of the Fluxions or Velocities) expressed by the finite Sides of the Triangle VBC , the Points C and c must be accurately coincident, i. e. one and the same. A Point therefore is considered as a Triangle, or a Triangle is supposed to be formed in a Point. Which to conceive seems quite impossible. Yet some there are, who, though they shrink at all other Mysteries, make no difficulty of their own, who strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel.

XXXV. I know not whether it be worth while to observe, that possibly some Men may hope to operate by Symbols and Suppositions, in such sort as to avoid the use of Fluxions, Momentums, and Infinitesimals after the following manner. Suppose x to be one Absciss of a Curve, and z another Absciss of the same Curve. Suppose also that the respective Areas are xxx and zzz : and that z — x is the Increment of the Absciss, and zzz — xxx the Increment of the Area, without considering how great, or how small those Increments may be. Divide now zzz — xxx by z - x and the Quotient will be zz + zx + xx : and, supposing that z and x are equal, this same Quotient will be 3xx which in that case is the Ordinate, which therefore may be thus obtained independently of Fluxions and Infinitesimals. But herein is a direct Fallacy: for in the first place, it is supposed that the Abscisses z and x are unequal, without which supposition no one step could have been made; and in the second place, it is supposed they are equal; which is a manifest Inconsistency, and amounts to the same thing that hath been before confidered. And there is indeed reason to apprehend, that all Attempts for setting the abstruse and fine Geometry on a right Foundation, and avoiding the Doctrine of Velocities, Momentums, &c. will be found impracticable, till such time as the Object and End of Geometry are better understood, than hitherto they seem to have been. The great Author of the Method of Fluxions felt this Difficulty, and therefore he gave into those nice Abstractions and Geometrical Metaphysics, without which he saw nothing could be done on the received Principles; and what in the way of Demonstration he hath done with them the Reader will judge. It must, indeed, be acknowledged, that he used Fluxions, like the Scaffold of a building, as things to be laid aside or got rid of, as soon as finite Lines were found proportional to them. But then these finite Exponents are found by the help of Fluxions. Whatever therefore is got by such Exponents and Proportions is to be ascribed to Fluxions: which must therefore be previously understood. And what are these Fluxions? The Velocities of evanescent Increments And what are these same evanescent Increments? They are neither finite Quantities, nor Quantities infinitely small, nor yet nothing. May we not call them the Ghosts of departed Quantities?

XXXVI. Men too often impose on themselves and others, as if they conceived and understood things expressed by Signs, when in truth they have no Idea, save only of the very Signs themselves. And there are some grounds to apprehend that this may be the present Case. The Velocities of evanescent or nascent Quantities are supposed to be expressed, both by finite Lines of a determinate Magnitude, and by Algebraical Notes or Signs: but I suspect that many who, perhaps never having examined the matter, take it for granted, would upon a narrow scrutiny find it impossible, to frame any Idea or Notion whatsoever of those Velocities, exclusive of such finite Quantities and Signs.

 [image "img120.png" file=Image00119.gif] 

Suppose the Line KP described by the Motion of a Point continually accelerated, and that in equal Particles of time the unequal Parts KL , LM , MN , NO &c. are generated. Suppose also that a , b , c , d , e , &c. denote the Velocities of the generating Point, at the several Periods of the Parts or Increments so generated. It is easy to observe that these Increments are each proportional to the sum of the Velocities with which it is described: That, consequently, the several Sums of the Velocities, generated in equal Parts of Time, may be set forth by the respective Lines KL , LM , MN , &c. generated in the same times: It is likewise an easy matter to say, that the last Velocity generated in the first Particle of Time, may be expressed by the Symbol a , the last in the second by b , the last generated in the third by c , and so on: that a is the Velocity of LM in statu nascenti , and b , c , d , e , &c. are the Velocities of the Increments MN , NO , OP , &c. in their respective nascent estates. You may proceed, and consider these Velocities themselves as flowing or increasing Quantities, taking the Velocities of the Velocities, and the Velocities of the Velocities of the Velocities, i. e. the first, second, third, &c. Velocities ad infinitum : which succeeding Series of Velocities may be thus expressed. a . b — a . c — 2b + a . d — 3c + 3b - a &c. which you may call by the names of first, second, third, fourth Fluxions. And for an apter Expression you may denote the variable flowing Line KL , KM , KN , &c. by the Letter x ; and the first Fluxions by  [image "img121.png" file=Image00120.gif]  , the second by  [image "img122.png" file=Image00121.gif]  , the third by  [image "img123.png" file=Image00122.gif]  , and so on ad infinitum .

XXXVII. Nothing is easier than to assign Names, Signs, or Expressions to these Fluxions, and it is not difficult to compute and operate by means of such Signs. But it will be found much more difficult, to omit the Signs and yet retain in our Minds the things, which we suppose to be signified by them. To consider the Exponents, whether Geometrical, or Algebraical, or Fluxionary, is no difficult Matter. But to form a precise Idea of a third Velocity for instance, in it self and by it self, Hoc opus, hic labor . Nor indeed is it an easy point, to form a clear and distinct Idea of any Velocity at all, exclusive of and prescinding from all length of time and space; as also from all Notes, Signs or Symbols whatsoever. This, if I may be allowed to judge of others by my self, is impossible. To me it seems evident, that Measures and Signs are absolutely necessary, in order to conceive or reason about Velocities; and that, consequently, when we think to conceive the Velocities, simply and in themselves, we are deluded by vain Abstractions.

XXXVIII. It may perhaps be thought by some an easier Method of conceiving Fluxions, to suppose them the Velocities wherewith the infinitesimal Differences are generated. So that the first Fluxions shall be the Velocities of the first Differences, the second the Velocities of the second Differences, the third Fluxions the Velocities of the third Differences, and so on ad infinitum . But not to mention the insurmountable difficulty of admitting or conceiving Infinitesimals, and Infinitesimals of Infinitesimals, &c. it is evident that this notion of Fluxions would not consist with the great Author’s view; who held that the minutest Quantity ought not to be neglected, that therefore the Doctrine of Infinitesimal Differences was not to be admitted in Geometry, and who plainly appears to have introduced the use of Velocities or Fluxions, on purpose to exclude or do without them.

XXXIX. To others it may possibly seem, that we should form a juster Idea of Fluxions, by assuming the finite unequal isochronal Increments KL , LM , MN , &c. and considering them in statu nascenti , also their Increments in statu nascenti , and the nascent Increments of those Increments, and so on, supposing the first nascent Increments to be proportional to the first Fluxions or Velocities, the nascent Increments of those Increments to be proportional to the second Fluxions, the third nascent Increments to be proportional to the third Fluxions, and so onwards. And, as the first Fluxions are the Velocities of the first nascent Increments, so the second Fluxions may be conceived to be the Velocities of the second nascent Increments, rather than the Velocities of Velocities. By which means the Analogy of Fluxions may seem better preserved, and the notion rendered more intelligible.

XL. And indeed it should seem, that in the way of obtaining the second or third Fluxion of an Equation, the given Fluxions were considered rather as Increments than Velocities. But the considering them sometimes in one Sense, sometimes in another, one while in themselves, another in their Exponents, seems to have occasioned no small share of that Confusion and Obscurity, which is found in the Doctrine of Fluxions. It may seem therefore, that the Notion might be still mended, and that instead of Fluxions of Fluxions, or Fluxions of Fluxions of Fluxions, and instead of second, third, or fourth, &c. Fluxions of a given Quantity, it might be more consistent and less liable to exception to say, the Fluxion of the first nascent Increment, i. e. the second Fluxion; the Fluxion of the second nascent Increment, i. e. the third Fluxion; the Fluxion of the third nascent Increment, i. e. the fourth Fluxion, which Fluxions are conceived respectively proportional, each to the nascent Principle of the Increment succeeding that whereof it is the Fluxion.

XLI. For the more distinct Conception of all which it may be considered, that if the finite Increment LM be divided into the Isochronal Parts Lm , mn , no , oM ; and the Increment MN into the Parts Mp , pq , qr , rN Isochronal to the former; as the whole Increments LM , MN are proportional to the Sums of their describing Velocities, even so the homologous Particles Lm , Mp are also proportional to the respective accelerated Velocities with which they are described. And as the Velocity with which Mp is generated, exceeds that with which Lm was generated, even so the Particle Mp exceeds the Particle Lm . And in general, as the Isochronal Velocities describing the Particles of MN exceed the Isochronal Velocities describing the Particles of LM , even so the Particles of the former exceed the correspondent Particles of the latter. And this will hold, be the said Particles ever so small. MN therefore will exceed LM if they are both taken in their nascent States: and that excess will be proportional to the excess of the Velocity b above the Velocity a . Hence we may see that this last account of Fluxions comes, in the upshot, to the same thing with the first.

XLII. But notwithstanding what hath been said it must still be acknowledged, that the finite Particles Lm or Mp , though taken ever so small, are not proportional to the Velocities a and b ; but each to a Series of Velocities changing every Moment, or which is the same thing, to an accelerated Velocity, by which it is generated, during a certain minute Particle of time: That the nascent beginnings or evanescent endings of finite Quantities which are produced in Moments or infinitely small Parts of Time, are alone proportional to given Velocities: That, therefore, in order to conceive the first Fluxions, we must conceive Time divided into Moments, Increments generated in those Moments, and Velocities proportional to those Increments: That in order to conceive second and third Fluxions, we must suppose that the nascent Principles or momentaneous Increments have themselves also other momentaneous Increments, which are proportional to their respective generating Velocities: That the Velocities of these second momentaneous Increments are second Fluxions: those of their nascent momentaneous Increments third Fluxions. And so on ad infinitum .

XLIII. By subducting the Increment generated in the first Moment from that generated in the second, we get the Increment of an Increment. And by subducting the Velocity generating in the first Moment from that generating in the second, we get the Fluxion of a Fluxion. In like manner, by subducting the Difference of the Velocities generating in the two first Moments, from the excess of the Velocity in the third above that in the second Moment, we obtain the third Fluxion. And after the same Analogy we may proceed to fourth, fifth, fixth Fluxions, &c. And if we call the Velocities of the first, second, third, fourth Moments a , b , c , d , the Series of Fluxions will be as above, a . b - a . c - 2b + a . d - 3c + 3b - a . ad infinitum , i. e.  [image "img124.png" file=Image00123.gif]  ad infinitum .

XLIV. Thus Fluxions may be considered in sundry Lights and Shapes, which seem all equally difficult to conceive. And indeed, as it is impossible to conceive Velocity without time or space, without either finite length or finite Duration, it must seem above the powers of Men to comprehend even the first Fluxions. And if the first are incomprehensible, what shall we say of the second and third Fluxions, &c ? He who can conceive the beginning of a beginning, or the end of an end, somewhat before the first or after the last, may be perhaps sharpsighted enough to conceive these things. But most Men will, I believe, find it impossible to understand them in any sense whatever.

XLV. One would think that Men could not speak too exactly on so nice a Subject. And yet, as was before hinted, we may often observe that the Exponents of Fluxions or Notes representing Fluxions are confounded with the Fluxions themselves. Is not this the Case, when just after the Fluxions of flowing Quantities were said to be the Celerities of their increasing, and the second Fluxions to be the mutations of the first Fluxions or Celerities, we are told that  [image "img125.png" file=Image00124.gif]    represents a Series of Quantities, whereof each subsequent Quantity is the Fluxion of the preceding; and each foregoing is a fluent Quantity having the following one for its Fluxion?

XLVI. Divers Series of Quantities and Expressions, Geometrical and Algebraical, may be easily conceived, in Lines, in Surfaces, in Species, to be continued without end or limit. But it will not be found so easy to conceive a Series, either of mere Velocities or of mere nascent Increments, distinct therefrom and corresponding thereunto. Some perhaps may be led to think the Author intended a Series of Ordinates, wherein each Ordinate was the Fluxion of the preceding and Fluent of the following, i. e. that the Fluxion of one Ordinate was it self the Ordinate of another Curve; and the Fluxion of this last Ordinate was the Ordinate of yet another Curve; and so on ad infinitum . But who can conceive how the Fluxion (whether Velocity or nascent Increment) of an Ordinate should be it self an Ordinate? Or more than that each preceding Quantity or Fluent is related to its Subsequent or Fluxion, as the Area of a curvilinear Figure to its Ordinate; agreeably to what the Author remarks, that each preceding Quantity in such Series is as the Area of a curvilinear Figure, whereof the Absciss is z , and the Ordinate is the following Quantity.

XLVII. Upon the whole it appears that the Celerities are dismissed, and instead thereof Areas and Ordinates are introduced. But however expedient such Analogies or such Expressions may be found for facilitating the modern Quadratures, yet we shall not find any light given us thereby into the original real nature of Fluxions; or that we are enabled to frame from thence just Ideas of Fluxions considered in themselves. In all this the general ultimate drift of the Author is very clear, but his Principles are obscure. But perhaps those Theories of the great Author are not minutely considered or canvassed by his Disciples; who seem eager, as was before hinted, rather to operate than to know, rather to apply his Rules and his Forms, than to understand his Principles and enter into his Notions. It is nevertheless certain, that in order to follow him in his Quadratures, they must find Fluents from Fluxions; and in order to this, they must know to find Fluxions from Fluents; and in order to find Fluxions, they must first know what Fluxions are. Otherwise they proceed without Clearness and without Science. Thus the direct Method precedes the inverse, and the knowledge of the Principles is supposed in both. But as for operating according to Rules, and by the help of general Forms, whereof the original Principles and Reasons are not understood, this is to be esteemed merely technical. Be the Principles therefore ever so abstruse and metaphysical, they must be studied by whoever would comprehend the Doctrine of Fluxions. Nor can any Geometrician have a right to apply the Rules of the great Author, without first considering his metaphysical Notions whence they were derived. These how necessary soever in order to Science, which can never be attained without a precise, clear, and accurate Conception of the Principles, are nevertheless by several carelesly passed over; while the Expressions alone are dwelt on and conisdered and treated with great Skill and Management, thence to obtain other Expressions by Methods, suspicious and indirect (to say the least) if considered in themselves, however recommended by Induction and Authority; two Motives which are acknowledged sufficient to beget a rational Faith and moral Persuasion, but nothing higher.

XLVIII. You may possibly hope to evade the Force of all that hath been said, and to screen false Principles and inconsistent Reasonings, by a general Pretence that these Objections and Remarks are Metaphysical. But this is a vain Pretence. For the plain Sense and Truth of what is advanced in the foregoing Remarks, I appeal to the Understanding of every unprejudiced intelligent Reader. To the same I appeal, whether the Points remarked upon are not most incomprehensible Metaphysics. And Metaphysics not of mine, but your own. I would not be understood to infer, that your Notions are false or vain because they are Metaphysical. Nothing is either true or false for that Reason. Whether a Point be called Metaphysical or no avails little. The Question is whether it be clear or obscure, right or wrong, well or ill-deduced?

XLIX. Although momentaneous Increments, nascent and evanescent Quantities, Fluxions and Infinitesimals of all Degrees, are in truth such shadowy Entities, so difficult to imagine or conceive distinctly, that (to say the least) they cannot be admitted as Principles or Objects of clear and accurate Science: and although this obscurity and incomprehensibility of your Metaphysics had been alone sufficient, to allay your Pretensions to Evidence; yet it hath, if I mistake not, been further shewn, that your Inferences are no more just than your Conceptions are clear, and that your Logics are as exceptionable as your Metaphysics. It should seem therefore upon the whole, that your Conclusions are not attained by just Reasoning from clear Principles; consequently that the Employment of modern Analysts, however useful in mathematical Calculations, and Constructions, doth not habituate and qualify the Mind to apprehend clearly and infer justly; and consequently, that you have no right in Virtue of such Habits, to dictate out of your proper Sphere, beyond which your Judgment is to pass for no more than that of other Men.

L. Of a long time I have suspected, that these modern Analytics were not scientifical, and gave some Hints thereof to the Public about twenty five Years ago. Since which time, I have been diverted by other Occupations, and imagined I might employ my self better than in deducing and laying together my Thoughts on so nice a Subject. And though of late I have been called upon to make good my Suggestions; yet as the Person, who made this Call, doth not appear to think maturely enough to understand, either those Metaphysics which he would refute, or Mathematics which he would patronize, I should have spared my self the trouble of writing for his Conviction. Nor should I now have troubled you or my self with this Address, after so long an Intermission of these Studies; were it not to prevent, so far as I am able, your imposing on your self and others in Matters of much higher Moment and Concern. And to the end that you may more clearly comprehend the Force and Design of the foregoing Remarks, and pursue them still further in your own Meditations, I shall subjoin the following Queries.

Query I. Whether the Object of Geometry be not the Proportions of assignable Extensions? And whether, there be any need of considering Quantities either infinitely great or infinitely small?

Qu. 2. Whether the end of Geometry be not to measure assignable finite Extension? And whether this practical View did not first put Men on the study of Geometry?

Qu. 3. Whether the mistaking the Object and End of Geometry hath not created needless Difficulties, and wrong Pursuits in that Science?

Qu. 4. Whether Men may properly be said to proceed in a scientific Method, without clearly conceiving the Object they are conversant about, the End proposed, and the Method by which it is pursued?

Qu. 5. Whether it doth not suffice, that every assignable number of Parts may be contained in some assignable Magnitude? And whether it be not unnecessary, as well as absurd, to suppose that finite Extension is infinitely divisible?

Qu. 6. Whether the Diagrams in a Geometrical Demonstration are not to be considered, as Signs of all possible finite Figures, of all sensible and imaginable Extensions or Magnitudes of the same kind?

Qu. 7. Whether it be possible to free Geometry from insuperable Difficulties and Absurdities, so long as either the abstract general Idea of Extension, or absolute external Extension be supposed its true Object?

Qu. 8. Whether the Notions of absolute Time, absolute Place, and absolute Motion be not most abstractedly Metaphysical? Whether it be possible for us to measure, compute, or know them?

Qu. 9. Whether Mathematicians do not engage themselves in Disputes and Paradoxes, concerning what they neither do nor can conceive? And whether the Doctrine of Forces be not a sufficient Proof of this?

Qu. 10. Whether in Geometry it may not suffice to consider assignable finite Magnitude, without concerning our selves with Infinity? And whether it would not be righter to measure large Polygons having finite Sides, instead of Curves, than to suppose Curves are Polygons of infinitesimal Sides, a Supposition neither true nor conceivable?

Qu. 11. Whether many Points, which are not readily assented to, are not nevertheless true? And whether those in the two following Queries may not be of that Number?

Qu. 12. Whether it be possible, that we should have had an Idea or Notion of Extension prior to Motion? Or whether if a Man had never perceived Motion, he would ever have known or conceived one thing to be distant from another?

Qu. 13. Whether Geometrical Quantity hath coexistent Parts? And whether all Quantity be not in a flux as well as Time and Motion?

Qu. 14. Whether Extension can be supposed an Attribute of a Being immutable and eternal?

Qu. 15. Whether to decline examining the Principles, and unravelling the Methods used in Mathematics, would not shew a bigotry in Mathematicians?

Qu. 16. Whether certain Maxims do not pass current among Analysts, which are shocking to good Sense? And whether the common Assumption that a finite Quantity divided by nothing is infinite be not of this Number?

Qu. 17. Whether the considering Geometrical Diagrams absolutely or in themselves, rather than as Representatives of all assignable Magnitudes or Figures of the same kind, be not a principal Cause of the supposing finite Extension infinitely divisible; and of all the Difficulties and Absurdities consequent thereupon?

Qu. 18. Whether from Geometrical Propositions being general, and the Lines in Diagrams being therefore general Substitutes or Representatives, it doth not follow that we may not limit or consider the number of Parts, into which such partiticular Lines are divisible?

Qu. 19. When it is said or implied, that such a certain Line delineated on Paper contains more than any assignable number of Parts, whether any more in truth ought to be understood, than that it is a Sign indifferently representing all finite Lines, be they ever so great. In which relative Capacity it contains, i. e. stands for more than any assignable number of Parts? And whether it be not altogether absurd to suppose a finite Line, considered in it self or in its own positive Nature, should contain an infinite number of Parts?

Qu. 20. Whether all Arguments for the infinite Divisibility of finite Extension do not suppose and imply, either general abstract Ideas or absolute external Extension to be the Object of Geometry? And, therefore, whether, along with those Suppositions, such Arguments also do not cease and vanish?

Qu. 21. Whether the supposed infinite Divisibility of finite Extension hath not been a Snare to Mathematicians, and a Thorn in their Sides? And whether a Quantity infinitely diminished and a Quantity infinitely small are not the same thing?

Qu. 22. Whether it be necessary to consider Velocities of nascent or evanescent Quantities, or Moments, or Infinitesimals? And whether the introducing of Things so inconceivable be not a reproach to Mathematics?

Qu. 23. Whether Inconsistencies can be Truths? Whether Points repugnant and absurd are to be admitted upon any Subject, or in any Science? And whether the use of Infinites ought to be allowed, as a sufficient Pretext and Apology, for the admitting of such Points in Geometry?

Qu. 24. Whether a Quantity be not properly said to be known, when we know its Proportion to given Quantities? And whether this Proportion can be known, but by Expressions or Exponents, either Geometrical, Algebraical, or Arithmetical? And whether Expressions in Lines or Species can be useful but so far forth as they are reducible to Numbers?

25. Whether the finding out proper Expressions or Notations of Quantity be not the most general Character and Tendency of the Mathematics? And Arithmetical Operation that which limits and defines their Use?

Qu. 26. Whether Mathematicians have sufficiently considered the Analogy and Use of Signs? And how far the specific limited Nature of things corresponds thereto?

Qu. 27. Whether because, in stating a general Case of pure Algebra, we are at full liberty to make a Character denote, either a positive or a negative Quantity, or nothing at all, we may therefore in a geometrical Case, limited by Hypotheses and Reasonings from particular Properties and Relations of Figures, claim the same Licence?

Qu. 28. Whether the Shifting of the Hypothesis, or (as we may call it) the fallacia Suppositionis be not a Sophism, that far and wide infects the modern Reasonings, both in the mechanical Philosophy and in the abstruse and fine Geometry?

Qu. 29. Whether we can form an Idea or Notion of Velocity distinct from and exclusive of its Measures, as we can of Heat distinct from and exclusive of the Degrees on the Thermometer, by which it is measured? And whether this be not supposed in the Reasonings of modern Analysts?

Qu. 30. Whether Motion can be conceived in a Point of Space? And if Motion cannot, whether Velocity can? And if not, whether a first or last Velocity can be conceived in a mere Limit, either initial or final, of the described Space?

Qu. 31. Where there are no Increments, whether there can be any Ratio of Increments? Whether Nothings can be considered as proportional to real Quantities? Or whether to talk of their Proportions be not to talk Nonsense? Also in what Sense we are to understand the Proportion of a Surface to a Line, of an Area to an Ordinate? And whether Species or Numbers, though properly expressing Quantities which are not homogeneous, may yet be said to express their Proportion to each other?

Qu. 32. Whether if all assignable Circles may be squared, the Circle is not, to all intents and purposes, squared as well as the Parabola? Or whether a parabolical Area can in fact be measured more accurately than a Circular?

Qu . 33. Whether it would not be righter to approximate fairly, than to endeavour at Accuracy by Sophisms?

Qu. 34. Whether it would not be more decent to proceed by Trials and Inductions, than to pretend to demonstrate by false Principles?

Qu. 35. Whether there be not a way of arriving at Truth, although the Principles are not scientific, nor the Reasoning just? And whether such a way ought to be called a Knack or a Science?

Qu. 36. Whether there can be Science of the Conclusion, where there is not Science of the Principles? And whether a Man can have Science of the Principles, without understanding them? And therefore whether the Mathematicians of the present Age act like Men of Science, in taking so much more pains to apply their Principles, than to understand them?

Qu. 37. Whether the greatest Genius wrestling with false Principles may not be foiled? And whether accurate Quadratures can be obtained without new Postulata or Assumptions? And if not, whether those which are intelligible and consistent ought not to be preferred to the contrary? See Sect. XXVIII and XXIX .

Qu. 38. Whether tedious Calculations in Algebra and Fluxions be the likliest Method to improve the Mind? And whether Mens being accustomed to reason altogether about Mathematical Signs and Figures, doth not make them at a loss how to reason without them?

Qu. 39. Whether, whatever readiness Analysts acquire in stating a Problem, or finding apt Expressions for Mathematical Quantities, the same doth necessarily infer a proportionable ability in conceiving and expressing other Matters?

Qu. 40. Whether it be not a general Case or Rule, that one and the same Coefficient dividing equal Products gives equal Quotients? And yet whether such Coefficient can be interpreted by o or nothing? Or whether any one will say, that if the Equation 2 × o = 5 × o , be divided by o , the Quotients on both Sides are equal? Whether therefore a Case may not be general with respect to all Quantities, and yet not extend to Nothings, or include the Case of Nothing? And whether the bringing Nothing under the Notion of Quantity may not have betrayed Men into false Reasoning?

Qu. 41. Whether in the most general Reasonings about Equalities and Proportions, Men may not demonstrate as well as in Geometry? Whether in such Demonstrations, they are not obliged to the same strict Reasoning as in Geometry? And whether such their Reasonings are not deduced from the same Axioms with those in Geometry? Whether therefore Algebra be not as truly a Science as Geometry?

Qu. 42. Whether Men may not reason in Species as well as in Words? Whether the same Rules of Logic do not obtain in both Cases? And whether we have not a right to expect and demand the same Evidence in both?

Qu. 43. Whether an Algebraist, Fluxionist, Geometrician or Demonstrator of any kind can expect indulgence for obscure Principles or incorrect Reasonings? And whether an Algebraical Note or Species can at the end of a Process be interpreted in a Sense, which could not have been substituted for it at the beginning? Or whether any particular Supposition can come under a general Case which doth not consist with the reasoning thereof?

Qu. 44. Whether the Difference between a mere Computer and a Man of Science be not, that the one computes on Principles clearly conceived, and by Rules evidently demonstrated, whereas the other doth not?

Qu. 45. Whether, although Geometry be a Science, and Algebra allowed to be a Science, and the Analytical a most excellent Method, in the Application nevertheless of the Analysis to Geometry, Men may not have admitted false Principles and wrong Methods of Reasoning?

Qu. 46. Whether although Algebraical Reasonings are admitted to be ever so just, when confined to Signs or Species as general Representatives of Quantity, you may not nevertheless fall into Error, if, when you limit them to stand for particular things, you do not limit your self to reason consistently with the Nature of such particular things? And whether such Error ought to be imputed to pure Algebra?

Qu. 47. Whether the View of modern Mathematicians doth not rather seem to be the coming at an Expression by Artifice, than the coming at Science by Demonstration?

Qu. 48. Whether there may not be sound Metaphysics as well as unsound? Sound as well as unsound Logic? And whether the modern Analytics may not be brought under one of these Denominations, and which?

Qu. 49. Whether there be not really a Philosophia prima , a certain transcendental Science superior to and more extensive than Mathematics, which it might behove our modern Analysts rather to learn than despise?

Qu. 50. Whether ever since the recovery of Mathematical Learning, there have not been perpetual Disputes and Controversies among the Mathematicians? And whether this doth not disparage the Evidence of their Methods?

Qu. 51. Whether any thing but Metaphysics and Logic can open the Eyes of Mathematicians and extricate them out of their Difficulties?

Qu. 52. Whether upon the received Principles a Quantity can by any Division or Subdivision, though carried ever so far, be reduced to nothing?

Qu. 53. Whether if the end of Geometry be Practice, and this Practice be Measuring, and we measure only assignable Extensions, it will not follow that unlimited Approximations compleatly answer the Intention of Geometry?

Qu. 54. Whether the same things which are now done by Infinites may not be done by finite Quantities? And whether this would not be a great Relief to the Imaginations and Understandings of Mathematical Men?

Qu. 55. Whether those Philomathematical Physicians, Anatomists, and Dealers in the Animal Oeconomy, who admit the Doctrine of Fluxions with an implicit Faith, can with a good grace insult other Men for believing what they do not comprehend?

Qu. 56. Whether the Corpuscularian, Experimental, and Mathematical Philosophy so much cultivated in the last Age, hath not too much engrossed Mens Attention; some part whereof it might have usefully employed?

Qu. 57. Whether from this, and other concurring Causes, the Minds of speculative Men have not been born downward, to the debasing and stupifying of the higher Faculties? And whether we may not hence account for that prevailing Narrowness and Bigotry among many who pass for Men of Science, their Incapacity for things Moral, Intellectual, or Theological, their Proneness to measure all Truths by Sense and Experience of animal Life?

Qu. 58. Whether it be really an Effect of Thinking, that the same Men admire the great Author for his Fluxions, and deride him for his Religion?

Qu. 59. If certain Philosophical Virtuosi of the present Age have no Religion, whether it can be said to be for want of Faith?

Qu. 60. Whether it be not a juster way of reasoning, to recommend Points of Faith from their Effects, than to demonstrate Mathematical Principles by their Conclusions?

Qu. 61 Whether it be not less exceptionable to admit Points above Reason than contrary to Reason?

Qu. 62. Whether Mysteries may not with better right be allowed of in Divine Faith, than in Humane Science?

Qu. 63. Whether such Mathematicians as cry out against Mysteries, have ever examined their own Principles?

Qu. 64. Whether Mathematicians, who are so delicate in religious Points, are strictly scrupulous in their own Science? Whether they do not submit to Authority, take things upon Trust, believe Points inconceivable? Whether they have not their Mysteries, and what is more, their Repugnancies and Contradictions?

Qu. 65. Whether it might not become Men, who are puzzled and perplexed about their own Principles, to judge warily, candidly, and modestly concerning other Matters?

Qu. 66. Whether the modern Analytics do not furnish a strong argumentum ad hominem , against the Philomathematical Infidels of these Times?

Qu. 67. Whether it follows from the abovementioned Remarks, that accurate and just Reasoning is the peculiar Character of the present Age? And whether the modern Growth of Infidelity can be ascribed to a Distinction so truly valuable?

FINIS .

 A Defence of Free-thinking in Mathematics (1735) [image "img126.jpg" file=Image00125.jpg] 

WITH APPENDIX CONCERNING MR. WALTON’S VINDICATION OF SIR ISAAC NEWTON’S PRINCIPLE OF FLUXIONS

FIRST EDITION TEXT

 CONTENTSA DEFENCE OF FREE-THINKING IN MATHEMATICS

 AN APPENDIX CONCERNING MR.WALTON’S VINDICATION OF SIR ISAAC NEWTON’S PRINCIPLES OF FLUXIONS

 

A Defence of Free-Thinking in Mathematics

In answer To a Pamphlet of Philalethes Cantabrigiensis , intituled,

Geometry no Friend to Infidelity, or a Defence of Sir ISAAC NEWTON,

and the BRITISH Mathematicians .

Also an Appendix concerning Mr. WALTON’s Vindication of the Principles of Fluxions contained in the ANALYST

 A DEFENCE OF FREE-THINKING IN MATHEMATICS [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

I . W HEN I read your Defence of the British Mathematicians, I could not Sir, but admire your Courage in asserting with such undoubting Assurance things so easily disproved. This to me seemed unaccountable, till I reflected on what you say (P . 32.) when upon my having appealed to every thinking Reader, whether it be possible to frame any clear Conception of Fluxions, you express your self in the following manner, “Pray sir who are those thinking Readers you appeal to? Are they Geometricians or Persons wholly ignorant of Geometry? If the former I leave it to them: if the latter, I ask how well are they qualified to judge of the Method of Fluxions?” It must be acknowledged you seem by this Dilemma secure in the favour of one Part of your Readers, and the ignorance of the other. I am nevertheless persuaded there are fair and candid Men among the Mathematicians. And for those who are not Mathematicians, I shall endeavour so to unveil this Mystery, and put the Controversy between us in such a Light, as that every Reader of ordinary Sense and Reflection may be a competent Judge thereof.

II. You express an extreme Surprize and Concern, “that I should take so much Pains to depreciate one of the noblest Sciences, to disparage and traduce a Set of learned Men whose Labours so greatly conduce to the Honour of this Island (P . 5), to lessen the Reputation and Authority of Sir Isaac Newton and his Followers, by shewing that they are not such Masters of Reason as they are generally presumed to be; and to depreciate the Science they profess, by demonstrating to the World, that it is not of that Clearness and certainty as is commonly imagined.” All which, you insist, “appears very strange to you and the rest of that famous University, who plainly see of how great Use Mathematical Learning is to Mankind.” Hence you take occasion to declaim on the usefulness of Mathematics in the several Branches, and then to redouble your Surprize and Amazement (P . 19 and 20). To all which Declamation I reply that it is quite beside the Purpose. For I allow, and always have allowed, its full claim of Merit to whatever is useful and true in the Mathematics: But that which is not so, the less it employs Men’s time and thoughts, the better. And after all you have said or can say, I believe the unprejudiced Reader will think with me, that things obscure are not therefore sacred; and that it is no more a Crime, to canvass and detect unsound Principles or false Reasonings in Mathematics, than in any other Part of Learning.

III. You are, it seems, much at a loss to understand the Usefulness or Tendency or Prudence of my Attempt. I thought I had sufficiently explained this in the Analyst . But for your further Satisfaction shall here tell you, it is very well known, that several Persons who deride Faith and Mysteries in Religion, admit the Doctrine of Fluxions for true and certain. Now if it be shewn that Fluxions are really most incomprehensible Mysteries, and that those, who believe them to be clear and scientific, do entertain an implicite Faith in the Author of that Method; will not this furnish a fair Argumentum ad Hominem against Men, who reject that very thing in Religion which they admit in humane Learning? And is it not a proper Way to abate the Pride, and discredit the Pretensions of those, who insist upon clear Ideas in Points of Faith, if it be shewn that they do without them even in Science?

IV. As to my timing this Charge; why now and not before, since I had published Hints thereof many Years ago? Surely I am obliged to give no Account of this: If what hath been said in the Analyst be not sufficient; suppose that I had not Leisure, or that I did not think it expedient, or that I had no Mind to it. When a Man thinks fit to publish any Thing, either in Mathematics, or in any other Part of Learning; what avails it, or indeed what Right hath any one to ask, why at this or that Time; in this or that Manner; upon this or that Motive? Let the Reader judge, if it suffice not, that what I publish is true, and that I have a Right to publish such Truths, when and how I please in a free Country.

V. I do not say, that Mathematicians, as such, are Infidels; or that Geometry is a Friend to Infidelity, which you untruly insinuate, as you do many other Things; whence you raise Topics for invective: But I say there are certain Mathematicians, who are known to be so; and that there are others, who are not Mathematicians, who are influenced by a Regard for their Authority. Some perhaps, who live in the University, may not be apprised of this; but the intelligent and observing Reader, who lives in the World, and is acquainted with the Humour of the Times, and the Characters of Men, is well aware, there are too many that deride Mysteries, and yet admire Fluxions; who yield that Faith to a mere Mortal, which they deny to Jesus Christ , whose Religion they make it their Study and Business to discredit. The owning this is not to own, that Men who reason well, are Enemies to Religion, as you would represent it: On the contrary, I endeavour to shew, that such men are defective in Point of Reason and Judgement, and that they do the very Thing they would seem to despise.

VI. There are, I make no doubt, among the Mathematicians many sincere Believers in Jesus Christ ; I know several such my self; but I addressed my Analyst to an Infidel; and on very good Grounds, I supposed that besides him, there were other Deriders of Faith, who had nevertheless a profound Veneration for Fluxions; and I was willing to set forth the Inconsistence of such Men. If there be no such Thing as Infidels, who pretend to Knowledge in the modern Analysis, I own my self misinformed, and shall gladly be found in a Mistake; but even in that Case, my Remarks upon Fluxions are not the less true; nor will it follow, that I have no Right to examine them on the Foot of Humane Science, even though Religion were quite unconcerned, and though I had no End to serve but Truth. But you are very angry (P . 13 and 14.) that I should enter the Lists with reasoning Infidels, and attack them upon their Pretensions to Science: And hence you take Occasion to shew your Spleen against the Clergy. I will not take upon me to say, that I know you to be a Minute Philosopher your self: But I know, the Minute Philosophers make just such Compliments as you do to our Church, and are just as angry as you can be at any, who undertake to defend Religion by Reason. If we resolve all into Faith, they laugh at us and our Faith: And if we attempt to Reason, they are angry at us: They pretend we go out of our Province, and they recommend to us a blind implicite Faith. Such is the Inconsistence of our Adversaries. But it is to be hoped, there will never be wanting Men to deal with them at their own Weapons; and to shew, they are by no Means those Masters of Reason; which they would fain pass for.

VII. I do not say, as you would represent me, that we have no better Reason for our Religion, than you have for Fluxions: but I say, that an Infidel, who believes the Doctrine of Fluxions, acts a very inconsistent Part, in pretending to reject the Christian Religion, because he cannot believe what he doth not comprehend; or because he cannot assent without Evidence; or because he cannot submit his Faith to Authority. Whether there are such Infidels, I submit to the Judgement of the Reader. For my own Part I make no Doubt of it, having seen some shrewd Signs thereof my self, and having been very credibly informed thereof by others. Nor doth this Charge seem the less credible, for your being so sensibly touched, and denying it with so much Passion. You, indeed, do not stick to affirm, that the persons who informed me are a pack of base profligate and impudent liars (P . 27). How far the Reader will think fit to adopt your passions I cannot say; but I can truly say, the late celebrated Mr. Addison is one of the persons, whom you are pleased to characterize in those modest and mannerly terms. He assured me that the Infidelity of a certain noted Mathematician, still living, was one principal reason assigned by a witty man of those times for his being an Infidel. Not, that I imagine Geometry disposeth men to Infidelity; but that from other causes, such as Presumption, Ignorance, or Vanity, like other Men Geometricians also become Infidels, and that the supposed light and evidence of their science gains credit to their Infidelity.

VIII. You reproach me with “Calumny, detraction, and artifice” (P . 15). You recommend such means as are “innocent and just, rather than the criminal method of lessening or detracting from my opponents” (ibid. ). You accuse me of the “odium Theologicum , the intemperate Zeal of Divines,” that I do “stare super vias antiquas ,” (P . 13.) with much more to the same effect. For all which charge I depend on the reader’s candour, that he will not take your word, but read and judge for himself. In which case he will be able to discern (though he should be no Mathematician) how passionate and unjust your reproaches are, and how possible it is, for a man to cry out against Calumny and practise it in the same breath. Considering how impatient all mankind are when their prejudices are looked into, I do not wonder to see you rail and rage at the rate you do. But if your own Imagination be strongly shocked and moved, you cannot therefore conclude, that a sincere endeavour to free a science, so useful and ornamental to Humane Life, from those subtilties, obscurities, and paradoxes which render it inaccessible to most men, will be thought a criminal undertaking by such as are in their right mind. Much less can you hope that an illustrious Seminary of Learned men, which hath produced so many free-spirited inquirers after Truth, will at once enter into your passions and degenerate into a nest of Bigots.

IX. I observe upon the Inconsistency of certain Infidel Analysts. I remark some defects in the principles of the modern Analysis. I take the liberty decently to dissent from Sir Isaac Newton . I propose some helps to abridge the trouble of Mathematical studies and render them more useful. What is there in all this that should make you declaim on the usefulness of practical Mathematics? that should move you to cry out Spain, Inquisition, Odium Theologicum ? By what figure of Speech, do you extend, what is said of the modern Analysis, to Mathematics in general, or what is said of Mathematical Infidels to all Mathematicians, or the confuting an errour in Science to burning or hanging the Authors? But it is nothing new or strange, that men should choose to indulge their passions, rather than quit their opinions how absurd soever. Hence the frightful visions and tragical uproars of Bigoted men, be the Subject of their Bigotry what it will. A very remarkable instance of this you give (P . 27) where, upon my having said that a deference to certain Mathematical Infidels, as I was credibly informed, had been one motive to Infidelity, you ask with no small emotion, “For God’s sake are we in England or in Spain ? Is this the language of a Familiar who is whispering an Inquisitor, &c ?” And the page before you exclaim in the following Words. “Let us burn or hang up all the Mathematicians in Great Britain , or halloo the mob upon them to tear them to pieces every Mother’s son of them, Tros Rutulusve fuat , Laymen or Clergymen, &c. Let us dig up the bodies of Dr. Barrow and Sir Isaac Newton , and burn them under the Gallows,” &c.

X. The Reader need not be a Mathematician, to see how vain all this tragedy of yours is. And if he be as thoroughly satisfied as I am, that the cause of Fluxions cannot be defended by reason, he will be as little surprised as I am, to see you betake your self to the arts of all bigoted men, raising terrour and calling in the passions to your assistance. Whether those Rhetorical flourishes about the Inquisition and the Gallies are not quite ridiculous, I leave to be determined by the Reader. Who will also judge (though he should not be skilled in Geometry) whether I have given the least grounds, for this and a World of such like declamation? and whether I have not constantly treated those celebrated Writers, with all proper respect, though I take the liberty in certain points to differ from them?

XI. As I heartily abhor an Inquisition in Faith, so I think you have no right to erect one in Science. At the time of writing your defence you seem to have been overcome with Passion: But now you may be supposed cool, I desire you to reflect whether it be not wrote in the true spirit of an Inquisitor. Whether this becomes a Person so exceeding delicate himself upon that Point? And whether your Brethren the Analysts will think themselves honoured or obliged by you, for having defended their Doctrine, in the same manner as any declaiming Bigot would defend Transubstantiation? The same false colours, the same intemperate Sallies, and the same Indignation against common Sense!

XII. In a matter of mere Science, where authority hath nothing to do, you constantly endeavour to overbear me with authorities, and load me with envy. If I see a Sophism in the writings of a great Author, and, in compliment to his understanding, suspect he could hardly be quite satisfyed with his own demonstration: This sets you on declaiming for several pages. It is pompously set forth, as a criminal method of detracting from great men, as a concerted project to lessen their reputation, as making them pass for imposters. If I publish my free thoughts, which I have as much right to publish as any other man, it is imputed to rashness and vanity and the love of opposition. Though perhaps my late publication, of what had been hinted twenty five years ago, may acquit me of this charge in the eyes of an impartial Reader. But when I consider the perplexities that beset a man, who undertakes to defend the doctrine of Fluxions, I can easily forgive your anger.

XIII. Two sorts of learned men there are: one, who candidly seek Truth by rational means. These are never averse to have their principles looked into, and examined by the test of Reason. Another sort there is who learn by route a set of principles and a way of thinking which happen to be in vogue. These betray themselves by their anger and surprise, whenever their principles are freely canvassed. But you must not expect, that your Reader will make himself a party to your passions or your prejudices. I freely own that Sir Isaac Newton hath shew’d himself an extraordinary Mathematician, a profound Naturalist, a Person of the greatest Abilities and Erudition. Thus far I can readily go, but I cannot go the lengths that you do. I shall never say of him as you do, Vestigia pronus adoro (P . 70). This same adoration that you pay to him, I will pay only to Truth.

XIV. You may, indeed, your self be an Idolater of whom you please: But then you have no right to insult and exclaim at other men, because they do not adore your Idol. Great as Sir Isaac Newton was, I think he hath, on more occasions than one, shew’d himself not to be infallible. Particularly, his demonstration of the Doctrine of Fluxions I take to be defective, and I cannot help thinking that he was not quite pleased with it himself. And yet this doth not hinder but the method may be useful, considered as an art of Invention. You, who are a Mathematician, must acknowledge, there have been divers such methods admitted in Mathematics, which are not demonstrative. Such, for instance, are the Inductions of Doctor Wallis in his Arithmetic of Infinites, and such, what Harriot and, after him, Descartes have wrote concerning the roots of affected Æquations. It will not, nevertheless, thence follow that those methods are useless; but only, that they are not to be allowed of as Premises in a strict Demonstration.

XV. No great Name upon earth shall ever make me accept things obscure for clear, or Sophisms for Demonstrations. Nor may you ever hope to deter me from freely speaking what I freely think, by those arguments ad invidia which at every turn you employ against me. You represent your self (P . 52) as a man, “whose highest ambition is in the lowest degree to imitate Sir Isaac Newton.” It might, perhaps, have suited better with your appellation of Philalethes , and been altogether as laudable, if your highest ambition had been to discover Truth. Very consistently with the character you give of your self, you speak of it as a sort of crime (P . 70) to think it possible, you should ever “see further, or go beyond Sir Isaac Newton.” And I am persuaded you speak the Sentiments of many more besides your self. But there are others who are not afraid to sift the Principles of human Science, who think it no honour to imitate the greatest man in his Defects, who even think it no crime to desire to know, not only beyond Sir Isaac Newton , but beyond all mankind. And whoever thinks otherwise, I appeal to the Reader, whether he can properly be called a Philosopher.

XVI. Because I am not guilty of your mean Idolatry, you inveigh against me as a person conceited of my own Abilities; not considering that a person of less Abilities may know more on a certain point than one of greater; not considering that a purblind eye, in a close and narrow view, may discern more of a thing, than a much better eye in a more extensive prospect; not considering that this is to fix a ne plus ultra , to put a stop to all future inquiries; Lastly, not considering that this is in fact, so much as in you lies, converting the Republick of Letters into an absolute monarchy, that it is even introducing a kind of Philosophic Popery among a free People.

XVII. I have said (and I venture still to say) that a Fluxion is incomprehensible: That second, third and fourth Fluxions are yet more incomprehensible: That it is not possible to conceive a simple Infinitesimal: That it is yet less possible to conceive an Infinitesimal of an Infinitesimal, and so onward. [NOTE: Analyst , Sect. 4, 5, 6, &c.] What have you to say in answer to this? Do you attempt to clear up the notion of a Fluxion or a Difference? Nothing like it; you only “assure me (upon your bare word) from your own experience, and that of several others whom you could name, that the Doctrine of Fluxions may be clearly conceived and distinctly comprehended; and that if I am puzzled about it and do not understand it, yet others do.” But can you think, Sir, I shall take your word when I refuse to take your Master’s?

XVIII. Upon this point every Reader of common sense may judge as well as the most profound Mathematician. The simple apprehension of a thing defined is not made more perfect by any subsequent progress in Mathematics. What any man evidently knows, he knows as well as you or Sir Isaac Newton . And every one can know whether the object of this method be (as you would have us think) clearly conceivable. To judge of this, no depth of Science is requisite, but only a bare attention to what passes in his own mind. And the same is to be understood of all definitions in all Sciences whatsoever. In none of which can it be supposed, that a man of Sense and Spirit will take any definition or principle on trust, without sifting it to the bottom, and trying how far he can or he cannot conceive it. This is the course I have taken and shall take, however you and your Brethren may declaim against it, and place it in the most invidious Light.

XIX. It is usual with you to admonish me to look over a second time, to consult, examine, weigh the words of Sir Isaac . In answer to which I will venture to say, that I have taken as much pains as (I sincerely believe) any man living, to understand that great Author and to make sense of his principles. No industry nor caution nor attention, I assure you, have been wanting on my part. So that, if I do not understand him, it is not my fault but my misfortune. Upon other subjects you are pleased to compliment me with depth of thought and uncommon abilities, (P . 5 and 84.) But I freely own, I have no pretence to those things. The only advantage I pretend to, is that I have always thought and judged for my self. And, as I never had a master in Mathematics, so I fairly followed the dictates of my own mind in examining, and censuring the authors I read upon that subject, with the same freedom that I used upon any other; taking nothing on trust, and believing that no writer was infallible. And a man of moderate parts, who takes this painful course in studying the principles of any Science, may be supposed to walk more surely than those of greater abilities, who set out with more speed and less care.

XX. What I insist on is, that the idea of a Fluxion simply considered is not at all improved or amended by any progress, though ever so great, in the Analysis: neither are the demonstrations of the general rules of that method at all cleared up by applying them. The reason of which is, because in operating or calculating, men do not return to contemplate the original principles of the method, which they constantly presuppose, but are employed in working, by notes and symbols, denoting the Fluxions supposed to have been at first explained, and according to rules supposed to have been at first demonstrated. This I say to encourage those, who are not far gone in these Studies, to use intrepidly their own judgement, without a blind or a mean deference to the best of Mathematicians, who are no more qualified than they are, to judge of the simple apprehension, or the evidence of what is delivered in the first elements of the method; men by further and frequent use or exercise becoming only more accustomed to the symbols and rules, which doth not make either the foregoing notions more clear, or the foregoing proofs more perfect. Every Reader of common sense, that will but use his faculties, knows as well as the most profound Analyst what idea he frames or can frame of Velocity without motion, or of motion without extension, of magnitude which is neither finite nor infinite, or of a quantity having no magnitude which is yet divisible, of a figure where there is no space, of proportion between nothings, or of a real product from nothing multiplied by something. He need not be far gone in Geometry to know, that obscure principles are not to be admitted in Demonstration: That if a man destroys his own Hypothesis, he at the same time destroys what was built upon it: That errour in the premises, not rectified, must produce errour in the conclusion.

XXI. In my opinion the greatest men have their Prejudices. Men learn the elements of Science from others: And every learner hath a deference more or less to authority, especially the young learners, few of that kind caring to dwell long upon Principles, but inclining rather to take them upon trust: And things early admitted by repetition become familiar: And this familiarity at length passeth for Evidence. Now to me it seems, there are certain points tacitly admitted by Mathematicians, which are neither evident nor true. And such points or principles ever mixing with their reasonings do lead them into paradoxes and perplexities. If the great author of the fluxionary method were early imbued with such notions, it would only shew he was a man. And if by vertue of some latent errour in his principles a man be drawn into fallacious reasonings, it is nothing strange that he should take them for true: And, nevertheless, if, when urged by perplexities and uncouth consequences, and driven to arts and shifts, he should entertain some doubt thereof, it is no more than one may naturally suppose, might befall a great genius grappling with an insuperable difficulty: Which is the light in which I have placed Sir Isaac Newton . [NOTE: Analyst , Sect. 18.] Hereupon you are pleased to remark, that I represent the great author not only as a weak but an ill man, as a Deceiver and an Impostor. The Reader will judge how justly.

XXII. As to the rest of your colourings and glosses, your reproaches and insults and outcries, I shall pass them over, only desiring the Reader not to take your word, but read what I have written, and he will want no other answer. It hath been often observed that the worst cause produceth the greatest clamour, and indeed you are so clamorous throughout your defence that the Reader, although he should be no Mathematician, provided he understands common sense and hath observed the ways of men, will be apt to suspect that you are in the wrong. It should seem, therefore, that your Brethren the Analysts are but little obliged to you, for this new method of declaiming in Mathematics. Whether they are more obliged by your Reasoning I shall now examine.

XXIII. You ask me (P . 32) where I find Sir Isaac Newton using such expressions as the Velocities of Velocities, the second, third, and fourth Velocities, &c. This you set forth as a pious fraud and unfair representation. I answer, that if according to Sir Isaac Newton a Fluxion be the velocity of an increment, then according to him I may call the Fluxion of a Fluxion the Velocity of a Velocity. But for the truth of the antecedent see his introduction to the Quadrature of Curves, where his own words are, motuum vel incrementorum velocitates nominando Fluxiones . See also the second Lemma of the second Book of his mathematical principles of natural Philosophy where he expresseth himself in the following manner, velocitates incrementorum ac decrementorum quas etiam, motus, mutationes & fluxiones quantitatum nominare licet. And that he admits Fluxions of Fluxions, or second, third, fourth Fluxions, &c. see his Treatise of the Quadrature of Curves. I ask now, Is it not plain, that if a Fluxion be a Velocity, then the Fluxion of a Fluxion may agreeably thereunto be called the Velocity of a Velocity? In like manner if by a Fluxion is meant a nascent augment, will it not then follow, that the Fluxion of a Fluxion or second Fluxion is the nascent augment of a nascent augment? Can anything be plainer? Let the Reader now judge who is unfair.

XXIV. I had observed, that the Great Author had proceeded illegitimately, in obtaining the Fluxion or moment of the Rectangle of two flowing quantities; and that he did not fairly get rid of the Rectangle of the moments. In answer to this you alledge, that the errour arising from the omission of such rectangle (allowing it to be an errour) is so small that it is insignificant. This you dwell upon and exemplify to no other purpose, but to amuse your Reader and mislead him from the Question; which in truth is not concerning the accuracy of computing or measuring in practice, but concerning the accuracy of the reasoning in science. That this was really the case, and that the smallness of the practical errour no wise concerns it, must be so plain to any one who reads the Analyst, that I wonder how you could be ignorant of it.

XXV. You would fain persuade your Reader, that I make an absurd quarrel against errours of no significancy in practice, and represent Mathematicians as proceeding blindfold in their approximations, in all which I cannot help thinking there is on your part either great ignorance or great disingenuity. If you mean to defend the reasonableness and use of approximations or of the method of Indivisibles, I have nothing to say. But then you must remember this is not the Doctrine of Fluxions: it is none of that Analysis with which I am concerned. That I am far from quarrelling at approximations in Geometry is manifest from the thirty third and fifty third Queries in the Analyst. And that the method of Fluxions pretends to somewhat more than the method of indivisibles is plain; because Sir Isaac disclaims this method as not Geometrical. [NOTE: See the Scholium at the end of the first section . Lib. i., Phil. Nat. Prin. Math.] And that the method of Fluxions is supposed accurate in Geometrical rigour is manifest, to whoever considers what the Great Author writes about it; especially in his Introduction to the Quadrature of Curves where he saith In rebus mathematicis errores quam minimi non sunt contemnendi . Which expression you have seen quoted in the Analyst, and yet you seem ignorant thereof, and indeed, of the very end and Design of the Great Author in this his invention of Fluxions.

XXVI. As oft as you talk of finite quantities inconsiderable in practice Sir Isaac disowns your apology. Cave , saith he, intellexeris finitas . And, although Quantities less than sensible may be of no account in practice, yet none of your masters, nor will even you your self venture to say, they are of no account in Theory and in Reasoning. The application in gross practice is not the point questioned, but the rigour and justness of the reasoning. And it is evident that, be the subject ever so little, or ever so inconsiderable, this doth not hinder but that a person treating thereof may commit very great errours in Logic, which Logical errours are in no wise to be measured by the sensible or practical inconveniences thence arising, which, perchance may be none at all. It must be owned, that after you have misled and amused your less qualified Reader (as you call him) you return to the real point in controversy, and set your self to justifie Sir Isaac ’s method of getting rid of the abovementioned Rectangle. And here I must intreat the Reader to observe how fairly you proceed.

XXVII. First then you affirm (P . 44), “that, neither in the Demonstration of the Rule for finding the fluxion of the rectangle of two flowing quantities, nor in anything preceding or following it, is any mention so much as once made of the increment of the rectangle of such flowing quantities.” Now I affirm the direct contrary. For in the very passage by you quoted in this same page, from the first case of the second lemma of the second Book of Sir Isaac ’s principles, beginning with Rectangulum quodvis motu perpetuo auctum , and ending with igitur laterum incrementis totis a and b generatur rectanguli incrementum aB + bA . Q.E.D. In this very passage I say is express mention made of the increment of such Rectangle. As this is matter of fact, I refer it to the Reader’s own eyes. Of what rectangle have we here the Increment? is it not plainly of that whose sides have a and b for their incrementa tota , that is, of AB . Let any Reader judge whether it be not plain from the words, the sense, and the context, that the Great Author in the end of his demonstration understands his incrementum as belonging to the Rectangulum quodvis at the beginning. Is not the same also evident from the very lemma it self prefixed to the Demonstration? The sense whereof is (as the author there explains it) that if the moments of the flowing quantities A and B are called a and b , then the momentum vel mutatio geniti rectanguli AB will be aB + bA . Either therefore the conclusion of the demonstration is not the thing which was to be demonstrated, or the Rectanguli incrementum aB + bA belongs to the rectangle AB .

XXVIII. All this is so plain that nothing can be more so; and yet you would fain perplex this plain case by distinguishing between an increment and a moment. But it is evident to every one, who has any notion of Demonstration, that the incrementum in the conclusion must be the momentum in the Lemma; and to suppose it otherwise is no credit to the Author. It is in effect supposing him to be one who did not know what he would demonstrate. But let us hear Sir Isaac ’s own words: Earum (quantitatum scilicet fluentium) incrementa vel decrementa momentanea sub nomine momentorum intelligo . And you observe your self that he useth the word moment to signify either an increment or decrement. Hence with an intention to puzzle me you propose the increment and decrement of AB , and ask which of these I would call the moment? The case you say is difficult. My answer is very plain and easy, to wit, Either of them. You, indeed, make a different answer, and from the Author’s saying that, by a moment he understands either the momentaneous increment or decrement of the flowing quantities, you would have us conclude, by a very wonderful inference, that his moment is neither the increment nor decrement thereof. Would it not be as good an inference, Because a number is either odd or even, to conclude it is neither? Can any one make sense of this? Or can even your self hope that this will go down with the Reader, how little soever qualified? It must be owned, you endeavour to obtrude this inference on him, rather by mirth and humour than by reasoning. Your are merry, I say, and (P . 46) represent the two mathematical quantities as pleading their rights, as tossing up cross and pile, as disputing amicably. You talk of their claiming preference, their agreeing, their boyishness and their gravity. And after this ingenious digression you address me in the following words — Believe me there is no remedy, you must acquiesce. But my answer is that I will neither believe you nor acquiesce; there is a plain remedy in common sense; and to prevent surprise I desire the Reader always to keep the controverted point in view, to examine your reasons, and be cautious how he takes your word, but most of all when you are positive or eloquent or merry.

XXIX. A page or two after, you very candidly represent your case to be that of an ass between two bottles of hay: it is your own expression. The cause of your perplexity is that you know not, whether the velocity of AB increasing or of AB decreasing is to be esteemed the Fluxion, or proportional to the moment of the rectangle. My opinion, agreeably to what hath been premised, is that either may be deemed the Fluxion. But you tell us (P . 49) “that you think, the venerable ghost of Sir Isaac Newton whispers you, the Velocity you seek for is neither the one nor the other of these, but is the velocity which the flowing rectangle hath, not while it is greater or less than AB , but at that very instant of time that it is AB .” For my part, in the rectangle AB considered simply in it self, without either increasing or diminishing, I can conceive no velocity at all. And if the Reader is of my mind, he will not take either your word, or even the word of a Ghost how venerable soever, for velocity without motion. You proceed and tell us that, in like manner, the moment of the rectangle is neither it’s increment or decrement. This you would have us believe on the authority of his Ghost, in direct opposition to what Sir Isaac himself asserted when alive. Incrementa (saith he) vel decrementa momentanea sub nomine momentorum intelligo: ita ut incrementa pro momentis addititiis seu affirmativis, ac decrementa pro subductitiis seu negativis habeantur . [NOTE: Princip. Phil. Nat. Lib. II, Lem. II.] I will not in your style bid the Reader believe me, but Believe his eyes.

XXX. To me it verily seems, that you have undertaken the defence of what you do not understand. To mend the matter, you say, “you do not consider AB as lying at either extremity of the moment, but as extended to the middle of it; as having acquired the one half of the moment, and as being about to acquire the other; or, as having lost one half of it, and being about to lose the other.” Now, in the name of Truth, I entreat you to tell what this moment is, to the middle whereof the rectangle is extended? This moment, I say, which is acquired, which is lost, which is cut in two, or distinguished into halfs? Is it a finite quantity, or an infinitesimal, or a mere limit, or nothing at all? Take it in what sense you will, I cannot make your defence either consistent or intelligible. For if you take it in either of the two former senses, you contradict Sir Isaac Newton . And if you take it in either of the latter, you contradict common sense; it being plain, that what hath no magnitude, or is no quantity, cannot be divided. And here I must entreat the reader to preserve his full freedom of mind intire, and not weakly suffer his judgment to be overborn by your imagination and your prejudices, by great names and authorities, by Ghosts and Visions, and above all by that extreme satisfaction and complacency with which you utter your strange conceits; if words without a meaning may be called so. After having given this unintelligible account, you ask with your accustomed air, “What say you Sir? Is this a just and legitimate reason for Sir Isaac ’s proceeding as he did? I think you must acknowledge it to be so.” But alas! I acknowledge no such thing. I find no sense or reason in what you say. Let the Reader find it if he can.

XXXI. In the next Place (P . 50) you charge me with want of caution. “Inasmuch (say you) as that quantity which Sir Isaac Newton through his whole Lemma, and all the several Cases of it, constantly calls a Moment , without confining it to be either an increment or decrement, is by you inconsiderately and arbitrarily, and without any Shadow of Reason given, supposed and determined to be an increment.” To which Charge I reply that it is as untrue as it is peremptory. For that, in the foregoing citation from the first case of Sir Isaac ’s Lemma, he expressly determines it to be an Increment. And as this particular Instance or Passage was that which I objected to, it was reasonable and proper for me to consider the Moment in that same Light. But take it increment or decrement as you will, the Objections still lie and the Difficulties are equally insuperable. You then proceed to extoll the great Author of the fluxionary Method, and to bestow some Brusqueries upon those who unadvisedly dare to differ from him. To all which I shall give no answer.

XXXII. Afterwards to remove (as you say) all Scruple and Difficulty about this affair, you observe that the Moment of the Rectangle determined by Sir Isaac Newton , and the Increment of the Rectangle determined by me are perfectly and exactly equal, supposing a and b to be diminished ad infinitum : and for proof of this, you refer to the first Lemma of the first Section of the first Book of Sir Isaac ’s Principles. I answer, that if a and b are real quantities, then ab is something, and consequently makes a real difference: but if they are nothing, then the Rectangles whereof they are coefficients become nothing likewise: and consequently the momentum or incrementum , whether Sir Isaac ’s or mine, are in that Case nothing at all. As for the abovementioned Lemma, which you refer to, and which you wish I had consulted sooner, both for my own sake and for yours; I tell you I had long since consulted and considered it. But I very much doubt whether you have sufficiently considered that Lemma, it’s Demonstration and it’s Consequences. For, however that way of reasoning may do in the Method of exhaustions , where quantities less than assignable are regarded as nothing; yet for a Fluxionist writing about momentums, to argue that quantities must be equal because they have no assignable difference, seems the most injudicious Step that could be taken: it is directly demolishing the very Doctrine you would defend. For it will thence follow, that all homogeneous momentums are equal, and consequently the velocities, mutations, or fluxions proportional thereto, are all likewise equal. There is, therefore, only one proportion of equality throughout, which at once overthrows the whole System you undertake to defend. Your moments (I say) not being themselves assignable quantities, their differences cannot be assignable: and if this be true, by that way of reasoning it will follow, they are all equal, upon which Supposition you cannot make one Step in the Method of Fluxions. It appears from hence, how unjustly you blame me (P . 32) for omitting to give any Account of that first Section of the first Book of the Principia , wherein (you say) the Foundation of the Method of Fluxions is geometrically demonstrated and largely explained, and difficulties and objections against it are clearly solved. All which is so far from being true, that the very first and fundamental Lemma of that Section is incompatible with, and subversive of the doctrine of Fluxions. And, indeed, who sees not that a Demonstration ad absurdum more veterum proceeding on a Supposition, that every difference must be some given quantity, cannot be admitted in, or consist with, a method, wherein Quantities, less than any given, are supposed really to exist, and be capable of division?

XXXIII. The next point you undertake to defend is that method for obtaining a rule to find the Fluxion of any Power of a flowing Quantity, which is delivered in the introduction to the Quadratures, and considered in the Analyst [NOTE: Sect. 13, 14, &c.]. And here the question between us is, whether I have rightly represented the sense of those words, evanescant jam augmenta illa , in rendering them, let the increments vanish i.e. let the increments be nothing, or let there be no increments? This you deny, but, as your manner is, instead of giving a reason you declaim. I, on the contrary affirm, the increments must be understood to be quite gone and absolutely nothing at all. My reason is, because without that supposition you can never bring the quantity or expression

 

down to nx n - , the very thing aimed at by supposing the evanescence. Say whether this be not the truth of the case? Whether the former expression is not to be reduced to the latter? And whether this can possibly be done so long as o is supposed a real Quantity? I cannot indeed say you are scrupulous about your affirmations, and yet I believe that even you will not affirm this; it being most evident, that the product of two real quantities is something real; and that nothing real can be rejected either according to the άκρίβεια of Geometry, or according to Sir Isaac ’s own Principles; for the truth of which I appeal to all who know any thing of these matters. Further by evanescant must either be meant let them (the increments) vanish and become nothing, in the obvious sense, or let them become infinitely small. But that this latter is not Sir Isaac ’s sense is evident from his own words in the very same page, that is, in the last of the Introduction to the Quadratures, where he expressly saith volui ostendere quod in methodo fluxionum non opus sit figuras infinite parvas in geometriam introducere . Upon the whole, you seem to have considered this affair so very superficially, as greatly to confirm me in the opinion, you are so angry with, to wit, that Sir Isaac ’s followers are much more eager in applying his method, than accurate in examining his principles. You raise a dust about evanescent augments which may perhaps amuse and amaze your Reader, but I am much mistaken if it ever instructs or enlightens him. For, to come to the point, those evanescent augments either are real quantities, or they are not. If you say they are; I desire to know, how you get rid of the rejectaneous quantity? If you say they are not; you indeed get rid of those quantities in the composition whereof they are coefficients; but then you are of the same opinion with me, which opinion you are pleased to call (P . 58) “a most palpable, inexcusable, and unpardonable blunder,” although it be a Truth most palpably evident.

XXXIV. Nothing I say can be plainer to any impartial Reader, than that by the Evanescence of augments, in the above-cited passage, Sir Isaac means their being actually reduced to nothing. But to put it out of all doubt, that this is the truth, and to convince even you, who shew so little disposition to be convinced, I desire you to look into his Analysis per æquationes infinitas (P . 20) where, in his preparation for demonstrating the first rule for the squaring of simple Curves, you will find that on a parallel occasion, speaking of an augment which is supposed to vanish, he interprets the word evanescere by esse nihil . Nothing can be plainer than this, which at once destroys your defence. And yet, plain as it is, I despair of making you acknowledge it; though I am sure you feel it, and the Reader if he useth his eyes must see it. The words Evanescere sive esse nihil do (to use your own expression) stare us in the face. Lo! This is what you call (P . 56) “so great, so unaccountable, so horrid, so truly Boeotian a blunder” that, according to you, it was not possible Sir Isaac Newton could be guilty of it. For the future, I advise you to be more sparing of hard words: Since, as you incautiously deal them about, they may chance to light on your friends as well as your adversaries. As for my part, I shall not retaliate. It is sufficient to say you are mistaken. But I can easily pardon your mistakes. Though, indeed, you tell me on this very occasion, that I must expect no quarter from Sir Isaac ’s followers. And I tell you that I neither expect nor desire any. My aim is truth. My reasons I have given. Confute them, if you can. But think not to overbear me either with authorities or harsh words. The latter will recoil upon your selves: The former in a matter of science are of no weight with indifferent Readers; and as for Bigots, I am not concerned about what they say or think.

XXXV. In the next place you proceed to declaim upon the following passage taken from the seventeenth section of the Analyst. “Considering the various arts and devices used by the great author of the fluxionary method: in how many lights he placeth his Fluxions: and in what different ways he attempts to demonstrate the same point: One would be inclined to think, he was himself suspicious of the justness of his own demonstrations.” This passage you complain of as very hard usage of Sir Isaac Newton . You declaim copiously, and endeavour to show that placing the same point in various lights is of great use to explain it; which you illustrate with much Rhetoric. But the fault of that passage is not the hard usage it contains: But on the contrary, that it is too modest, and not so full and expressive of my sense, as perhaps it should have been. Would you like it better if I should say, the various inconsistent accounts, which this great author gives of his momentums and his fluxions, may convince every intelligent Reader that he had no clear and steady notions of them, without which there can be no demonstration? I own frankly that I see no clearness or consistence in them. You tell me indeed, in Miltonic verse that the fault is in my own eyes,

So thick a drop serene has quench’d their orbs
Or dim suffusion veil’d.

at the same time you acknowledge your self obliged for those various lights, which have enabled you to understand his Doctrine. But as for me who do not understand it, you insult me saying: “For God’s sake what is it you are offended at, who do not still understand him?” May not I answer, that I am offended for this very reason; because I cannot understand him or make sense of what he says? You say to me, that I am all in the dark. I acknowledge it, and intreat you who see so clearly to help me out.

XXXVI. You Sir with the bright eyes, be pleased to tell me, whether Sir Isaac ’s momentum be a finite quantity, or an infinitesimal, or a mere limit? If you say a finite quantity: Be pleased to reconcile this with what he saith in the Scholium of the second Lemma of the first Section of the first book of his Principles: Cave intelligas quantitates magnitudine determinatas, sed cogita semper diminuendas sine limite . If you say, an infinitesimal: reconcile this with what is said in the Introduction to the Quadratures: Volui ostendere quod in methodo Fluxionum non opus sit figuras infinite parvas in Geometriam introducere . If you should say, it is a mere limit, be pleased to reconcile this with what we find in the first case of the second Lemma in the second book of his Principles: Ubi de lateribus A et B deerant momentorum dimidia , &c. where the moments are supposed to be divided. I should be very glad, a person of such a luminous intellect would be so good as to explain, whether by Fluxions we are to understand the nascent or evanescent quantities themselves, or their motions, or their Velocities, or simply their proportions: and having interpreted them in what sense you will, that you would then condescend to explain the Doctrine of second, third, and fourth Fluxions, and shew it to be consistent with common sense if you can. You seem to be very sanguine when you express your self in the following terms: “I do assure you, Sir, from my own Experience, and that of many others whom I could name that the Doctrine may be clearly conceived and distinctly comprehended” (P . 31). And it may be uncivil not to believe what you so solemnly affirm, from your own experience. But I must needs own, I should be better satisfied of this, if, instead of entertaining us with your Rhetoric, you would vouchsafe to reconcile those difficulties, and explain those obscure points abovementioned. If either you, or any one of those many whom you could name, will but explain to others what you so clearly conceive your selves, I give you my word that several will be obliged to you who, I may venture to say, understand those matters no more than my self. But, if I am not mistaken, you and your friends will modestly decline this task.

XXXVII. I have long ago done what you so often exhort me to do, diligently read and considered the several accounts of this Doctrine given by the great Author in different parts of his writings: any upon the whole I could never make it out to be consistent and intelligible. I was even led to say, that “one would be inclined to think, He was himself suspicious of the justness of his own demonstrations: and that he was not enough pleased with any one notion steadily to adhere to it.” After which I added, “Thus much is plain that he owned himself satisfied concerning certain points, which nevertheless he could not undertake to demonstrate to others.” See the seventeenth section of the Analyst. It is one thing when a Doctrine is placed in various lights: and another, when the principles and notions are shifted. When new devices are introduced and substituted for others, a Doctrine instead of being illustrated may be explained away. Whether there be not something of this in the present case I appeal to the writings of the Great Author. His methodus rationum primarum et ultimarum , His second Lemma in the second book of his Principles, his Introduction and Treatise of the Quadrature of Curves. In all which it appears to me, there is not one uniform doctrine explained and carried throughout the whole, but rather sundry inconsistent accounts of this new method, which still grows more dark and confused the more it is handled: I could not help thinking, the greatest genius might lye under the influence of false principles; and where the object and notions were exceeding obscure, he might possibly distrust even his own demonstrations. “At least thus much seemed plain, that Sir Isaac had sometime owned himself satisfied, where he could not demonstrate to others.” In proof whereof I mentioned his letter to Mr. Collins ; Hereupon you tell me: “there is a great deal of difference between saying, I cannot undertake to prove a thing, and I will not undertake it.” But in answer to this, I desire you will be pleased to consider, that I was not making a precise extract out of that letter, in which the very words of Sir Isaac should alone be inserted. But I made my own remark and inference, from what I remembred to have read in that letter; where, speaking of a certain mathematical matter, Sir Isaac expresseth himself, in the following terms: “It is plain to me by the fountain I draw it from; though I will not undertake to prove it to others.” Now whether my inference may not be fairly drawn from those words of Sir Isaac Newton ; and whether the difference as to the sense be so great between will and can in that particular case, I leave to be determined by the Reader.

XXXVIII. In the next paragraph you talk big but prove nothing. You speak of driving out of intrenchments, of sallying and attacking and carrying by assault; of slight and untenable works, of a new-raised and undisciplined militia, and of veteran regular troops. Need the Reader be a Mathematician to see the vanity of this paragraph? After this you employ (P . 65) your usual colouring, and represent the great Author of the Method of Fluxions “as a Good old Gentleman fast asleep, and snoring in his easy chair; while dame Fortune is bringing him her apron full of beautiful theorems and problems, which he never knows or thinks of.” This you would have pass for a consequence of my notions. But I appeal to all those who are ever so little knowing in such matters, whether there are not divers fountains of Experiment, Induction, and Analogy, whence a man may derive and satisfy himself concerning the truth of many points in Mathematics and Mechanical Philosophy, although the proofs thereof afforded by the modern Analysis should not amount to demonstration? I further appeal to the conscience of all the most profound Mathematicians, whether they can, with perfect acquiescence of mind free from all scruple, apply any proposition merely upon the strength of a Demonstration involving second or third Fluxions, without the aid of any such experiment or analogy or collateral proof whatsoever? Lastly, I appeal to the Reader’s own heart, whether he cannot clearly conceive a medium between being fast asleep and demonstrating? But you will have it, that I represent Sir Isaac ’s Conclusions as coming out right, because one errour is compensated by another contrary and equal errour, which perhaps he never knew himself nor thought of: that by a twofold mistake he arrives though not at science yet at Truth: that he proceeds blindfold, &c. All which is untruly said by you, who have misapplied to Sir Isaac what was intended for the Marquis de l’Hospital and his followers, for no other end (as I can see) but that you may have an opportunity, to draw that ingenious portraiture of Sir Isaac Newton and Dame Fortune, as will be manifest to whoever reads the Analyst.

XXXIX. You tell me (P . 70), if I think fit to persist in asserting, “that this affair of a double errour is entirely a new discovery of my own, which Sir Isaac and his followers never knew or thought of, that you have unquestionable evidence to convince me to the contrary, and that all his followers are already apprised, that this very objection of mine was long since foreseen, and clearly and fully removed by Sir Isaac Newton in the first section of the first book of his Principia .” All which I do as strongly deny as you affirm. And I do aver, that this is an unquestionable proof of the matchless contempt which you, Philalethes , have for Truth. And I do here publickly call upon you, to produce that evidence which you pretend to have, and to make good that fact which you so confidently affirm. And, at the same time, I do assure the Reader that you never will, nor can.

XL. If you defend Sir Isaac ’s notions as delivered in his Principia , it must be on the rigorous foot of rejecting nothing, neither admitting nor casting away infinitely small quantities. If you defend the Marquis, whom you also style your Master, it must be on the foot of admitting that there are infinitesimals, that they may be rejected, that they are nevertheless real quantities, and themselves infinitely subdivisible. But you seem to have grown giddy with passion, and in the heat of controversy to have mistaken and forgot your part. I beseech you, Sir, to consider, that the Marquis (whom alone, and not Sir Isaac this double errour in finding the subtangent doth concern) rejects indeed infinitesimals, but not on the foot that you do, to wit, their being inconsiderable in practical Geometry or mixed Mathematics. But he rejects them in the accuracy of Speculative Knowledge: in which respect there may be great Logical errours, although there should be no sensible mistake in practice: which, it seems, is what you cannot comprehend. He rejects them likewise in vertue of a Postulatum, which I venture to call rejecting them without ceremony. And though he inferreth a conclusion accurately true, yet he doth it, contrary to the rules of Logic, from inaccurate and false premises. And how this comes about, I have at large explained in the Analyst, and shewed in that particular case of Tangents, that the Rejectaneous Quantity might have been a finite quantity of any given magnitude, and yet the conclusion have come out exactly the same way; and consequently, that the truth of this method doth not depend on the reason assigned by the Marquis, to wit, the postulatum for throwing away Infinitesimals, and therefore that he and his follows acted blindfold, as not knowing the true reason for the conclusions coming out accurately right, which I shew to have been the effect of a double errour.

XLI. This is the truth of the matter, which you shamefully misrepresent and declaim upon, to no sort of purpose but to amuse and mislead your Reader. For which conduct of yours throughout your remarks, you will pardon me if I cannot otherwise account, than from a secret hope that the Reader of your defence would never read the Analyst. If he doth, He cannot but see what an admirable Method you take to defend your cause: How instead of justifying the Reasoning, the Logic or the Theory of the case specified, which is the real point, you discourse of sensible and practical errours: And how all this is a manifest imposition upon the Reader. He must needs see that I have expressly said, “I have no controversy except only about your Logic and method: that I consider how you demonstrate; what objects you are conversant about; and whether you conceive them clearly?” That I have often expressed my self to the same effect desiring the Reader to remember, “that I am only concerned about the way of coming at your theorems, whether it be legitimate or illegitimate, clear or obscure, scientific or tentative: That I have on this very occasion, to prevent all possibility of mistake, repeated and insisted that I consider the Geometrical Analyst as a Logician i.e. so far forth as he reasons and argues; and his mathematical conclusions not in themselves but in their premises; not as true or false, useful or insignificant, but as derived from such principles, and by such inferences.” [NOTE: ‘Analyst,’ Sect. 20.] You affirm (and indeed what can you not affirm?) that the difference between the true subtangent and that found without any compensation is absolutely nothing at all. I profess my self of a contrary opinion. My reason is because nothing cannot be divided into parts. But this difference is capable of being divided into any, or into more than any given number of parts; For the truth of which consult the Marquis de l’Hospital . And, be the errour in fact or in practice ever so small, it will not thence follow that the errour in Reasoning, which is what I am alone concerned about, is one whit the less, it being evident that a man may reason most absurdly about the minutest things.

XLII. Pray answer me fairly, once for all, whether it be your opinion that whatsoever is little and inconsiderable enough to be rejected without inconvenience in practice, the same may in like manner be safely rejected and overlooked in Theory and Demonstration. if you say no , it will then follow, that all you have been saying here and elsewhere, about yards and inches and decimal fractions, setting forth and insisting on the extreme smallness of the rejectaneous quantity, is quite foreign to the argument, and only a piece of skill to impose upon your Reader. If you say yes , it follows that you then give up at once all the orders of Fluxions and Infinitesimal Differences; and so most imprudently turn all your sallies and attacks and Veterans to your own overthrow. If the Reader is of my mind, he will despair of ever seeing you get clear of this dilemma. The points in controversy have been so often and so distinctly noted in the Analyst, that I very much wonder how you could mistake if you had no mind to mistake. It is very plain, if you are in earnest, that you neither understand me nor your Masters. And what shall we think of other ordinary Analysts, when it shall be found that even you, who, like a Champion step forth to defend their principles, have not considered them?

XLIII. The impartial reader is entreated to remark throughout your whole performance how confident you are in asserting and withall how modest in proving or explaining: How frequent it is with you to employ Figures and Tropes instead of Reasons: How many difficulties proposed in the Analyst are discreetly overlooked by you, and what strange work you make with the rest: How grossly you mistake and misrepresent, and how little you practise the advice which you so liberally bestow. Believe me Sir, I had long and maturely considered the principles of the modern Analysis, before I ventured to publish my thoughts thereupon in the Analyst. And since the publication thereof, I have my self freely conversed with Mathematicians of all ranks, and some of the ablest Professors, as well as made it my business to be informed of the Opinions of others, being very desirous to hear what could be said towards clearing my difficulties or answering my objections. But though you are not afraid or ashamed, to represent the Analysts as very clear and uniform in their Conception of these matters, yet I do solemnly affirm (and several of themselves know it to be true) that I found no harmony or agreement among them, but the reverse thereof, the greatest dissonance and even contrariety of Opinions, employed to explain what after all seemed inexplicable.

XLIV. Some fly to proportions between nothings. Some reject quantities because infinitesimal. Others allow only finite quantities, and reject them because inconsiderable. Others place the method of Fluxions on a foot with that of exhaustions , and admit nothing new therein. Some maintain the clear conception of Fluxions. Others hold they can demonstrate about things incomprehensible. Some would prove the Algorism of Fluxions by reductio ad absurdum ; others a priori . Some hold the evanescent increments to be real quantities, some to be nothings, some to be limits. As many Men, so many minds: each differing one from another, and all from Sir Isaac Newton . Some plead inaccurate expressions in the great Author, whereby they would draw him to speak their sense, not considering that if he meant as they do, he could not want words to express his meaning. Others are magisterial and positive, say they are satisfied, and that is all, not considering that we, who deny Sir Isaac Newton ’s Authority, shall not submit to that of his Disciples. Some insist, that the Conclusions are true, and therefore the principles, not considering what hath been largely said in the Analyst [NOTE: Sect . 19, 20. &c.] on that head. Lastly several (and those none of the meanest) frankly owned the objections to be unanswerable. All which I mention by way of Antidote to your false Colours: and that the unprejudiced Inquirer after Truth may see, it is not without foundation, that I call on the celebrated Mathematicians of the present Age to clear up these obscure Analytics, and concur in giving to the publick some consistent and intelligible account of the principles of their great Master: for if they do not, I believe the World will take it for granted that they cannot.

XLV. Having gone through your defence of the British Mathematicians, I find in the next place, that you attack me on a point of Metaphysics, with what success the Reader will determine. I had upon another occasion many years ago wrote against Abstract general Ideas. [NOTE: Introduction to a Treatise concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge printed in the Year MDCCX. ] In opposition to which, you declare your self to adhere to the vulgar opinion, that neither Geometry nor any other general Science can subsist without general Ideas (P . 74). This implies that I hold there are no general Ideas. But I hold the direct contrary, that there are indeed general Ideas, but not formed by abstraction in the manner set forth by Mr. Locke . To me it is plain, there is no consistent Idea, the likeness whereof may not really exist. Whatsoever therefore is said to be somewhat which cannot exist, the Idea thereof must be inconsistent. Mr Locke acknowledgeth it doth require Pains and Skill to form his general Idea of a triangle. He farther expressly saith, it must be neither oblique nor rectangular, neither equilateral, equicrural, nor scalenum; but all and none of these of these at once. He also saith, it is an idea wherein some parts of several different and inconsistent Ideas are put together. [NOTE: Essay on Humane Understanding , b. iv, c. vii, § ix.] All this looks very like a Contradiction. But to put the matter past dispute, it must be noted, that he affirms it to be somewhat imperfect that cannot exist; consequently the Idea thereof is impossible or inconsistent.

XLVI. I desire to know, whether it is not possible for any thing to exist, which doth not include a contradiction: And if it is, whether we may not infer, that what may not possibly exist, the same doth include a contradiction: I further desire to know, whether the reader can frame a distinct idea of anything that includes a contradiction? For my part, I cannot, nor consequently of the abovementioned triangle; Though you (you it seems know better than my self what I can do) are pleased to assure me of the contrary. Again, I ask whether that, which it is above the power of man to form a compleat idea of, may not be called incomprehensible? And whether the Reader can frame a compleat idea of this imperfect impossible triangle? And if not, whether it doth not follow that it is incomprehensible? It should seem, that a distinct aggregate of a few consistent parts was nothing so difficult to conceive or impossible to exist; and that, therefore, your Comment must be wide of the Author’s meaning. You give me to understand (P . 82) that this account of a general triangle was a trap which Mr. Locke set to catch fools. Who is caught therein let the Reader judge.

XLVII. It is Mr. Locke ’s opinion, that every general name stands for a general abstract idea, which prescinds from the species or individuals comprehended under it. Thus, for example, according to him, the general name Colour stands for an idea, which is neither Blue, Red, Green, nor any particular colour, but somewhat distinct and abstracted from them all. To me it seems the word Colour is only a more general name applicable to all and each of the particular colours; while the other specific names, as Blue, Red, Green, and the like are each restrained to a more limited signification. The same can be said of the word Triangle . Let the Reader judge whether this be not the case; and whether he can distinctly frame such an idea of colour as shall prescind from all the species thereof, or of a triangle which shall answer Mr. Locke ’s account, prescinding and abstracting from all the particular sorts of triangles, in the manner aforesaid.

XLVIII. I entreat my Reader to think. For if he doth not, he may be under some influence from your confident and positive way of talking. But any one who thinks may, if I mistake not, plainly perceive that you are deluded, as it often happens, by mistaking the terms for ideas. Nothing is easier, than to define in terms or words that which is incomprehensible in idea, forasmuch as any words can be either separated or joined as you please, but ideas always cannot. It is as easy to say a round square as an oblong square, though the former be inconceivable. If the Reader will but take a little care to distinguish between the Definition and the Idea, between words or expressions and the conceptions of the mind, he will judge of the truth of what I now advance, and clearly perceive how far you are mistaken, in attempting to illustrate Mr. Locke ’s Doctrine, and where your mistake lies. Or, if the Reader is minded to make short work, he needs only at once to try, whether laying aside the words he can frame in his mind the idea of an impossible triangle; upon which trial the issue of this dispute may be fairly put. This doctrine of abstract general ideas seemed to me a capital errour, productive of numberless difficulties and disputes, that runs not only throughout Mr. Locke ’s book but through most parts of Learning. Consequently, my animadversions thereupon were not an effect of being inclined to carp or cavil at a single passage, as you would wrongfully insinuate, but proceeded from a love of Truth, and a desire to banish, so far as in me lay, false principles and wrong ways of thinking, without respect of persons. And indeed, though you and other Party-men are violently attached to your respective Masters, yet I, who profess my self only attached to Truth, see no reason why I may not as freely animadvert on Mr. Locke or Sir Isaac Newton , as they would on Aristotle or Descartes . Certainly the more extensive the influence of any Errour, and the greater the authority which supports it, the more it deserves to be considered and detected by sincere Inquirers after Knowledge.

XLIX. In the close of your performance, you let me understand, that your Zeal for Truth and the reputation of your Masters have occasioned your reprehending me with the utmost freedom. And it must be owned you have shewn a singular talent therein. But I am comforted under the severity of your reprehensions, when I consider the weakness of your arguments, which, were they as strong as your reproofs, could leave no doubt in the mind of the Reader concerning the matters in dispute between us. As it is, I leave him to reflect and examine by your light, how clearly he is enabled to conceive a fluxion, or a fluxion of a fluxion, a part infinitely small subdivided into an infinity of parts, a nascent or evanescent increment, that which is neither something nor nothing, a triangle formed in a point, velocity without motion, and the rest of those arcana of the modern Analysis. To conclude, I had some thoughts of advising you how to conduct your self for the future, in return for the advice you have so freely imparted to me: but, as you think it becomes me rather to inform my self than instruct others, I shall, for my farther information, take leave to propose a few Queries to those learned Gentlemen of Cambridge , whom you associate with your self, and represent as being equally surprised at the tendency of my Analyst.

L. I desire to know, whether those who can neither demonstrate nor conceive the principles of the modern Analysis, and yet give in to it, may not be justly said to have Faith, and be styled believers of mysteries? Whether it is impossible to find among the Physicians, mechanical Philosophers, Mathematicians, and Philomathematicians of the present age, some such Believers, who yet deride Christians for their belief of Mysteries? Whether with such men it is not a fair, reasonable, and legitimate method to use the Argumentum ad Hominem ? And being so, whether it ought to surprise either Christians or Scholars? Whether in an age wherein so many pretenders to science attack the Christian Religion, we may not be allowed to make reprisals, in order to shew that the Irreligion of those men is not to be presumed an effect of deep and just thinking? Whether an attempt to detect false reasonings, and remedy defects in Mathematics, ought to be ill received by Mathematicians? Whether the introducing more easy methods and more intelligible principles in any science should be discountenanced? Whether there may not be fair objections as well as cavils? And whether to inquire diligently into the meaning of terms and the proof of propositions, not excepting against anything without assigning a reason, nor affecting to mistake the signification of words, or stick at an expression where the sense was clear, but considering the subject in all lights, sincerely endeavouring to find out any sense or meaning whatsoever, candidly setting forth what seems obscure and what fallacious, and calling upon those, who profess the knowledge of such matters, to explain them, whether I say such a proceeding can be justly called cavilling? Whether there be an ipse dixit erected? And if so, when, where, by whom, and upon what Authority? Whether even where Authority was to take place, one might not hope the Mathematics, at least, would be excepted? Whether the chief end, in making Mathematics so considerable a part of Academical Education, be not to form in the minds of young Students habits of just and exact Reasoning? And whether the study of abstruse and subtile matters can conduce to this end, unless they are well understood, examined, and sifted to the bottom? Whether, therefore, the bringing Geometrical demonstrations to the severest test of Reason should be reckoned a discouragement to the studies of any learned Society? Whether to separate the clear parts of things from the obscure, to distinguish the real Principles whereon Truths rest, and whence they are derived, and to proportion the just measures of assent according to the various degrees of evidence, be a useless or unworthy undertaking? Whether the making more of an argument than it will bear, and placing it in an undue rank of evidence, be not the likely way to disparage it? Whether it may not be of some use, to provoke and stir up the learned professors to explain a part of Mathematical Learning, which is acknowledged to be most profound, difficult, and obscure, and at the same time set forth by Philalethes and many others, as the greatest instance that has ever been given of the extent of humane abilities? Whether for the sake of a Great man’s discoveries, we must adopt his errours? Lastly, whether in an age wherein all other principles are canvassed with the utmost freedom, the principles of Fluxions are to be alone excepted?

 AN APPENDIX CONCERNING MR.WALTON’S VINDICATION OF SIR ISAAC NEWTON’S PRINCIPLES OF FLUXIONS [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

I . I HAD no sooner considered the performance of Philalethes , but Mr. Walton ’s Vindication of Fluxions was put into my hands. As this Dublin professor gleans after the Cantabrigian , only endeavouring to translate a few passages from Sir Isaac Newton ’s Principia , and enlarge on a hint or two of Philalethes , he deserves no particular notice. It may suffice to advertise the Reader, that the foregoing defence, contains a full and explicite answer to Mr. Walton , as he will find, if he thinks it worth his pains to read what this Gentleman hath written, and compare it therewith: Particularly with Sect. 18, 20, 30, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 43. It is not, I am sure, worth mine to repeat the same things, or confute the same notions twice over, in mere regard to a writer who hath copied even the manners of Philalethes , and whom in answering the other I have, if I am not much mistaken, sufficiently answered.

II. Mr. Walton touches on the same points that the other had touched upon before him. He pursues a hint which the other had given, [NOTE: Philalethes , .] about Sir Isaac ’s first Section concerning the Rationes primae et ultimae . He discreetly avoids, like the other, to say one syllable of second, third, or fourth Fluxions, and of divers other points mentioned in the Analyst, about all which I observe in him a most prudent and profound silence. And yet he very modestly gives his Reader to understand, that he is able to clear up all difficulties and objections, that have ever been made (P . 5). Mr. Walton in the beginning, like Philalethes , from a particular case makes a general inference, supposing that Infidelity to be imputed to Mathematicians in general, which I suppose only in the person to whom the Analyst was addressed, and certain other persons of the same mind with him. Whether this extraordinary way of reasoning be the cause or effect of his passion, I know not: But before I had got to the end of his Vindication, I ceased to be surprized at his Logic and his temper in the beginning. The double errour, which in the Analyst was plainly meant to belong to others, he with Philalethes (whose very oversight he adopts) supposeth to have been ascribed to Sir Isaac Newton (P . 36). And this writer also, as well as the Cantabrigian , must needs take upon him to explain the motive of my writing against Fluxions: which he gives out, with great assurance, to have been, because Sir Isaac Newton had presumed to interpose in Prophecies and Revelations, and to decide in religious affairs (P . 4) which is so far from being true, that, on the contrary, I have a high value for those learned remains of that Great Man, whose original and free Genius is an eternal reproach to that tribe of followers, who are always imitating, but never resemble him. This specimen of Mr. Walton ’s truth will be a warning to the Reader to use his own eyes, and in obscure points never to trust the Gentleman’s Candour, who dares to misrepresent the plainest.

III. I was thinking to have said no more concerning this Author’s performance, but lest he should imagine himself too much neglected, I entreat the Reader to have the patience to peruse it; and if he finds any one point of the doctrine of Fluxions cleared up, or any one objection in the Analyst answered, or so much as fairly stated, let him then make his compliments to the Author. But, if he can no more make sense of what this Gentleman has written than I can, he will need no answer to it. Nothing is easier, than for a man to translate or copy, or compose a plausible discourse of some pages in technical terms, whereby he shall make a shew of saying somewhat, although neither the Reader nor himself understand one Tittle of it. Whether this be the case of Mr. Walton , and whether he understands either Sir Isaac Newton , or me, or himself, (whatever I may think) I shall not take it upon me to say. But one thing I know, that many an unmeaning Speech passeth for significant by the mere assurance of the Speaker, till he cometh to be catechised upon it; and then the truth sheweth it self. This Vindicator, indeed, by his dissembling nine parts in ten of the difficulties proposed in the Analyst, sheweth no inclination to be catechised by me. But his Scholars have a right to be informed. I therefore, recommend it to them, not to be imposed on by hard words and magisterial assertions, but carefully to pry into his sense, and sift his meaning, and particularly to insist on a distinct answer to the following Questions.

IV. Let them ask him, whether he can conceive velocity without motion, or motion without extension, or extension without magnitude? If he answers that he can, let him teach them to do the same. If he cannot, let him be asked, how he reconciles the idea of a Fluxion which he gives (P . 13,) with common sense? Again, let him be asked, whether nothing be not the product of nothing multiplied by something? And if so, when the difference between the Gnomon and the sum of the rectangles [NOTE: See Vindication , .] vanisheth, whether the rectangles themselves do not also vanish? i.e. when ab is nothing, whether Ab + Ba be not also nothing? i.e. whether the momentum of AB be not nothing? Let him then be asked, what his momentums are good for, when they are thus brought to nothing? Again, I wish he were asked to explain the difference, between a magnitude infinitely small and a magnitude infinitely diminished. If he saith there is no difference: Then let him be farther asked, how he dares to explain the method of Fluxions, by the Ratio of magnitudes infinitely diminished (P . 9), when Sir Isaac Newton hath expressly excluded all consideration of quantities infinitely small? [NOTE: See his Introduction to the Quadratures. ] If this able vindicator should say that quantities infinitely diminished are nothing at all, and consequently that, according to him, the first and last Ratio ’s are proportions between nothings, let him be desired to make sense of this, or explain what he means by proportion between nothings . If he should say the ultimate proportions are the Ratio ’s of mere limits, then let him be asked how the limits of lines can be proportioned or divided? After all, who knows but this Gentleman, who hath already complained of me for an uncommon way of treating Mathematics and Mathematicians (P . 5), may (as well as the Cantabrigian ) cry out Spain and the Inquisition , when he finds himself thus closely pursued and beset with Interrogatories? That we may not, therefore seem too hard on an innocent man, who probably meant nothing, but was betray’d by following another into difficulties and straits that he was not aware of, I shall propose one single expedient, by which his Disciples (whom it most concerns) may soon satisfy themselves, whether this Vindicator really understands what he takes upon him to vindicate. It is in short, that they would ask him to explain the second, third or fourth Fluxions upon his Principles. Be this the Touchstone of his vindication. If he can do it, I shall own my self much mistaken: If he cannot, it will be evident that he was much mistaken in himself, when he presumed to defend Fluxions without so much as knowing what they are. So having put the merits of the cause on this issue, I leave him to be tried by his Scholars.

 Reasons for Not Replying to Mr. Walton’s Full Answer (1735) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

FIRST EDITION TEXT

REASONS For not Replying to Mr. WALTON’s FULL ANSWER IN A LETTER to P. T. P.

By the Author of the MINUTE PHILOSOPHER.

Ex Fumo Lucem.

DUBLIN: Printed by M. RHAMES, for R. GUNNE, Bookseller in Capel-street, M.DCCXXXV.

REASONS FOR NOT REPLYING TO MR. WALTON’S FULL ANSWER, &C.I. THERE are some Men that can neither give nor take an Answer, but writing merely for the sake of writing multiply words to no purpose. There are also certain careless Writers, that in defiance of common sense publish such things as, though they are not asham’d to utter, yet, other men may well be asham’d to answer. Whether there be any thing in Mr. Walton’s method of vindicating Fluxions, that might justify my taking no further notice of him on the abovementioned considerations, I leave you and every other Reader to judge. But those, Sir, are not the reasons I shall assign for not replying to Mr. Walton’s full Answer. The true reason is, that he seems at bottom a facetious man, who under the colour of an opponent writes on my side of the Question, and really believes no more than I do of Sir Isaac Newton’s Doctrine about Fluxions, which he exposes, contradicts, and confutes with great skill and humour, under the masque of a grave vindication.

II. AT first I consider’d him in another light, as one who had good reason for keeping to the beaten Track, who had been used to dictate, who had terms of art at will, but was indeed, at small trouble about putting them together, and perfectly easy about his Reader’s understanding them. It must be owned, in an Age of so much ludicrous humour, it is not every one can at first sight discern a Writer’s real design. But, be a man’s Assertions ever so strong in favour of a Doctrine, yet if his Reasonings are directly levelled against it, whatever Question there may be about the matter in Dispute, there can be none about the Intention of the Writer. Should a Person, so knowing and discreet as Mr. Walton, thwart and contradict Sir Isaac Newton under pretence of defending his Fluxions, and should he at every turn say such uncouth things of these same Fluxions, and place them in such odd lights, as must set all men in their Wits against them, could I hope for a better second in this Cause? or could there remain any doubt of his being a disguised Freethinker in Mathematics, who defended Fluxions just as a certain Freethinker in Religion did the Rights of the Christian Church.

III. MR. Walton indeed after his free manner calls my Analyst a Libel. But this ingenious Gentleman well knows a bad Vindication is the bitterest Libel. Had you a mind, Sir, to betray and ridicule any Cause under the Notion of vindicating it, would you not think it the right way to be very strong and dogmatical in the Affirmative, and very weak and puzzled in the argumentative Parts of your Performance? To utter Contradictions and Paradoxes without Remorse, and to be at no pains about reconciling or explaining them? And with great good humour to be at perpetual variance with yourself and the Author you pretend to vindicate? How successfully Mr. Walton hath practised these Arts, and how much to the honour of the great Client he would seem to take under his protection, I shall particularly examine throughout every Article of his full Answer.

IV. FIRST then, saith Mr. Walton,

I am to be asked, whether I can conceive Velocity without Motion, or Motion without Extension, or Extension without Magnitude?

To which he answereth in positive Terms, that he can conceive Velocity and Motion in a Point (P. 7). And to make out this, he undertakes to demonstrate,

that if a thing be moved by an Agent operating continually with the same force, the Velocity will not be the same in any two different Points of the described Space. But that it must vary upon the least change of Space.

Now admitting thus much to be demonstrated, yet I am still at a loss to perceive, how Mr. Walton’s Conclusion will follow, to wit,

that I am greatly mistaken in imagining there can be no Motion, no Velocity in a Point of Space

(P. 10). Pray, Sir, consider his Reasoning. The same Velocity cannot be in two Points of Space; therefore Velocity can be in a Point of Space. Would it not be just as good Reasoning to say, the same man cannot be in two Nutshels; therefore a Man can be in a Nutshel? Again, Velocity must vary upon the least change of Space; therefore there may be Velocity without Space. Make Sense of this if you can. What have these Consequences to do with their Premises? Who but Mr. Walton could have inferred them? Or how could even he have inferred them, had it not been in jest.

V. SUPPOSE the Center of a falling Body to describe a Line, divide the time of its Fall into equal Parts, for instance into minutes. The Spaces described in those equal parts of Time will be unequal. That is, from whatsoever Points of the described Line you measure a minute’s descent, you will still find it a different Space. This is true. But how or why from this plain truth a Man should infer, that Motion can be conceived in a Point, is to me as obscure as any the most obscure mysteries that occur in this profound Author. Let the Reader make the best of it. For my Part, I can as easily conceive Mr. Walton should walk without stirring, as I can his Idea of Motion without Space. After all, the Question was not whether Motion could be proved to exist in a Point, but only whether it could be conceived in a Point. For, as to the proof of things impossible, some men have a way of proving that may equally prove any thing. But I much question whether any Reader of common Sense will undertake to conceive what this pleasant Man at Inference undertakes to prove.

VI. IF Mr. Walton really meant to defend the Author of the Fluxionary Method, would he not have done it in a Way consistent with this illustrious Author’s own Principles? Let us now see what may be Sir Isaac’s Notion, about this matter. He distinguisheth two sorts of motion, absolute and relative. The former he defineth to be a Translation from absolute place to absolute place, the latter from one relative place to another. Mr. Walton’s is plainly neither of these sorts of Motion, but some third kind, which what it is, I am at a loss to comprehend. But I can clearly comprehend that, if we admit Motion without Space, then Sir Isaac Newton’s Account of it must be wrong: For place by which he defines Motion is, according to him, a part of Space. And if so, then this notable Defender hath cut out new Work for himself to defend and explain. But about this, if I mistake not, he will be very easy. For, as I said before, he seems at bottom a back Friend to that great Man; which Opinion you will see further confirmed in the Sequel.

VII. I SHALL no more ask Mr. Walton to explain any thing. For I can honestly say, the more he explains, the more I am puzzled. But I will ask his Readers to explain, by what Art a Man may conceive Motion without Space. And supposing this to be done, in the second place to explain, how it consists with Sir Isaac Newton’s Account of Motion. Is it not evident, that Mr. Walton hath deserted from his old Master, and been at some pains to expose him, while he defends one Part of his Principles by overturning another? Let any Reader tell me, what Mr. Walton means by Motion, or if he can guess, what this third kind is, which is neither absolute nor relative, which exists in a Point, which may be conceiv’d without Space. This learned Professor saith,

I have no clear Conception of the Principles of Motion

(P. 24). And in another place (P. 7.) he saith,

I might have conceived Velocity in a Point, if I had understood and considered the nature of Motion.

I believe I am not alone in not understanding his Principles. For myself, I freely confess the Case to be desperate. I neither understand them, nor have any hopes of being ever able to understand them.

VIII. BEING now satisfied, that Mr. Walton’s aim is not to clear up or defend Sir Isaac’s Principles, but rather to contradict and expose them, you will not, I suppose, think it strange, if instead of putting Questions to this intrepid Answerer, who is never at a loss, how often soever his Readers may, I entreat you, or any other Man of plain Sense, to read the following Passage cited from the thirty first Section of the Analyst, and then try to apply Mr. Walton’s Answer to it: Whereby you will clearly perceive what a vein of Raillery that Gentleman is Master of.

Velocity necessarily implies both Time and Space, and cannot be conceived without them. And if the Velocities of nascent and evanescent Quantities, i. e. abstracted from time and space, may not be comprehended, how can we comprehend and demonstrate their Proportions? or consider their rationes primae & ultimae. For to consider the Proportion or Ratio of Things implieth that such Things have Magnitude: That such their Magnitudes may be measured, and their Relations to each other known. But, as there is no measure of Velocity except Time and Space, the proportion of Velocities being only compounded of the direct proportion of the Spaces and the reciprocal Proportion of the Times; doth it not follow, that to talk of investigating, obtaining, and considering the proportions of Velocities, exclusively of Time and Space, is to talk unintelligibly?

Apply now, as I said, Mr. Walton’s full Answer and you will soon find how fully you are enlightened about the Nature of Fluxions.

IX. IN the following Article of Mr. Walton’s full Answer, he saith divers curious things, which, being derived from this same Principle, that motion may be conceived in a point, are altogether as incomprehensible as the Origine from whence they flow. It is obvious and natural to suppose Ab and Ba to be Rectangles produced from finite lines multiplied by Increments. Mr. Walton indeed supposeth that when the Increments vanish or become nothing, the Velocities remain, which being multiplied by finite lines produce those Rectangles (P. 13.) But admitting the Velocities to remain, yet how can any one conceive a Rectangular Surface to be produced from a line multiplied by Velocity, otherwise than by supposing such line multiplied by a line or Increment, which shall be exponent of or proportional to such Velocity? You may try to conceive it otherwise. I must own I cannot. Is not the Increment of a Rectangle it self a Rectangle? must not then Ab and Ba be Rectangles? and must not the Coefficients or Sides of Rectangles be lines? consequently are not b and a lines or (which is the same thing) Increments of lines? these Increments may indeed be considered as proportional to and exponents of Velocity. But exclusive of such exponents to talk of Rectangles under lines and velocities is, I conceive, to talk unintelligibly. And yet this is what Mr. Walton doth, when he maketh b and a in the Rectangles Ab and Ba to denote mere Velocities.

X. As to the Question, whether nothing be not the Product of nothing multiplied by something, Mr. Walton is pleased to answer in the affirmative. And nevertheless when ab is nothing, that is, when a and b are nothing, he denies that Ab + Ba is nothing. This is one of these many Inconsistencies which I leave the Reader to reconcile. But, saith Mr. Walton, the Sides of the given Rectangle still remain, which two Sides according to him must form the Increment of the flowing Rectangle. But in this he directly contradicts Sir Isaac Newton, who asserts that Ab + Ba and not A + B is the Increment of the Rectangle AB. And, indeed, how is it possible, a line should be the Increment of a Surface? Laterum Incrementis totis a et b generatur Rectanguli incrementum Ab + Ba are the Words of Sir Isaac. which words seem utterly inconsistent with Mr. Walton’s Doctrine. But, no wonder that Gentleman should not agree with Sir Isaac, since he cannot agree even with himself; but contradicts what he saith elsewhere as the Reader may see, even before he gets to the End of that same Section, wherein he hath told us that

the Gnomon and the Sum of the two Rectangles are turned into those two Sides by a retroverted Motion

(P. 11 & 12). which proposition if you or any other Person shall try to make Sense of, you may possibly be convinced, that this profound Author is as much at variance with common Sense, as he is with himself and Sir Isaac Newton.

XI. MR. Walton in the ninth Page of his Vindication, in order to explain the Nature of Fluxions, saith that

to obtain the last ratio of synchronal Increments, the magnitude of those Increments must be infinitely diminished.

Notwithstanding which, in the twenty third Page of his full Answer he chargeth me as greatly mistaken, in supposing that he explained the Doctrine of Fluxions by the ratio of Magnitudes infinitely diminished. It is an easy matter, for any Author to write so, as to betray his Readers into Mistakes about his meaning. But then it is not easy to conceive, what right he hath to upbraid them with such their Mistakes. If I have mistaken his Sense, let any one judge if he did not fairly lead me into the Mistake. When a Man puzzleth his Reader, saith and unsaith, useth ambiguous Terms and obscure Terms, and putteth them together in so perverse a Manner, that it is odds you can make out no sense at all, or if any, a wrong sense, pray who is in fault but the Writer himself? let any one consider Mr. Walton’s own words, and then say whether I am not justified in making this Remark.

XII. IN the twentieth Page of his full Answer Mr. Walton tells us, that

Fluxions are measured by the first or last proportions of isochronal Increments generated or destroyed by motion.

A little after he saith these Ratios subsist when isochronal Increments have no Magnitude. Now, I would fain know whether the isochronal Increments themselves subsist when they have no Magnitude? whether by isochronal Increments we are not to understand Increments generated in equal times? whether there can be an Increment where there is no increase, or increase where there is no Magnitude? whether if Magnitudes are not generated in those equal times, what else is generated therein, or what else is it that Mr. Walton calls isochronal? I ask the Reader these Questions. I dare not ask Mr. Walton. For, as I hinted before, the Subject grows still more obscure in proportion as this able Writer attempts to illustrate it.

XIII. We are told (P. 22.)

that the first or last ratio of the isochronal Spaces hath a real existence, forasmuch as it is equal to the ratio of the two motions of two points; which motions, subsisting when the isochronal Spaces are nothing; preserve the existence of the first or last ratio of these Spaces, or keep it from being a ratio of nothings.

In order to assist your understanding, it must not be omitted that the said two points are supposed to exist at the same time in one point, and to be moved different ways without stirring from that point. Mr. Walton hath the Conscience to call this Riddle a full and clear Answer: to make sense of which you must suppose it one of his Ironies. In the next and last Article of his performance, you still find him proceed in the same Vein of Raillery upon Fluxions.

XIV. It will be allowed, that who ever seriously undertook to explain the second, third, and fourth Fluxions of Sir Isaac Newton, would have done it in a way agreeable to that great Man’s own Doctrine. What Sir Isaac’s precise notion is I will not petend to say. And yet I will venture to say, it is something that cannot be explained by the three dimensions of a Cube I frankly own, I do not understand Sir Isaac’s Doctrine so far as to frame a positive Idea of his Fluxions. I have, nevertheless, a negative conception thereof, so far as to see that Mr. Walton is in jest, or (if in earnest) that he understands it no more than I do.

XV. Sir Isaac tells us that he considers indeterminate quantities as flowing, or in other words, as increasing or decreasing by a perpetual motion. Which quantities he denotes by the latter Letters of the Alphabet, and their Fluxions or Celerities of increasing by the same Letters pointed over head, and the Fluxions of Fluxions or second Fluxions, i. e. the Mutations more or less swift of the first Celerities by the same Letters pointed with double points; and the Mutations of those Mutations of the first Mutations or Fluxions or Celerities of increasing, which he calls Fluxions of Fluxions of Fluxions or third Fluxions, by three points; the fourth Fluxions by four points; the fifth by five; and so on . Sir Isaac, you see, speaks of quantity in general. And in the Analyst the Doctrine is exemplified and the Case is put in lines. Now in lines, where there is only one Dimension, how are we enabled to conceive second, third or fourth Fluxions by conceiving the generation of three dimensions in a Cube? Let any one but read what Sir Isaac Newton or what I have said, and then apply what Mr. Walton hath written about the three dimensions of a Cube, and see whether the difficulties are solved or the Doctrine made one whit the clearer by this Explication.

XVI. That you may the better judge of the merit of this Part of Mr. Walton’s performance, I shall beg leave to set down a Passage or two from the Analyst.

As it is impossible to conceive Velocity without time or space, without either finite length or finite duration, it must seem above the Power of Man to comprehend even the first Fluxions. And if the first are incomprehensible, what shall we say of the second and third Fluxions, &c. He who can conceive the beginning of a beginning or the end of an end, somewhat before the first or after the last, may perhaps be sharpsighted enough to conceive these things. But most Men, I believe, will find it impossible to understand them in any sense whatsoever. One would think that Men could not speak too exactly on so nice a subject. And yet we may often observe, that the exponents of Fluxions or notes representing Fluxions are confounded with the Fluxions themselves. Is not this the Case, when just after the Fluxions of flowing quantities, were said to be celerities of their increasing and the second Fluxions to be the Mutations of the first Fluxions or celerities, we are told that 〈 math 〉 represents a series of quantities whereof each subsequent quantity is the Fluxion of the preceding; and each foregoing is a fluent quantity having the following one for it’s Fluxion. Divers series of quantities and expressions Geometrical and Algebraical may be easily conceived in lines, in surfaces, in species, to be continued without end or limit. But it will not be found so easy to conceive a series, either of mere Velocities or of mere nascent Increments, distinct therefrom and corresponding thereunto.

Compare what is here said with Mr. Walton’s Genesis of a Cube, and you will then clearly see how far this answerer is from explaining the nature of second, third and fourth Fluxions: And how justly I might repay that Gentleman in kind, and tell him in his own language, that all his Skill is vain and impertinent, (vind. ).

XVII. BUT it doth not become me to find fault with this learned Professor, who at bottom militates on my Side, and in this very Section, makes it his business directly to overthrow Sir Isaac Newton’s Doctrine. For he saith in plain Terms, that there can be no fourth Fluxion of a Cube (P. 25.) that is, there can be no second Fluxion of a line, and a fortiori, no third, fourth, fifth, &c. Insomuch that with one single dash of his Pen Mr. Walton destroys, to the great relief of the learned World, an indefinite rank of Fluxions of different Orders that might have reached from Pole to Pole. I had distinctly pointed out the difficulties in several Parts both of my Analyst and Defence, and I leave you to judge whether he explains or even attempts to explain one of them. Instead thereof he tells us of the true Dimension of a Cube generated by Motion: Whence he takes occasion, as hath been observed, to explode Sir Isaac’s own Doctrine, which is utterly inconsistent with Mr. Walton’s And can you now doubt the real design of this egregious Vindicator.

XVIII. BEFORE ever Sir Isaac Newton thought of his Fluxions, every body knew there were three Dimensions in a Cube, and that a Solid might be generated by the motion of a Surface, a Surface by the motion of a Line, and a Line by the motion of a Point. And this in effect is all we know from Mr. Walton’s Explication. As for his dwelling so minutely on the Genesis of the solid Parts of a Cube, a thing so foreign from the Purpose, the only rational Account I can give of it is, that Mr. Walton, by puzzling the Imagination of his vulgar Readers, hoped the better to disguise his betraying the Doctrine of his great Client, which to a discerning eye he manifestly gives up; and instead thereof humourously substitutes, what all the World knew before Sir Isaac was born, to wit, the three Dimensions of a Cube and the genesis thereof by Motion.

XIX. UPON the whole I appeal to you and every intelligent Reader, whether this thing, which Walton is pleased ironically to call a full Answer, doth not carry throughout a fly Insinuation, that the profound Science of Fluxions cannot be maintained but by the help of most unintelligible Paradoxes and Inconsistencies. So far, indeed, as Affirmations go he sheweth himself an able Support of Sir Isaac Newton. But then in his Reasonings he drops that great man upon the most important Points, to wit, his Doctrine of Motion and his Doctrine of Fluxions, not regarding how far the demonstration of his famous Principia is interested therein. To convince you still more and more of the Truth hereof, do but reflect a little on Mr. Walton’s Conduct. Can you think it probable, that so learned and clear-headed a Writer would have laid down such a direct repugnancy to common Sense, as his Idea of Motion in a Point, for the ground work of his Explanation, had it been his real Intention to explain? Or can you suppose, he would have been absolutely silent, on so many Points urged home, both in the Analyst and Defence, which it concerned a Vindicator of Sir Isaac not to have overlooked? Can you imagine, that if he meant seriously to defend the Doctrine of Fluxions, he would have contented himself with barely asserting that

Sir Isaac Newton in the Introduction to his Quadrature of Curves, in the second Lemma of the second Book, and in the Scholium to the first Section of the first Book of his Principles of Philosophy, hath delivered his Doctrine of Fluxions in so clear and distinct a manner, without the least Inconsistency in terms or Arguments, that one would have thought it impossible for any Person not to have understood him

(P. 30).

XX. IS it possible, I say, that Mr. Walton could in earnest hope we should take his bare Word, as so much more credible that Sir Isaac’s, and not rather have endeavoured to answer the Questions and reconcile the Difficulties set forth in my Defence of Free-thinking, for instance, in Sect xxxvi. Wherein I intreat my Antagonist to explain

whether Sir Isaac’s Momentum be a finite Quantity or an Infinitesimal or a mere Limit, adding, if you say a finite Quantity, be pleased to reconcile this with what he saith in the Scholium of the second Lemma of the first Section of the first Book of his Principles: Cave intelligas quantitates magnitudine determinatas, sed cogita semper diminuendas sine limite. If you say an Infinitesimal: Reconcile this with what is said in the Introduction to his Quadratures: Volui ostendere quod in methodo Fluxionum non opus sit figuras infinite parvas in Geometriam introducere. If you should say it is a mere Limit, be pleased to reconcile this with what we find in the first Case of the second Lemma in the second Book of his Principles: Ubi de lateribus A & B deerant momentorum dimidia, &c. where the Moments are supposed to be divided.

I shall scarce think it worth my while to bestow a serious thought on any Writer who shall pretend to maintain Sir Isaac’s Doctrine, and yet leave this Passage without a Reply. And the Reader, I believe, will think with me that, in answer to difficulties distinctly proposed and insisted on, to offer nothing but a magisterial Assertion is a mere grimace of one who made merry with Fluxions, under the Notion of defending them. And he will be further confirmed in this way of thinking, when he observes that Mr. Walton hath not said one Syllable, in Reply to those several Sections of my Defence, which I had particularly referred to, as containing a full answer to his Vindication. But it is no wonder if, with Sir Isaac’s Doctrine, he should drop also his own Arguments in favour thereof.

XXI. I HAVE been at the Pains once for all to write this short Comment on Mr. Walton, as the only way I could think of for making him intelligible, which will also serve as a Key to his future Writings on this Subject. And I was the rather inclined to take this trouble, because it seemeth to me, there is no part of Learning that wants to be clear’d up more than this same Doctrine of Fluxions, which hath hitherto walked about in a mist to the Stupefaction of the Literati of the present Age. To conclude, I accept this Professor’s Recantation, nor am at all displeased at the ingenious method he takes to disguise it. Some zealous Fluxionist may perhaps answer him.

FINIS .

 The Querist (1737) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

CONTAINING SEVERAL QUERIES PROPOSED TO THE CONSIDERATION OF THE PUBLIC

FIRST EDITION TEXT

 CONTENTSPart I

Part II

 Part III

 

 Part I [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

Q UERY 1.

Whether there ever was, is, or will be, an industrious nation poor, or an idle rich?

2. Qu. Whether a people can be called poor, where the common sort are well fed, clothed, and lodged?

3. Qu. Whether the drift and aim of every wise State should not be, to encourage industry in its members? And whether those who employ neither heads nor hands for the common benefit deserve not to be expelled like drones out of a well-governed State?

4. Qu. Whether the four elements, and man’s labour therein, be not the true source of wealth?

5. Qu. Whether money be not only so far useful, as it stirreth up industry, enabling men mutually to participate the fruits of each other’s labour?

6. Qu. Whether any other means, equally conducing to excite and circulate the industry of mankind, may not be as useful as money.

7. Qu. Whether the real end and aim of men be not power? And whether he who could have everything else at his wish or will would value money?

8. Qu. Whether the public aim in every well-govern’d State be not that each member, according to his just pretensions and industry, should have power?

9. Qu. Whether power be not referred to action; and whether action doth not follow appetite or will?

10. Qu. Whether fashion doth not create appetites; and whether the prevailing will of a nation is not the fashion?

11. Qu. Whether the current of industry and commerce be not determined by this prevailing will?

12. Qu. Whether it be not owing to custom that the fashions are agreeable?

13. Qu. Whether it may not concern the wisdom of the legislature to interpose in the making of fashions; and not leave an affair of so great influence to the management of women and fops, tailors and vintners?

14. Qu. Whether reasonable fashions are a greater restraint on freedom than those which are unreasonable?

15. Qu. Whether a general good taste in a people would not greatly conduce to their thriving? And whether an uneducated gentry be not the greatest of national evils?

16. Qu. Whether customs and fashions do not supply the place of reason in the vulgar of all ranks? Whether, therefore, it doth not very much import that they should be wisely framed?

17. Qu. Whether the imitating those neighbours in our fashions, to whom we bear no likeness in our circumstances, be not one cause of distress to this nation?

18. Qu. Whether frugal fashions in the upper rank, and comfortable living in the lower, be not the means to multiply inhabitants?

19. Qu. Whether the bulk of our Irish natives are not kept from thriving, by that cynical content in dirt and beggary which they possess to a degree beyond any other people in Christendom?

20. Qu. Whether the creating of wants be not the likeliest way to produce industry in a people? And whether, if our peasants were accustomed to eat beef and wear shoes, they would not be more industrious?

21. Qu. Whether other things being given, as climate, soil, etc., the wealth be not proportioned to the industry, and this to the circulation of credit, be the credit circulated or transferred by what marks or tokens soever?

22. Qu. Whether, therefore, less money swiftly circulating, be not, in effect, equivalent to more money slowly circulating? Or, whether, if the circulation be reciprocally as the quantity of coin, the nation can be a loser?

23. Qu. Whether money is to be considered as having an intrinsic value, or as being a commodity, a standard, a measure, or a pledge, as is variously suggested by writers? And whether the true idea of money, as such, be not altogether that of a ticket or counter?

24. Qu. Whether the value or price of things be not a compounded proportion, directly as the demand, and reciprocally as the plenty?

25. Qu. Whether the terms crown, livre, pound sterling, etc., are not to be considered as exponents or denominations of such proportion? And whether gold, silver, and paper are not tickets or counters for reckoning, recording, and transferring thereof?

26. Qu. Whether the denominations being retained, although the bullion were gone, things might not nevertheless be rated, bought, and sold, industry promoted, and a circulation of commerce maintained?

27. Qu. Whether an equal raising of all sorts of gold, silver, and copper coin can have any effect in bringing money into the kingdom? And whether altering the proportions between the kingdom several sorts can have any other effect but multiplying one kind and lessening another, without any increase of the sum total?

28. Qu. Whether arbitrary changing the denomination of coin be not a public cheat?

29. Qu. Whether, nevertheless, the damage would be very considerable, if by degrees our money were brought back to the English value there to rest for ever?

30. Qu. Whether the English crown did not formerly pass with us for six shillings? And what inconvenience ensued to the public upon its reduction to the present value, and whether what hath been may not be?

31. Qu. What makes a wealthy people? Whether mines of gold and silver are capable of doing this? And whether the negroes, amidst the gold sands of Afric, are not poor and destitute?

32. Qu. Whether there be any vertue in gold or silver, other than as they set people at work, or create industry?

33. Qu. Whether it be not the opinion or will of the people, exciting them to industry, that truly enricheth a nation? And whether this doth not principally depend on the means for counting, transferring, and preserving power, that is, property of all kinds?

34. Qu. Whether if there was no silver or gold in the kingdom, our trade might not, nevertheless, supply bills of exchange, sufficient to answer the demands of absentees in England or elsewhere?

35. Qu. Whether current bank notes may not be deemed money? And whether they are not actually the greater part of the money of this kingdom?

36. Qu. Provided the wheels move, whether it is not the same thing, as to the effect of the machine, be this done by the force of wind, or water, or animals?

37. Qu. Whether power to command the industry of others be not real wealth? And whether money be not in truth tickets or tokens for conveying and recording such power, and whether it be of great consequence what materials the tickets are made of?

38. Qu. Whether trade, either foreign or domestic, be in truth any more than this commerce of industry?

39. Qu. Whether to promote, transfer, and secure this commerce, and this property in human labour, or, in other words, this power, be not the sole means of enriching a people, and how far this may be done independently of gold and silver?

40. Qu. Whether it were not wrong to suppose land itself to be wealth? And whether the industry of the people is not first to be consider’d, as that which constitutes wealth, which makes even land and silver to be wealth, neither of which would have, any value but as means and motives to industry?

41. Qu. Whether in the wastes of America a man might not possess twenty miles square of land, and yet want his dinner, or a coat to his back?

42. Qu. Whether a fertile land, and the industry of its inhabitants, would not prove inexhaustible funds of real wealth, be the counters for conveying and recording thereof what you will, paper, gold, or silver?

43. Qu. Whether a single hint be sufficient to overcome a prejudice? And whether even obvious truths will not sometimes bear repeating?

44. Qu. Whether, if human labour be the true source of wealth, it doth not follow that idleness should of all things be discouraged in a wise State?

45. Qu. Whether even gold or silver, if they should lessen the industry of its inhabitants, would not be ruinous to a country? And whether Spain be not an instance of this?

46. Qu. Whether the opinion of men, and their industry consequent thereupon, be not the true wealth of Holland and not the silver supposed to be deposited in the bank at Amsterdam?

47. Qu. Whether there is in truth any such treasure lying dead? And whether it be of great consequence to the public that it should be real rather than notional?

48. Qu. Whether in order to understand the true nature of wealth and commerce, it would not be right to consider a ship’s crew cast upon a desert island, and by degrees forming themselves to business and civil life, while industry begot credit, and credit moved to industry?

49. Qu. Whether such men would not all set themselves to work? Whether they would not subsist by the mutual participation of each other’s industry? Whether, when one man had in his way procured more than he could consume, he would not exchange his superfluities to supply his wants? Whether this must not produce credit? Whether, to facilitate these conveyances, to record and circulate this credit, they would not soon agree on certain tallies, tokens, tickets, or counters?

50. Qu. Whether reflection in the better sort might not soon remedy our evils? And whether our real defect be not a wrong way of thinking?

51. Qu. Whether it would not be an unhappy turn in our gentlemen, if they should take more thought to create an interest to themselves in this or that county, or borough, than to promote the real interest of their country?

52. Qu. Whether it be not a bull to call that making an interest, whereby a man spendeth much and gaineth nothing?

53. Qu. Whether if a man builds a house he doth not in the first place provide a plan which governs his work? And shall the pubic act without an end, a view, a plan?

54. Qu. Whether by how much the less particular folk think for themselves, the public be not so much the more obliged to think for them?

55. Qu. Whether cunning be not one thing and good sense another? and whether a cunning tradesman doth not stand in his own light?

56. Qu. Whether small gains be not the way to great profit? And if our tradesmen are beggars, whether they may not thank themselves for it?

57. Qu. Whether some way might not be found for making criminals useful in public works, instead of sending them either to America, or to the other world?

58. Qu. Whether we may not, as well as other nations, contrive employment for them? And whether servitude, chains, and hard labour, for a term of years, would not be a more discouraging as well as a more adequate punishment for felons than even death itself?

59. Qu. Whether there are not such things in Holland as bettering houses for bringing young gentlemen to order? And whether such an institution would be useless among us?

60. Qu. Whether it be true that the poor in Holland have no resource but their own labour, and yet there are no beggars in their streets?

61. Qu. Whether he whose luxury consumeth foreign products, and whose industry produceth nothing domestic to exchange for them, is not so far forth injurious to his country?

62. Qu. Whether, consequently, the fine gentlemen, whose employment is only to dress, drink, and play, be not a pubic nuisance?

63. Qu. Whether necessity is not to be hearkened to before convenience, and convenience before luxury?

64. Qu. Whether to provide plentifully for the poor be not feeding the root, the substance whereof will shoot upwards into the branches, and cause the top to flourish?

65. Qu. Whether there be any instance of a State wherein the people, living neatly and plentifully, did not aspire to wealth?

66. Qu. Whether nastiness and beggary do not, on the contrary, extinguish all such ambition, making men listless, hopeless, and slothful?

67. Qu. Whether a country inhabited by people well fed, clothed and lodged would not become every day more populous? And whether a numerous stock of people in such circumstances would? and how far the product of not constitute a flourishing nation; our own country may suffice for the compassing of this end?

68. Qu. Whether a people who had provided themselves with the necessaries of life in good plenty would not soon extend their industry to new arts and new branches of commerce?

69. Qu. Whether those same manufactures which England imports from other countries may not be admitted from Ireland? And, if so, whether lace, carpets, and tapestry, three considerable articles of English importation, might not find encouragement in Ireland? And whether an academy for design might not greatly conduce to the perfecting those manufactures among us?

70. Qu. Whether France and Flanders could have drawn so much money from England for figured silks, lace, and tapestry, if they had not had academies for designing?

71. Qu. Whether, when a room was once prepared, and models in plaster of Paris, the annual expense of such an academy need stand the pubic in above two hundred pounds a year?

72. Qu. Whether our linen-manufacture would not find the benefit of this institution? And whether there be anything that makes us fall short of the Dutch in damasks, diapers, and printed linen, but our ignorance in design?

73. Qu. Whether those specimens of our own manufacture, hung up in a certain public place, do not sufficiently declare such our ignorance? and whether for the honour of the nation they ought not to be removed?

74. Qu. Whether those who may slight this affair as notional have sufficiently considered the extensive use of the art of design, and its influence in most trades and manufactures, wherein the forms of things are often more regarded than the materials?

75. Qu. Whether there be any art sooner learned than that of making carpets? And whether our women, with little time and pains, may not make more beautiful carpets than those imported from Turkey? And whether this branch of the woollen manufacture be not open to us?

76. Qu. Whether human industry can produce, from such cheap materials, a manufacture of so great value by any other art as by those of sculpture and painting?

77. Qu. Whether pictures and statues are not in fact so much treasure? And whether Rome and Florence would not be poor towns without them?

78. Qu. Whether they do not bring ready money as well as jewels? Whether in Italy debts are not paid, and children portioned with them, as with gold and silver?

79. Qu. Whether it would not be more prudent, to strike out and exert ourselves in permitted branches of trade, than to fold our hands, and repine that we are not allowed the woollen?

80. Qu. Whether it be true that two millions are yearly expended by England in foreign lace and linen?

81. Qu. Whether immense sums are not drawn yearly into the Northern countries, for supplying the British navy with hempen manufactures?

82. Qu. Whether there be anything more profitable than hemp? And whether there should not be great premiums for encouraging our hempen trade? What advantages may not Great Britain make of a country where land and labour are so cheap?

83. Qu. Whether Ireland alone might not raise hemp sufficient for the British navy? And whether it would not be vain to expect this from the British Colonies in America, where hands are so scarce, and labour so excessively dear?

84. Qu. Whether, if our own people want will or capacity for such an attempt, it might not be worth while for some undertaking spirits in England to make settlements, and raise hemp in the counties of Clare and Limerick, than which, perhaps, there is not fitter land in the world for that purpose? And whether both nations would not find their advantage therein?

85. Qu. Whether if all the idle hands in this kingdom were employed on hemp and flax, we might not find sufficient vent for these manufactures?

86. Qu. How far it may be in our own power to better our affairs, without interfering with our neighbours?

87. Qu. Whether the prohibition of our woollen trade ought not naturally to put us on other methods which give no jealousy?

88. Qu. Whether paper be not a valuable article of commerce? And whether it be not true that one single bookseller in London yearly expended above four thousand pounds in that foreign commodity?

89. Qu. How it comes to pass that the Venetians and Genoese, who wear so much less linen, and so much worse than we do, should yet make very good paper, and in great quantity, while we make very little?

90. Qu. How long it will be before my countrymen find out that it is worth while to spend a penny in order to get a groat?

91. Qu. If all the land were tilled that is fit for tillage, and all that sowed with hemp and flax that is fit for raising them, whether we should have much sheep-walk beyond what was sufficient to supply the necessities of the kingdom?

92. Qu. Whether other countries have not flourished without the woollen trade?

93. Qu. Whether it be not a sure sign or effect of a country’s inhabitants? And, thriving, to see it well cultivated and full of; if so, whether a great quantity of sheep-walk be not ruinous to a country, rendering it waste and thinly inhabited?

94. Qu. Whether the employing so much of our land under sheep be not in fact an Irish blunder?

95. Qu. Whether our hankering after our woollen trade be not the true and only reason which hath created a jealousy in England towards Ireland? And whether anything can hurt us more than such jealousy?

96. Qu. Whether it be not the true interest of both nations to become one people? And whether either be sufficiently apprised of this?

97. Qu. Whether the upper part of this people are not truly English, by blood, language, religion, manners, inclination, and interest?

98. Qu. Whether we are not as much Englishmen as the children of old Romans, born in Britain, were still Romans?

99. Qu. Whether it be not our true interest not to interfere with them; and, in every other case, whether it be not their true interest to befriend us?

100. Qu. Whether a mint in Ireland might not be of great convenience to the kingdom; and whether it could be attended with any possible inconvenience to Great Britain? And whether there were not mints in Naples and Sicily, when those kingdoms were provinces to Spain or the house of Austria?

101. Qu. Whether anything can be more ridiculous than for the north of Ireland to be jealous of a linen manufacturer in the south?

102. Qu. Whether the county of Tipperary be not much better land than the county of Armagh; and yet whether the latter is not much better improved and inhabited than the former?

103. Qu. Whether every landlord in the kingdom doth not know the cause of this? And yet how few are the better for such their knowledge?

104. Qu. Whether large farms under few hands, or small ones under many, are likely to be made most of? And whether flax and tillage do not naturally multiply hands, and divide land into small holdings, and well-improved?

105. Qu. Whether, as our exports are lessened, we ought not to lessen our imports? And whether these will not be lessened as our demands, and these as our wants, and these as our customs or fashions? Of how great consequence therefore are fashions to the public?

106. Qu. Whether it would not be more reasonable to mend our state than to complain of it; and how far this may be in our own power?

107. Qu. What the nation gains by those who live in Ireland upon the produce of foreign Countries?

108. Qu. How far the vanity of our ladies in dressing, and of our gentlemen in drinking, contributes to the general misery of the people?

109. Qu. Whether nations, as wise and opulent as ours, have not made sumptuary laws; and what hinders us from doing the same?

110. Qu. Whether those who drink foreign liquors, and deck themselves and their families with foreign ornaments, are not so far forth to be reckoned absentees?

111. Qu. Whether, as our trade is limited, we ought not to limit our expenses; and whether this be not the natural and obvious remedy?

112. Qu. Whether the dirt, and famine, and nakedness of the bulk of our people might not be remedied, even although we had no foreign trade? And whether this should not be our first care; and whether, if this were once provided for, the conveniences of the rich would not soon follow?

113. Qu. Whether comfortable living doth not produce wants, and wants industry, and industry wealth?

114. Qu. Whether there is not a great difference between Holland and Ireland? And whether foreign commerce, without which the one could not subsist, be so necessary for the other?

115. Qu. Might we not put a hand to the plough, or the spade, although we had no foreign commerce?

116. Qu. Whether the exigencies of nature are not to be answered by industry on our own soil? And how far the conveniences and comforts of life may be procured by a domestic commerce between the several parts of this kingdom?

117. Qu. Whether the women may not sew, spin, weave, embroider sufficiently for the embellishment of their persons, and even enough to raise envy in each other, without being beholden to foreign countries?

118. Qu. Suppose the bulk of our inhabitants had shoes to their feet, clothes to their backs, and beef in their bellies, might not such a state be eligible for the public, even though the squires were condemned to drink ale and cider?

119. Qu. Whether, if drunkenness be a necessary evil, men may not as well drink the growth of their own country?

120. Qu. Whether a nation within itself might not have real wealth, sufficient to give its inhabitants power and distinction, without the help of gold and silver?

121. Qu. Whether, if the arts of sculpture and painting were encouraged among us, we might not furnish our houses in a much nobler manner with our own manufactures?

122. Qu. Whether we have not, or may not have, all the necessary materials for building at home?

123. Qu. Whether tiles and plaster may not supply the place of Norway fir for flooring and wainscot?

124. Qu. Whether plaster be not warmer, as well as more secure, than deal? And whether a modern fashionable house, lined with fir, daubed over with oil and paint, be not like a fire-ship, ready to be lighted up by all accidents?

125. Qu. Whether larger houses, better built and furnished, a greater train of servants, the difference with regard to equipage and table between finer and coarser, more and less elegant, may not be sufficient to feed a reasonable share of vanity, or support all proper distinctions? And whether all these may not be procured by domestic industry out of the four elements, without ransacking the four quarters of the globe?

126. Qu. Whether anything is a nobler ornament, in the eye of the world, than an Italian palace, that is, stone and mortar skilfully put together, and adorned with sculpture and painting; and whether this may not be compassed without foreign trade?

127. Qu. Whether an expense in gardens and plantations would not be an elegant distinction for the rich, a domestic magnificence employing many hands within, and drawing nothing from abroad?

128. Qu. Whether the apology which is made for foreign luxury in England, to wit, that they could not carry on their trade without imports as well as exports, will hold in Ireland?

129. Qu. Whether one may not be allowed to conceive and suppose a society or nation of human creatures, clad in woollen cloths and stuffs, eating good bread, beef and mutton, poultry and fish, in great plenty, drinking ale, mead, and cider, inhabiting decent houses built of brick and marble, taking their pleasure in fair parks and gardens, depending on no foreign imports either for food or raiment? And whether such people ought much to be pitied?

130. Qu. Whether Ireland be not as well qualified for such a state as any nation under the sun?

131. Qu. Whether in such a state the inhabitants may not contrive to pass the twenty-four hours with tolerable ease and cheerfulness? And whether any people upon earth can do more?

132. Qu. Whether they may not eat, drink, play, dress, visit, sleep in good beds, sit by good fires, build, plant, raise a name, make estates, and spend them?

133. Qu. Whether, upon the whole, a domestic trade may not suffice in such a country as Ireland, to nourish and clothe its inhabitants, and provide them with the reasonable conveniences and even comforts of life?

134. Qu. Whether a general habit of living well would not produce numbers and industry’ and whether, considering the tendency of human kind, the consequence thereof would not be foreign trade and riches, how unnecessary soever?

135. Qu. Whether, nevertheless, it be a crime to inquire how far we may do without foreign trade, and what would follow on such a supposition?

136. Qu. Whether the number and welfare of the subjects be not the true strength of the crown?

137. Qu. Whether in all public institutions there should not be an end proposed, which is to be the rule and limit of the means? Whether this end should not be the well-being of the whole? And whether, in order to this, the first step should not be to clothe and feed our people?

138. Qu. Whether there be upon earth any Christian or civilized people so beggarly, wretched, and destitute as the common Irish?

139. Qu. Whether, nevertheless, there is any other people whose wants may be more easily supplied from home?

140. Qu. Whether, if there was a wall of brass a thousand cubits high round this kingdom, our natives might not nevertheless live cleanly and comfortably, till the land, and reap the fruits of it?

141. Qu. What should hinder us from exerting ourselves, using our hands and brains, doing something or other, man, woman, and child, like the other inhabitants of God’s earth?

142. Qu. Be the restraining our trade well or ill advised in our neighbours, with respect to their own interest, yet whether it be not plainly ours to accommodate ourselves to it?

143. Qu. Whether it be not vain to think of persuading other people to see their interest, while we continue blind to our own?

144. Qu. Whether there be any other nation possess’d of so much good land, and so many able hands to work it, which yet is beholden for bread to foreign countries?

145. Qu. Whether it be true that we import corn to the value of two hundred thousand pounds in some years?

146. Qu. Whether we are not undone by fashions made for other people? And whether it be not madness in a poor nation to imitate a rich one?

147. Qu. Whether a woman of fashion ought not to be declared a public enemy?

148. Qu. Whether it be not certain that from the single town of Cork were exported, in one year, no less than one hundred and seven thousand one hundred and sixty-one barrels of beef; seven thousand three hundred and seventy-nine barrels of pork; thirteen thousand four hundred and sixty-one casks, and eighty-five thousand seven hundred and twenty-seven firkins of butter? And what hands were employed in this manufacture?

149. Qu. Whether a foreigner could imagine that one half of the people were starving, in a country which sent out such plenty of provisions?

150. Qu. Whether an Irish lady, set out with French silks and Flanders lace, may not be said to consume more beef and butter than a hundred of our labouring peasants?

151. Qu. Whether nine-tenths of our foreign trade be not carried on singly to support the article of vanity?

152. Qu. Whether it can be hoped that private persons will not indulge this folly, unless restrained by the public?

153. Qu. How vanity is maintained in other countries? Whether in Hungary, for instance, a proud nobility are not subsisted with small imports from abroad?

154. Qu. Whether there be a prouder people upon earth than the noble Venetians, although they all wear plain black clothes?

155. Qu. Whether a people are to be pitied that will not sacrifice their little particular vanities to the public good? And yet, whether each part would not except their own foible from this public sacrifice, the squire his bottle, the lady her lace?

156. Qu. Whether claret be not often drank rather for vanity than for health, or pleasure?

157. Qu. Whether it be true that men of nice palates have been imposed on, by elder wine for French claret, and by mead for palm sack?

158. Qu. Do not Englishmen abroad purchase beer and cider at ten times the price of wine?

159. Qu. How many gentlemen are there in England of a thousand pounds per annum who never drink wine in their own houses? Whether the same may be said of any in Ireland who have even? one hundred pounds per annum.

160. Qu. What reasons have our neighbours in England for discouraging French wines which may not hold with respect to us also?

161. Qu. How much of the necessary sustenance of our people is yearly exported for brandy?

162. Qu. Whether, if people must poison themselves, they had not better do it with their own growth?

163. Qu. If we imported neither claret from France, nor fir from Norway, what the nation would save by it?

164. Qu. When the root yieldeth insufficient nourishment, whether men do not top the tree to make the lower branches thrive?

165. Qu. Whether, if our ladies drank sage or balm tea out of Irish ware, it would be an insupportable national calamity?

166. Qu. Whether it be really true that such wine is best as most encourages drinking, i.e., that must be given in the largest dose to produce its effect? And whether this holds with regard to any other medicine?

167. Qu. Whether that trade should not be accounted most pernicious wherein the balance is most against us? And whether this be not the trade with France?

168. Qu. Whether it be not even madness to encourage trade with a nation that takes nothing of our manufacture?

169. Qu. Whether Ireland can hope to thrive if the major part of her patriots shall be found in the French interest?

170. Qu. Why, if a bribe by the palate or the purse be in effect the same thing, they should not be alike infamous?

171. Qu. Whether the vanity and luxury of a few ought to stand in competition with the interest of a nation?

172. Qu. Whether national wants ought not to be the rule of trade? And whether the most pressing wants of the majority ought not to be first consider’d?

173. Qu. Whether it is possible the country should be well improved, while our beef is exported, and our labourers live upon potatoes?

174. Qu. If it be resolved that we cannot do without foreign trade, whether, at least, it may not be worth while to consider what branches thereof deserve to be entertained, and how far we may be able to carry it on under our present limitations?

175. Qu. What foreign imports may be necessary for clothing and feeding the families of persons not worth above one hundred pounds a year? And how many wealthier there are in the kingdom, and what proportion they bear to the other inhabitants?

176. Qu. Whether trade be not then on a right foot, when foreign commodities are imported in exchange only for domestic superfluities?

177. Qu. Whether the quantities of beef, butter, wool, and leather, exported from this island, can be reckoned the superfluities of a country, where there are so many natives naked and famished?

178. Qu. Whether it would not be wise so to order our trade as to export manufactures rather than provisions, and of those such as employ most hands?

179. Qu. Whether she would not be a very vile matron, and justly thought either mad or foolish, that should give away the necessaries of life from her naked and famished children, in exchange for pearls to stick in her hair, and sweetmeats to please her own palate?

180. Qu. Whether a nation might not be consider’d as a family?

181. Qu. Whether other methods may not be found for supplying the funds, besides the custom on things imported?

182. Qu. Whether any art or manufacture be so difficult as the making of good laws?

183. Qu. Whether our peers and gentlemen are born legislators? Or, whether that faculty be acquired by study and reflection?

184. Qu. Whether to comprehend the real interest of a people, and the means to procure it, doth not imply some fund of knowledge, historical, moral, and political, with a faculty of reason improved by learning?

185. Qu. Whether every enemy to learning be not a Goth? And whether every such Goth among us be not an enemy to the country?

186. Qu. Whether, therefore, it would not be an omen of ill presage, a dreadful phenomenon in the land, if our great men should take it in their heads to deride learning and education?

187. Qu. Whether, on the contrary, it should not seem worth while to erect a mart of literature in this kingdom, under wiser regulations and better discipline than in any other part of Europe? And whether this would not be an infallible means of drawing men and money into the kingdom?

188. Qu. Whether the governed be not too numerous for the governing part of our college? And whether it might not be expedient to convert thirty natives-places into twenty fellowships?

189. Qu. Whether, if we had two colleges, there might not spring a useful emulation between them? And whether it might not be contrived so to divide the fellows, scholars, and revenues between both, as that no member should be a loser thereby?

190. Qu. Whether ten thousand pounds well laid out might not build a decent college, fit to contain two hundred persons; and whether the purchase money of the chambers would not go a good way towards defraying the expense?

191. Qu. Where this college should be situated?

192. Qu. Whether it is possible a State should not thrive, whereof the lower part were industrious, and the upper wise?

193. Qu. Whether the collected wisdom of ages and nations be not found in books, improved and applied by study?

194. Qu. Whether it was not an Irish professor who first opened the public schools at Oxford? Whether this island hath not been anciently famous for learning? And whether at this day it hath any better chance for being considerable?

195. Qu. Whether we may not with better grace sit down and complain, when we have done all that lies in our power to help ourselves?

196. Qu. Whether the gentleman of estate hath a right to be idle; and whether he ought not to be the great promoter and director of industry among his tenants and neighbours?

197. Qu. Whether the real foundation for wealth must not be laid in the numbers, the frugality, and the industry of the people? And whether all attempts to enrich a nation by other means, as raising the coin, stock-jobbing, and such arts are not vain?

198. Qu. Whether a door ought not to be shut against all other methods of growing rich, save only by industry and merit? And whether wealth got otherwise would not be ruinous to the public?

199. Qu. Whether the abuse of banks and paper-money is a just objection against the use thereof? And whether such abuse might not easily be prevented?

200. Qu. Whether national banks are not found useful in Venice, Holland, and Hamburg? And whether it is not possible to contrive one that may be useful also in Ireland?

201. Qu. Whether any nation ever was in greater want of such an expedient than Ireland?

202. Qu. Whether the banks of Venice and Amsterdam are not in the hands of the public?

203. Qu. Whether it may not be worth while to inform ourselves in the nature of those banks? And what reason can be assigned why Ireland should not reap the benefit of such public banks as well as other countries?

204. Qu. Whether a bank of national credit, supported by public funds and secured by Parliament, be a chimera or impossible thing? And if not, what would follow from the supposal of such a bank?

205. Qu. Whether the currency of a credit so well secured would not be of great advantage to our trade and manufactures?

206. Qu. Whether the notes of such public bank would not have a more general circulation than those of private banks, as being less subject to frauds and hazards?

207. Qu. Whether it be not agreed that paper hath in many respects the advantage above coin, as being of more dispatch in payments, more easily transferred, preserved, and recovered when lost?

208. Qu. Whether, besides these advantages, there be not an evident necessity for circulating credit by paper, from the defect of coin in this kingdom?

209. Qu. Whether the public may not as well save the interest which it now pays?

210. Qu. What would happen if two of our banks should break at once? And whether it be wise to neglect providing against an event which experience hath shewn us not to be impossible?

211. Qu. Whether such an accident would not particularly affect the bankers? And therefore whether a national bank would not be a security even to private bankers?

212. Qu. Whether we may not easily avoid the inconveniencies attending the paper-money of New England, which were incurred by their issuing too great a quantity of notes, by their having no silver in bank to exchange for notes, by their not insisting upon repayment of the loans at the time prefixed, and especially by their want of manufactures to answer their imports from Europe?

213. Qu. Whether a combination of bankers might not do wonders, and whether bankers know their own strength?

214. Qu. Whether a bank in private hands might not even overturn a government? and whether this was not the case of the Bank of St. George in Genoa? [Footnote: See the Vindication and Advancement of our national Constitution and Credit. Printed in London 1710.]

215. Qu. Whether we may not easily prevent the ill effects of such a bank as Mr Law proposed for Scotland, which was faulty in not limiting the quantum of bills, and permitting all persons to take out what bills they pleased, upon the mortgage of lands, whence by a glut of paper, the prices of things must rise? Whence also the fortunes of men must increase in denomination, though not in value; whence pride, idleness, and beggary?

216. Qu. Whether such banks as those of England and Scotland might not be attended with great inconveniences, as lodging too much power in the hands of private men, and giving handle for monopolies, stock-jobbing, and destructive schemes?

217. Qu. Whether the national bank, projected by an anonymous writer in the latter end of Queen Anne’s reign, might not on the other hand be attended with as great inconveniencies by lodging too much power in the Government?

218. Qu. Whether the bank projected by Murray, though it partake, in many useful particulars, with that of Amsterdam, yet, as it placeth too great power in the hands of a private society, might not be dangerous to the public?

219. Qu. Whether it be rightly remarked by some that, as banking brings no treasure into the kingdom like trade, private wealth must sink as the bank riseth? And whether whatever causeth industry to flourish and circulate may not be said to increase our treasure?

220. Qu. Whether the ruinous effects of Mississippi, South Sea, and such schemes were not owing to an abuse of paper money or credit, in making it a means for idleness and gaming, instead of a motive and help to industry?

221. Qu. Whether those effects could have happened had there been no stock-jobbing? And whether stock-jobbing could at first have been set on foot, without an imaginary foundation of some improvement to the stock by trade? Whether, therefore, when there are no such prospects, or cheats, or private schemes proposed, the same effects can be justly feared?

222. Qu. Whether by a national bank, be not properly understood a bank, not only established by public authority as the Bank of England, but a bank in the hands of the public, wherein there are no shares: whereof the public alone is proprietor, and reaps all the benefit?

223. Qu. Whether, having considered the conveniencies of banking and paper-credit in some countries, and the inconveniencies thereof in others, we may not contrive to adopt the former, and avoid the latter?

224. Qu. Whether great evils, to which other schemes are liable, may not be prevented, by excluding the managers of the bank from a share in the legislature?

225. Qu. Whether the rise of the bank of Amsterdam was not purely casual, for the security and dispatch of payments? And whether the good effects thereof, in supplying the place of coin, and promoting a ready circulation of industry and commerce may not be a lesson to us, to do that by design which others fell upon by chance?

226. Qu. Whether the bank proposed to be established in Ireland, under the notion of a national bank, by the voluntary subscription of three hundred thousand pounds, to pay off the national debt, the interest of which sum to be paid the subscribers, subject to certain terms of redemption, be not in reality a private bank, as those of England and Scotland, which are national only in name, being in the hands of particular persons, and making dividends on the money paid in by subscribers? [Footnote: See a Proposal for the Relief of Ireland, &c. Printed in Dublin A. D. 1734]

227. Qu. Whether plenty of small cash be not absolutely necessary for keeping up a circulation among the people; that is, whether copper be not more necessary than gold?

228. Qu. Whether it is not worth while to reflect on the expedients made use of by other nations, paper-money, bank-notes, public funds, and credit in all its shapes, to examine what hath been done and devised to add to our own animadversions, and upon the whole offer such hints as seem not unworthy the attention of the public?

229. Qu. Whether that, which increaseth the stock of a nation be not a means of increasing its trade? And whether that which increaseth the current credit of a nation may not be said to increase its stock?

230. Qu. Whether it may not be expedient to appoint certain funds or stock for a national bank, under direction of certain persons, one-third whereof to be named by the Government, and one-third by each House of Parliament?

231. Qu. Whether the directors should not be excluded from sitting in either House, and whether they should not be subject to the audit and visitation of a standing committee of both Houses?

232. Qu. Whether such committee of inspectors should not be changed every two years, one-half going out, and another coming in by ballot?

233. Qu. Whether the notes ought not to be issued in lots, to be let at interest on mortgaged lands, the whole number of lots to be divided among the four provinces, rateably to the number of hearths in each?

234. Qu. Whether it may not be expedient to appoint four counting-houses, one in each province, for converting notes into specie?

235. Qu. Whether a limit should not be fixed, which no person might exceed, in taking out notes?

236. Qu. Whether, the better to answer domestic circulation, it may not be right to issue notes as low as twenty shillings?

237. Qu. Whether all the bills should be issued at once, or rather by degrees, that so men may be gradually accustomed and reconciled to the bank?

238. Qu. Whether the keeping of the cash, and the direction of the bank, ought not to be in different hands, and both under public control?

239. Qu. Whether the same rule should not alway be observed, of lending out money or notes, only to half the value of the mortgaged land? and whether this value should not alway be rated at the same number of years’ purchase as at first?

240. Qu. Whether care should not be taken to prevent an undue rise of the value of land?

241. Qu. Whether the increase of industry and people will not of course raise the value of land? And whether this rise may not be sufficient?

242. Qu. Whether land may not be apt to rise on the issuing too great plenty of notes?

243. Qu. Whether this may not be prevented by the gradual and slow issuing of notes, and by frequent sales of lands?

244. Qu. Whether interest doth not measure the true value of land; for instance, where money is at five per cent, whether land is not worth twenty years’ purchase?

245. Qu. Whether too small a proportion of money would not hurt the landed man, and too great a proportion the monied man? And whether the quantum of notes ought not to bear proportion to the pubic demand? And whether trial must not shew what this demand will be?

246. Qu. Whether the exceeding this measure might not produce divers bad effects, one whereof would be the loss of our silver?

247. Qu. Whether interest paid into the bank ought not to go on augmenting its stock?

248. Qu. Whether it would or would not be right to appoint that the said interest be paid in notes only?

249. Qu. Whether the notes of this national bank should not be received in all payments into the exchequer?

250. Qu. Whether on supposition that the specie should fail, the credit would not, nevertheless, still pass, being admitted in all payments of the public revenue?

251. Qu. Whether the pubic can become bankrupt so long as the notes are issued on good security?

252. Qu. Whether mismanagement, prodigal living, hazards by trade, which often affect private banks, are equally to be apprehended in a pubic one?

253. Qu. Whether as credit became current, and this raised the value of land, the security must not of course rise?

254. Qu. Whether, as our current domestic credit grew, industry would not grow likewise; and if industry, our manufactures; and if these, our foreign credit?

255. Qu. Whether by degrees, as business and people multiplied, more bills may not be issued, without augmenting the capital stock, provided still, that they are issued on good security; which further issuing of new bills, not to be without consent of Parliament?

256. Qu. Whether such bank would not be secure? Whether the profits accruing to the pubic would not be very considerable? And whether industry in private persons would not be supplied, and a general circulation encouraged?

257. Qu. Whether such bank should, or should not, be allowed to issue notes for money deposited therein? And, if not, whether the bankers would have cause to complain?

258. Qu. Whether, if the public thrives, all particular persons must not feel the benefit thereof, even the bankers themselves?

259. Qu. Whether, beside the Bank-Company, there are not in England many private wealthy bankers, and whether they were more before the erecting of that company?

260. Qu. Whether as industry increased, our manufactures would not flourish; and as these flourished, whether better returns would not be made from estates to their landlords, both within and without the kingdom?

261. Qu. Whether we have not paper-money circulating among, whether, therefore, we might not as well have that us already which is secured by the public, and whereof the pubic reaps the benefit?

262. Qu. Whether there are not two general ways of circulating money, to wit, play and traffic? and whether stock-jobbing is not to be ranked under the former?

263. Qu. Whether there are more than two things that might draw silver out of the bank, when its credit was once well established, to wit, foreign demands and small payments at home?

264. Qu. Whether, if our trade with France were checked, the former of these causes could be supposed to operate at all? and whether the latter could operate to any great degree?

265. Qu. Whether the sure way to supply people with tools and materials, and to set them at work, be not a free circulation of money, whether silver or paper?

266. Qu. Whether in New England all trade and business is not as much at a stand, upon a scarcity of paper-money, as with us from the want of specie?

267. Qu. Whether paper-money or notes may not be issued from the national bank, on the security of hemp, of linen, or other manufactures whereby the poor might be supported in their industry?

268. Qu. Whether it be certain that the quantity of silver in the bank of Amsterdam be greater now than at first; but whether it be not certain that there is a greater circulation of industry and extent of trade, more people, ships, houses, and commodities of all sorts, more power by sea and land?

269. Qu. Whether money, lying dead in the bank of Amsterdam, would not be as useless as in the mine?

270. Qu. Whether our visible security in land could be doubted? And whether there be anything like this in the bank of Amsterdam?

271. Qu. Whether it be just to apprehend danger from trusting a national bank with power to extend its credit, to circulate notes which it shall be felony to counterfeit, to receive goods on loans, to purchase lands, to sell also or alienate them, and to deal in bills of exchange; when these powers are no other than have been trusted for many years with the bank of England, although in truth but a private bank?

272. Qu. Whether the objection from monopolies and an overgrowth of power, which are made against private banks, can possibly hold against a national one?

273. Qu. Whether banks raised by private subscription would be as advantageous to the public as to the subscribers? and whether risks and frauds might not be more justly apprehended from them?

274. Qu. Whether the evil effects which of late years have attended paper-money and credit in Europe did not spring from subscriptions, shares, dividends, and stock-jobbing?

275. Qu. Whether the great evils attending paper-money in the British Plantations of America have not sprung from the overrating their lands, and issuing paper without discretion, and from the legislators breaking their own rules in favour of themselves, thus sacrificing the public to their private benefit? And whether a little sense and honesty might not easily prevent all such inconveniences?

276. Qu. Whether an argument from the abuse of things, against the use of them, be conclusive?

277. Qu. Whether he who is bred to a part be fitted to judge of the whole?

278. Qu. Whether interest be not apt to bias judgment? and whether traders only are to be consulted about trade, or bankers about money?

279. Qu. Whether the subject of Freethinking in religion be not exhausted? And whether it be not high time for our freethinkers to turn their thoughts to the improvement of their country?

280. Qu. Whether any man hath a right to judge, that will not be at the pains to distinguish?

281. Qu. Whether there be not a wide difference between the profits going to augment the national stock, and being divided among private sharers? And whether, in the former case, there can possibly be any gaming or stock-jobbing?

282. Qu. Whether it must not be ruinous for a nation to sit down to game, be it with silver or with paper?

283. Qu. Whether, therefore, the circulating paper, in the late ruinous schemes of France and England, was the true evil, and not rather the circulating thereof without industry? And whether the bank of Amsterdam, where industry had been for so many years subsisted and circulated by transfers on paper, doth not clearly decide this point?

284. Qu. Whether there are not to be seen in America fair towns, wherein the people are well lodged, fed, and clothed, without a beggar in their streets, although there be not one grain of gold or silver current among them?

285. Qu. Whether these people do not exercise all arts and trades, build ships and navigate them to all parts of the world, purchase lands, till and reap the fruits of them, buy and sell, educate and provide for their children? Whether they do not even indulge themselves in foreign vanities?

286. Qu. Whether, whatever inconveniences those people may have incurred from not observing either rules or bounds in their paper money, yet it be not certain that they are in a more flourishing condition, have larger and better built towns, more plenty, more industry, more arts and civility, and a more extensive commerce, than when they had gold and silver current among them?

287. Qu. Whether a view of the ruinous effects of absurd schemes and credit mismanaged, so as to produce gaming and madness instead of industry, can be any just objection against a national bank calculated purely to promote industry?

288. Qu. Whether a scheme for the welfare of this nation should not take in the whole inhabitants? And whether it be not a vain attempt, to project the flourishing of our Protestant gentry, exclusive of the bulk of the natives?

289. Qu. Whether, therefore, it doth not greatly concern the State, that our Irish natives should be converted, and the whole nation united in the same religion, the same allegiance, and the same interest? and how this may most probably be effected?

290. Qu. Whether an oath, testifying allegiance to the king, and disclaiming the pope’s authority in temporals, may not be justly required of the Roman Catholics? And whether, in common prudence or policy, any priest should be tolerated who refuseth to take it?

291. Qu. Whether there have not been Popish recusants? and, if so, whether it would be right to object against the foregoing oath, that all would take it, and none think themselves bound by it?

292. Qu. Whether those of the Church of Rome, in converting the Moors of Spain or the Protestants of France, have not set us an example which might justify a similar treatment of themselves, if the laws of Christianity allowed thereof?

293. Qu. Whether compelling men to a profession of faith is not the worst thing in Popery, and, consequently, whether to copy after the Church of Rome therein, were not to become Papists ourselves in the worst sense?

294. Qu. Whether, nevertheless, we may not imitate the Church of Rome, in certain places, where Jews are tolerated, by obliging our Irish Papists, at stated times, to hear Protestant sermons? and whether this would not make missionaries in the Irish tongue useful?

295. Qu. Whether the mere act of hearing, without making any profession of faith, or joining in any part of worship, be a religious act; and, consequently, whether their being obliged to hear, may not consist with the toleration of Roman Catholics?

296. Qu. Whether, if penal laws should be thought oppressive, we may not at least be allowed to give premiums? And whether it would be wrong, if the public encouraged Popish families to become hearers, by paying their hearth-money for them?

297. Qu. Whether in granting toleration, we ought not to distinguish between doctrines purely religious, and such as affect the State?

298. Qu. Whether the case be not very different in regard to a man who only eats fish on Fridays, says his prayers in Latin, or believes transubstantiation, and one who professeth in temporals a subjection to foreign powers, who holdeth himself absolved from all obedience to his natural prince and the laws of his country? who is even persuaded, it may be meritorious to destroy the powers that are?

299. Qu. Whether, therefore, a distinction should not be made between mere Papists and recusants? And whether the latter can expect the same protection from the Government as the former?

300. Qu. Whether our Papists in this kingdom can complain, if they are allowed to be as much Papists as the subjects of France or of the Empire?

301. Qu. Whether there is any such thing as a body of inhabitants, in any Roman Catholic country under the sun, that profess an absolute submission to the pope’s orders in matters of an indifferent nature, or that in such points do not think it their duty to obey the civil government?

302. Qu. Whether since the peace of Utrecht, mass was not celebrated and the sacraments administered in divers dioceses of Sicily, notwithstanding the Pope’s interdict?

303. Qu. Whether every plea of conscience is to be regarded? Whether, for instance, the German Anabaptists, Levellers, or Fifth Monarchy men would be tolerated on that pretence?

304. Qu. Whether Popish children bred in charity schools, when bound out in apprenticeship to Protestant masters, do generally continue Protestants?

305. Qu. Whether a Sum, which would go but a little way towards erecting hospitals for maintaining and educating the children of the native Irish, might not go far in binding them out apprentices to Protestant masters, for husbandry, useful trades, and the service of families?

306. Qu. Whether if the parents are overlooked, there can be any great hopes of success in converting the children?

307. Qu. Whether there be any instance, of a people’s being converted in a Christian sense, otherwise than by preaching to them and instructing them in their own language?

308. Qu. Whether catechists in the Irish tongue may not easily be procured and subsisted? And whether this would not be the most practicable means for converting the natives?

309. Qu. Whether it be not of great advantage to the Church of Rome, that she hath clergy suited to all ranks of men, in gradual subordination from cardinals down to mendicants?

310. Qu. Whether her numerous poor clergy are not very useful in missions, and of much influence with the people?

311. Qu. Whether, in defect of able missionaries, persons conversant in low life, and speaking the Irish tongue, if well instructed in the first principles of religion, and in the popish controversy, though for the rest on a level with the parish clerks, or the school-masters of charity-schools, may not be fit to mix with and bring over our poor illiterate natives to the Established Church? Whether it is not to be wished that some parts of our liturgy and homilies were publicly read in the Irish language? And whether, in these views, it may not be right to breed up some of the better sort of children in the charity-schools, and qualify them for missionaries, catechists, and readers?

312. Qu. Whether there be any nation of men governed by reason? And yet, if there was not, whether this would be a good argument against the use of reason in pubic affairs?

313. Qu. Whether, as others have supposed an Atlantis or Utopia, we also may not suppose an Hyperborean island inhabited by reasonable creatures?

314. Qu. Whether an indifferent person, who looks into all hands, may not be a better judge of the game than a party who sees only his own?

315. Qu. Whether one, whose end is to make his countrymen think, may not gain his end, even though they should not think as he doth?

316. Qu. Whether he, who only asks, asserts? and whether any man can fairly confute the querist?

317. Qu. Whether the interest of a part will not always be preferred to that of the whole?

 

FINIS

 Part II [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

Q UERY 1.

Whether there be any country in Christendom more capable of improvement than Ireland?

2. Qu. Whether we are not as far before other nations with respect to natural advantages, as we are behind them with respect to arts and industry?

3. Qu. Whether we do not live in a most fertile soil and temperate climate, and yet whether our people in general do not feel great want and misery?

4. Qu. Whether my countrymen are not readier at finding excuses than remedies?

5. Qu. Whether it can be reasonably hoped, that our state will mend, so long as property is insecure among us?

6. Qu. Whether in that case the wisest government, or the best laws can avail us?

7. Qu. Whether a few mishaps to particular persons may not throw this nation into the utmost confusion?

8. Qu. Whether the public is not even on the brink of being undone by private accidents?

9. Qu. Whether the wealth and prosperity of our country do not hang by a hair, the probity of one banker, the caution of another, and the lives of all?

10. Qu. Whether we have not been sufficiently admonished of this by some late events?

11. Qu. Whether therefore it be not high time to open our eyes?

12. Qu. Whether a national bank would not at once secure our properties, put an end to usury, facilitate commerce, supply the want of coin, and produce ready payments in all parts of the kingdom?

13. Qu. Whether the use or nature of money, which all men so eagerly pursue, be yet sufficiently understood or considered by all?

14. Qu. Whether mankind are not governed by Citation rather than by reason?

15. Qu. Whether there be not a measure or limit, within which gold and silver are useful, and beyond which they may be hurtful?

16. Qu. Whether that measure be not the circulating of industry?

17. Qu. Whether a discovery of the richest gold mine that ever was, in the heart of this kingdom, would be a real advantage to us?

18. Qu. Whether it would not tempt foreigners to prey upon us?

19. Qu. Whether it would not render us a lazy, proud, and dastardly people?

20. Qu. Whether every man who had money enough would not be a gentleman? And whether a nation of gentlemen would not be a wretched nation?

21. Qu. Whether all things would not bear a high price? And whether men would not increase their fortunes without being the better for it?

22. Qu. Whether the same evils would be apprehended from paper-money under an honest and thrifty regulation?

23. Qu. Whether, therefore, a national bank would not be more beneficial than even a mine of gold?

24. Qu. Whether private ends are not prosecuted with more attention and vigour than the public? And yet, whether all private ends are not included in the pubic?

25. Qu. Whether banking be not absolutely necessary to the pubic weal?

26. Qu. Whether even our private banks, though attended with such hazards as we all know them to be, are not of singular use in defect of a national bank?

27. Qu. Whether without them what little business and industry there is would not stagnate? But whether it be not a mighty privilege for a private person to be able to create a hundred pounds with a dash of his pen?

28. Qu. Whether the mystery of banking did not derive its original from the Italians? Whether this acute people were not, upon a time, bankers over all Europe? Whether that business was not practised by some of their noblest families who made immense profits by it, and whether to that the house of Medici did not originally owe its greatness?

29. Qu. Whether the wise state of Venice was not the first that conceived the advantage of a national bank?

30. Qu. Whether at Venice all payments of bills of exchange and merchants’ contracts are not made in the national or pubic bank, the greatest affairs being transacted only by writing the names of the parties, one as debtor the other as creditor in the bank-book?

31. Qu. Whether nevertheless it was not found expedient to provide a chest of ready cash for answering all demands that should happen to be made on account of payments in detail?

32. Qu. Whether this offer of ready cash, instead of transfers in the bank, hath not been found to augment rather than diminish the stock thereof?

33. Qu. Whether at Venice, the difference in the value of bank money above other money be not fixed at twenty per cent?

34. Qu. Whether the bank of Venice be not shut up four times in the year twenty days each time?

35. Qu. Whether by means of this bank the public be not mistress of a million and a half sterling?

36. Qu. Whether the great exactness and integrity with which this bank is managed be not the chief support of that republic?

37. Qu. Whether we may not hope for as much skill and honesty in a Protestant Irish Parliament as in a Popish Senate of Venice?

38. Qu. Whether the bank of Amsterdam was not begun about one hundred and thirty years ago, and whether at this day its stock be not conceived to amount to three thousand tons of gold, or thirty millions sterling?

39. Qu. Whether besides coined money, there be not also great quantities of ingots or bars of gold and silver lodged in this bank?

40. Qu. Whether all payments of contracts for goods in gross, and letters of exchange, must not be made by transfers in the bank-books, provided the sum exceed three hundred florins?

41. Qu. Whether it be not true, that the bank of Amsterdam never makes payments in cash?

42. Qu. Whether, nevertheless, it be not also true, that no man who hath credit in the bank can want money from particular persons, who are willing to become creditors in his stead?

43. Qu. Whether any man thinks himself the poorer, because his money is in the bank?

44. Qu. Whether the creditors of the bank of Amsterdam are not at liberty to withdraw their money when they please, and whether this liberty doth not make them less desirous to use it?

45. Qu. Whether this bank be not shut up twice in the year for ten or fifteen days, during which time the accounts are balanced?

46. Qu. Whether it be not owing to this bank that the city of Amsterdam, without the least confusion, hazard, or trouble, maintains and every day promotes so general and quick a circulation of industry?

47. Qu. Whether it be not the greatest help and spur to commerce that property can be so readily conveyed and so well secured by a compte en banc, that is, by only writing one man’s name for another’s in the bank-book?

48. Qu. Whether, at the beginning of the last century, those who had lent money to the public during the war with Spain were not satisfied by the sole expedient of placing their names in a compte en banc, with liberty to transfer their claims?

49. Qu. Whether the example of those easy transfers in the compte en banc, thus casually erected, did not tempt other men to become creditors to the public, in order to profit by the same secure and expeditious method of keeping and transferring their wealth?

50. Qu. Whether this compte en banc hath not proved better than a mine of gold to Amsterdam?

51. Qu. Whether that city may not be said to owe her greatness to the unpromising accident of her having been in debt more than she was able to Pay?

52. Qu. Whether it be known that any State from such small beginnings, in so short a time, ever grew to so great wealth and power as the province of Holland hath done; and whether the bank of Amsterdam hath not been the real cause of such extraordinary growth?

53. Qu. Whether we are by nature a more stupid people than the Dutch? And yet whether these things are sufficiently considered by our patriots?

54. Qu. Whether anything less than the utter subversion of those Republics can break the banks of Venice and Amsterdam?

55. Qu. Whether at Hamburgh the citizens have not the management of the bank, without the meddling or inspection of the Senate?

56. Qu. Whether the directors be not four principal burghers chosen by plurality of voices, whose business is to see the rules observed, and furnish the cashiers with money?

57. Qu. Whether the book-keepers are not obliged to balance their accounts every week, and exhibit them to the controllers or directors?

58. Qu. Whether any besides the citizens are admitted to have compte en banc at Hamburgh?

59. Qu. Whether there be not a certain limit, under which no sum can be entered into the bank?

60. Qu. Whether each particular person doth not pay a fee in order to be admitted to a compte en banc at Hamburgh and Amsterdam?

61. Qu. Whether the effects lodged in the bank of Hamburgh are liable to be seized for debt or forfeiture?

62. Qu. Whether this bank doth not lend money upon pawns at low interest and only for half a year, after which term, in default of payment, the pawns are punctually sold by auction?

63. Qu. Whether the book-keepers of the bank of Hamburgh are not obliged upon oath never to reveal what sums of money are paid in or out of the bank, or what effects any particular person has therein?

64. Qu. Whether, therefore, it be possible to know the state or stock of this bank; and yet whether it be not of the greatest reputation and most established credit throughout the North?

65. Qu. Whether the success of those public banks in Venice, Amsterdam and Hamburg would not naturally produce in other States an inclination to the same methods?

66. Qu. Whether an absolute monarchy be so apt to gain credit, and whether the vivacity of some humours could so well suit with the slow steps and discreet management which a bank requires?

67. Qu. Whether the bank called the general bank of France, contrived by Mr Law, and established by letters patent in May, 1716, was not in truth a particular and not a national bank, being in the hands of a particular company privileged and protected by the Government?

68. Qu. Whether the Government did not order that the notes of this bank should pass on a par with ready money in all payments of the revenue?

69. Qu. Whether this bank was not obliged to issue only such notes as were payable at sight?

70. Qu. Whether it was not made a capital crime to forge the notes of this bank?

71. Qu. Whether this bank was not restrained from trading either by sea or land, and from taking up money upon interest?

72. Qu. Whether the original stock thereof was not six millions of livres, divided into actions of a thousand crowns each?

73. Qu. Whether the proprietors were not to hold general assemblies twice in the year, for the regulating of their affairs?

74. Qu. Whether the accompts of this bank were not balanced twice every year?

75. Qu. Whether there were not two chests belonging to this bank, the one called the general chest containing their specie, their bills and their copper plates for the printing of those bills, under the custody of three locks, whereof the keys were kept by the director, the inspector and treasurer, also another called the ordinary chest, containing part of the stock not exceeding two hundred thousand crowns, under the key of the treasurer?

76. Qu. Whether out of this last mentioned sum, each particular cashier was not to be intrusted with a share not exceeding the value of twenty thousand crowns at a time, and that under good security?

77. Qu. Whether the Regent did not reserve to himself the power of calling this bank to account, so often as he should think good, and of appointing the inspector?

78. Qu. Whether in the beginning of the year 1719 the French King did not convert the general bank of France into a Banque Royale, having himself purchased the stock of the company and taken it into his own hands, and appointed the Duke of Orleans chief manager thereof?

79. Qu. Whether from that time, all matters relating to the bank were not transacted in the name, and by the sole authority, of the king?

80. Qu. Whether his Majesty did not undertake to receive and keep the cash of all particular persons, subjects, or foreigners, in his said Royale Banque, without being paid for that trouble? And whether it was not declared, that such cash should not be liable to seizure on any pretext, not even on the king’s own account?

81. Qu. Whether the treasurer alone did not sign all the bills, receive all the stock paid into the bank, and keep account of all the in-goings and out-goings?

82. Qu. Whether there were not three registers for the enregistering of the bills kept in the Banque Royale, one by the inspector, another by the controller, and a third by the treasurer?

83. Qu. Whether there was not also a fourth register, containing the profits of the bank, which was visited, at least once a week, by the inspector and controller?

84. Qu. Whether, beside the general bureau or compter in the city of Paris, there were not also appointed five more in the towns of Lyons, Tours, Rochelle, Orleans, and Amiens, each whereof was provided with two chests, one of specie for discharging bills at sight, and another of bank bills to be issued as there should be demand?

85. Qu. Whether, in the above mentioned towns, it was not prohibited to make payments in silver, exceeding the sum of six hundred livres?

86. Qu. Whether all creditors were not empowered to demand payment in bank bills instead of specie?

87. Qu. Whether, in a short compass of time, this bank did not undergo many new changes and regulations by several successive acts of council?

88. Qu. Whether the untimely, repeated, and boundless fabrication of bills did not precipitate the ruin of this bank?

89. Qu. Whether it be not true, that before the end of July, 1719, they had fabricated four hundred millions of livres in bank-notes, to which they added the sum of one hundred and twenty millions more on the twelfth of September following, also the same sum of one hundred and twenty millions on the twenty-fourth of 3 October, and again on the twenty-ninth of December, in the same year, the farther sum of three hundred and sixty millions, making the whole, from an original stock of six millions, mount, within the compass of one year, to a thousand millions of livres?

90. Qu. Whether on the twenty-eighth of February, 1720, the king did not make an union of the bank with the united company of the East and West Indies, which from that time had the administration and profits of the Banque Royale?

91. Qu. Whether the king did not still profess himself responsible for the value of the bank bills, and whether the company were not responsible to his Majesty for their management?

92. Qu. Whether sixteen hundred millions of livres, lent to his majesty by the company, was not a sufficient pledge to indemnify the king?

93. Qu. Whether the new directors were not prohibited to make any more bills without an act of council?

94. Qu. Whether the chests and books of the Banque were not subjected to the joint inspection of a Counsellor of State, and the Prevot des Marchands, assisted by two Echevins, a judge, and a consul, who had power to visit when they would and without warning?

95. Qu. Whether in less than two years the actions or shares of the Indian Company (first established for Mississippi, and afterwards increased by the addition of other compares and further? and whether this privileges) did not rise to near 2000 per cent must be ascribed to real advantages of trade, or to mere frenzy?

96. Qu. Whether, from first to last, there were not fabricated bank bills, of one kind or other, to the value of more than two thousand and six hundred millions of livres, or one hundred and thirty millions sterling?

97. Qu. Whether the credit of the bank did not decline from its union with the Indian Company?

98. Qu. Whether, notwithstanding all the above-mentioned extraordinary measures, the bank bills did not still pass at par with gold and silver to May, 1720, when the French king thought fit, by a new act of council, to make a reduction of their value, which proved a fatal blow, the effects whereof, though soon retracted, no subsequent skill or management could ever repair?

99. Qu. Whether, what no reason, reflexion, or foresight could do, this simple matter of fact (the most powerful argument with the multitude) did not do at once, to wit, open the eyes of the people?

100. Qu. Whether the dealers in that sort of ware had ever troubled their heads with the nature of credit, or the true use and end of banks, but only considered their bills and actions as things, to which the general demand gave a price?

101. Qu. Whether the Government was not in great perplexity to contrive expedients for the getting rid of those bank bills, which had been lately multiplied with such an unlimited passion?

102. Qu. Whether notes to the value of about ninety millions were not sunk by being paid off in specie, with the cash of the Compagnie des Indes, with that of the bank, and that of the Hotels des Monnoyes? Whether five hundred and thirty millions were not converted into annuities at the royal treasury? Whether several hundred millions more in bank bills were not extinguished and replaced by annuities on the City of Paris, on taxes throughout the provinces, &c., &c?

103. Qu. Whether, after all other shifts, the last and grand resource for exhausting that ocean, was not the erecting of a compte en banc in several towns of France?

104. Qu. Whether, when the imagination of a people is thoroughly wrought upon and heated by their own example, and the arts of designing men, this doth not produce a sort of enthusiasm which takes place of reason, and is the most dangerous distemper in a State?

105. Qu. Whether this epidemical madness should not be always before the eyes of a legislature, in the framing of a national bank?

106. Qu. Whether, therefore, it may not be fatal to engraft trade on a national bank, or to propose dividends on the stock thereof?

107. Qu. Whether it be possible for a national bank to subsist and maintain its credit under a French government?

108. Qu. Whether it may not be as useful a lesson to consider the bad management of some as the good management of others?

109. Qu. Whether the rapid and surprising success of the schemes of those who directed the French bank did not turn their brains?

110. Qu. Whether the best institutions may not be made subservient to bad ends?

111. Qu. Whether, as the aim of industry is power, and the aim of a bank is to circulate and secure this power to each individual, it doth not follow that absolute power in one hand is inconsistent with a lasting and a flourishing bank?

112. Qu. Whether our natural appetites, as well as powers, are not limited to their respective ends and uses? But whether artificial appetites may not be infinite?

113. Qu. Whether the simple getting of money, or passing it from hand to hand without industry, be an object worthy of a wise government?

114. Qu. Whether, if money be considered as an end, the appetite thereof be not infinite? But whether the ends of money itself be not bounded?

115. Qu. Whether the mistaking of the means for the end was not a fundamental error in the French councils?

116. Qu. Whether the total sum of all other powers, be it of enjoyment or action, which belong to man, or to all mankind together, is not in truth a very narrow and limited quantity? But whether fancy is not boundless?

117. Qu. Whether this capricious tyrant, which usurps the place of reason, doth not most cruelly torment and delude those poor men, the usurers, stockjobbers, and projectors, of content to themselves from heaping up riches, that is, from gathering counters, from multiplying figures, from enlarging denominations, without knowing what they would be at, and without having a proper regard to the use or end or nature of things?

118. Qu. Whether the ignis fatuus of fancy doth not kindle immoderate desires, and lead men into endless pursuits and wild labyrinths?

119. Qu. Whether counters be not referred to other things, which, so long as they keep pace and proportion with the counters, it must be owned the counters are useful; but whether beyond that to value or covet counters be not direct folly?

120. Qu. Whether the public aim ought not to be, that men’s industry should supply their present wants, and the overplus be converted into a stock of power?

121. Qu. Whether the better this power is secured, and the more easily it is transferred, industry be not so much the more encouraged?

122. Qu. Whether money, more than is expedient for those purposes, be not upon the whole hurtful rather than beneficial to a State?

123. Qu. Whether there should not be a constant care to keep the bills at par?

124. Qu. Whether, therefore, bank bills should at any time be multiplied but as trade and business were also multiplied?

125. Qu. Whether it was not madness in France to mint bills and actions, merely to humour the people and rob them of their cash?

126. Qu. Whether we may not profit by their mistakes, and as some things are to be avoided, whether there may not be others worthy of imitation in the conduct of our neighbours?

127. Qu. Whether the way be not clear and open and easy, and whether anything but the will is wanting to our legislature?

128. Qu. Whether jobs and tricks are not detested on all hands, but whether it be not the joint interest of prince and people to promote industry?

129. Qu. Whether, all things considered, a national bank be not the most practicable, sure, and speedy method to mend our affairs, and cause industry to flourish among us?

130. Qu. Whether a compte en banc or current bank bills would best answer our occasions?

131. Qu. Whether a public compte en banc, where effects are received, and accounts kept with particular persons, be not an excellent expedient for a great city?

132. Qu. What effect a general compte en banc would have in the metropolis of this kingdom with one in each province subordinate thereunto?

133. Qu. Whether it may not be proper for a great kingdom to unite both expedients, to wit, bank notes and a compte en banc?

134. Qu. Whether, nevertheless, it would be advisable to begin with both at once, or rather to proceed first with the bills, and afterwards, as business multiplied, and money or effects flowed in, to open the compte en banc?

135. Qu. Whether, for greater security, double books of compte en banc should not be kept in different places and hands?

136. Qu. Whether it would not be right to build the compters and public treasuries, where books and bank notes are kept, without wood, all arched and floored with brick or stone, having chests also and cabinets of iron?

137. Qu. Whether divers registers of the bank notes should not be kept in different hands?

138. Qu. Whether there should not be great discretion in the uttering of bank notes, and whether the attempting to do things per saltum be not often the way to undo them?

139. Qu. Whether the main art be not by slow degrees and cautious measures to reconcile the bank to the public, to wind it insensibly into the affections of men, and interweave it with the constitution?

140. Qu. Whether the promoting of industry should not be always in view, as the true and sole end, the rule and measure, of a national bank? And whether all deviations from that object should not be carefully avoided?

141. Qu. Whether a national bank may not prevent the drawing of specie out of the country (where it circulates in small payments), to be shut up in the chests of particular persons?

142. Qu. Whether it may not be useful, for supplying manufactures and trade with stock, for regulating exchange, for quickening commerce, for putting spirit into the people?

143. Qu. Whether tenants or debtors could have cause to complain of our monies being reduced to the English value if it were withal multiplied in the same, or in a greater proportion? and whether this would not be the consequence of a nation al bank?

144. Qu. If there be an open sure way to thrive, without hazard to ourselves or prejudice to our neighbours, what should hinder us from putting it in practice?

145. Qu. Whether in so numerous a Senate, as that of this kingdom, it may not be easie to find men of pure hands and clear heads fit to contrive and model a public bank?

146. Qu. Whether a view of the precipice be not sufficient, or whether we must tumble headlong before we are roused?

147. Qu. Whether in this drooping and dispirited country, men are quite awake?

148. Qu. Whether we are sufficiently sensible of the peculiar security there is in having a bank that consists of land and paper, one of which cannot be exported, and the other is in no danger of being exported?

149. Qu. Whether it be not delightful to complain? And whether there be not many who had rather utter their complaints than redress their evils?

150. Qu. Whether, if ‘the crown of the wise be their riches’ (Prov., xiv.24), we are not the foolishest people in Christendom?

151. Qu. Whether we have not all the while great civil as well as natural advantages?

152. Qu. Whether there be any people who have more leisure to cultivate the arts of peace, and study the public weal?

153. Qu. Whether other nations who enjoy any share of freedom, and have great objects in view, be not unavoidably embarrassed and distracted by factions? But whether we do not divide upon trifles, and whether our parties are not a burlesque upon politics?

154. Qu. Whether it be not an advantage that we are not embroiled in foreign affairs, that we hold not the balance of Europe, that we are protected by other fleets and armies, that it is the true interest of a powerful people, from whom we are descended, to guard us on all sides?

155. Qu. Whether England doth not really love us and wish well to us, as bone of her bone, and flesh of her flesh? And whether it be not our part to cultivate this love and affection all manner of ways?

156. Qu. Whether, if we do not reap the benefits that may be made of our country and government, want of will in the lower people, or want of wit in the upper, be most in fault?

157. Qu. What sea-ports or foreign trade have the Swisses; and yet how warm are those people, and how well provided?

158. Qu. Whether there may not be found a people who so contrive as to be impoverished by their trade? And whether we are not that people?

159. Qu. Whether it would not be better for this island, if all our fine folk of both sexes were shipped off, to remain in foreign countries, rather than that they should spend their estates at home in foreign luxury, and spread the contagion thereof through their native land?

160. Qu. Whether our gentry understand or have a notion of magnificence, and whether for want thereof they do not affect very wretched distinctions?

161. Qu. Whether there be not an art or skill in governing human pride, so as to render it subservient to the pubic aim?

162. Qu. Whether the great and general aim of the public should not be to employ the people?

163. Qu. What right an eldest son hath to the worst education?

164. Qu. Whether men’s counsels are not the result of their knowledge and their principles?

165. Qu. Whether an assembly of freethinkers, petit maitres, and smart Fellows would not make an admirable Senate?

166. Qu. Whether there be not labour of the brains as well as of the hands, and whether the former is beneath a gentleman?

167. Qu. Whether the public be more interested to protect the property acquired by mere birth than that which is the Mediate fruit of learning and vertue?

168. Qu. Whether it would not be a poor and ill-judged project to attempt to promote the good of the community, by invading the rights of one part thereof, or of one particular order of men?

169. Qu. Whether the public happiness be not proposed by the legislature, and whether such happiness doth not contain that of the individuals?

170. Qu. Whether, therefore, a legislator should be content with a vulgar share of knowledge? Whether he should not be a person of reflexion and thought, who hath made it his study to understand the true nature and interest of mankind, how to guide men’s humours and passions, how to incite their active powers, how to make their several talents co-operate to the mutual benefit of each other, and the general good of the whole?

171. Qu. Whether it doth not follow that above all things a gentleman’s care should be to keep his own faculties sound and entire?

172. Qu. Whether the natural phlegm of this island needs any additional stupefier?

173. Qu. Whether all spirituous liquors are not in truth opiates?

174. Qu. Whether our men of business are not generally very grave by fifty?

175. Qu. Whether there be really among us any parents so silly, as to encourage drinking in their children?

176. Qu. Whence it is, that our ladies are more alive, and bear age so much better than our gentlemen?

177. Qu. Whether all men have not faculties of mind or body which may be employed for the public benefit?

178. Qu. Whether the main point be not to multiply and employ our people?

179. Qu. Whether hearty food and warm clothing would not enable and encourage the lower sort to labour?

180. Qu. Whether, in such a soil as ours, if there was industry, there could be want?

181. Qu. Whether the way to make men industrious be not to let them taste the fruits of their industry? And whether the labouring ox should be muzzled?

182. Qu. Whether our landlords are to be told that industry and numbers would raise the value of their lands, or that one acre about the Tholsel is worth ten thousand acres in Connaught?

183. Qu. Whether our old native Irish are not the most indolent and supine people in Christendom?

184. Qu. Whether they are yet civilized, and whether their habitations and furniture are not more sordid than those of the savage Americans?

185. Qu. Whether this be altogether their own fault?

186. Qu. Whether it be not a sad circumstance to live among lazy beggars? And whether, on the other hand, it would not be delightful to live in a country swarming, like China, with busy people?

187. Qu. Whether we should not cast about, by all manner of means, to excite industry, and to remove whatever hinders it? And whether every one should not lend a helping hand?

188. Qu. Whether vanity itself should not be engaged in this good work? And whether it is not to be wished that the finding of employment for themselves and others were a fashionable distinction among the ladies?

189. Qu. Whether idleness be the mother or the daughter of spleen?

190. Qu. Whether it may not be worth while to publish the conversation of Ischomachus and his wife in Xenophon, for the use of our ladies?

191. Qu. Whether it is true that there have been, upon a time, one hundred millions of people employed in China, without the woollen trade, or any foreign commerce?

192. Qu. Whether the natural inducements to sloth are not greater in the Mogul’s country than in Ireland, and yet whether, in that suffocating and dispiriting climate, the Banyans are not all, men, women, and children, constantly employed?

193. Qu. Whether it be not true that the great Mogul’s subjects might undersell us even in our own markets, and clothe our people with their stuffs and calicoes, if they were imported duty free?

194. Qu. Whether there can be a greater reproach on the leading men and the patriots of a country, than that the people should want employment? And whether methods may not be found to employ even the lame and the blind, the dumb, the deaf, and the maimed, in some or other branch of our manufactures?

195. Qu. Whether much may not be expected from a biennial consultation of so many wise men about the public good?

196. Qu. Whether a tax upon dirt would not be one way of encouraging industry?

197. Qu. Whether it may not be right to appoint censors in every parish to observe and make returns of the idle hands?

198. Qu. Whether a register or history of the idleness and industry of a people would be an useless thing?

199. Qu. Whether we are apprized, of all the uses that may be made of political arithmetic?

200. Qu. Whether it would be a great hardship if every parish were obliged to find work for their poor?

201. Qu. Whether children especially should not be inured to labour betimes?

202. Qu. Whether there should not be erected, in each province, an hospital for orphans and foundlings, at the expense of old bachelors?

203. Qu. Whether it be true that in the Dutch workhouses things are so managed that a child four years old may earn its own livelihood?

204. Qu. What a folly is it to build fine houses, or establish lucrative posts and large incomes, under the notion of providing for the poor?

205. Qu. Whether the poor, grown up and in health, need any other provision but their own industry, under public inspection?

206. Qu. Whether the poor-tax in England hath lessened or increased the number of the poor?

207. Qu. Why the workhouse in Dublin, with so good an endowment, should yet be of so little use? and whether this may not be owing to that very endowment?

208. Qu. Whether that income might not, by this time, have gone through the whole kingdom, and erected a dozen workhouses in every county?

209. Qu. Whether workhouses should not be made at the least expense, with clay floors, and walls of rough stone, without plastering, ceiling, or glazing?

210. Qu. Whether the tax on chairs or hackney coaches be not paid, rather by the country gentlemen, than the citizens of Dublin?

211. Qu. Whether it be an impossible attempt to set our people at work, or whether industry be a habit which, like other habits, may by time and skill be introduced among any people?

212. Qu. Whether all manner of means should not be employed to possess the nation in general with an aversion and contempt for idleness and all idle folk?

213. Qu. Whether it would be a hardship on people destitute of all things, if the public furnished them with necessaries which they should be obliged to earn by their labour?

214. Qu. Whether other nations have not found great benefit from the use of slaves in repairing high roads, making rivers navigable, draining bogs, erecting public buildings, bridges, and manufactures?

215. Qu. Whether temporary servitude would not be the best cure for idleness and beggary?

216. Qu. Whether the public hath not a right to employ those who cannot or who will not find employment for themselves?

217. Qu. Whether all sturdy beggars should not be seized and made slaves to the public for a certain term of years?

218. Qu. Whether he who is chained in a jail or dungeon hath not, for the time, lost his liberty? And if so, whether temporary slavery be not already admitted among us?

219. Qu. Whether a state of servitude, wherein he should be well worked, fed, and clothed, would not be a preferment to such a fellow?

220. Qu. Whether criminals in the freest country may not forfeit their liberty, and repair the damage they have done the public by hard labour?

221. Qu. What the word ‘servant’ signifies in the New Testament?

222. Qu. Whether the view of criminals chained in pairs and kept at hard labour would not be very edifying to the multitude?

223. Qu. Whether the want of such an institution be not plainly seen in England, where the disbelief of a future state hardeneth rogues against the fear of death, and where, through the great growth of robbers and housebreakers, it becomes every day more necessary?

224. Qu. Whether it be not easier to prevent than to remedy, and whether we should not profit by the example of others?

225. Qu. Whether felons are not often spared, and therefore encouraged, by the compassion of those who should prosecute them?

226. Qu. Whether many that would not take away the life of a thief may not nevertheless be willing to bring him to a more adequate punishment?

227. Qu. Whether there should not be a difference between the treatment of criminals and that of other slaves?

228. Qu. Whether the most indolent would be fond of idleness, if they regarded it as the sure road to hard labour?

229. Qu. Whether the industry of the lower part of our people doth not much depend on the expense of the upper?

230. Qu. What would be the consequence if our gentry affected to distinguish themselves by fine houses rather than fine clothes?

231. Qu. Whether any people in Europe are so meanly provided with houses and furniture, in proportion to their incomes, as the men of estates in Ireland?

232. Qu. Whether building would not peculiarly encourage all other arts in this kingdom?

233. Qu. Whether smiths, masons, bricklayers, plasterers, carpenters, joiners, tilers, plumbers, and glaziers would not all find employment if the humour of building prevailed?

234. Qu. Whether the ornaments and furniture of a good house do not employ a number of all sorts of artificers, in iron, wood, marble, brass, pewter, copper, wool, flax, and divers other materials?

235. Qu. Whether in buildings and gardens a great number of day-labourers do not find employment?

236. Qu. Whether by these means much of that sustenance and wealth of this nation which now goes to foreigners would not be kept at home, and nourish and circulate among our own people?

237. Qu. Whether, as industry produced good living, the number of hands and mouths would not be increased; and in proportion thereunto, whether there would not be every day more occasion for agriculture? And whether this article alone would not employ a world of people?

238. Qu. Whether such management would not equally provide for the magnificence of the rich, and the necessities of the poor?

239. Qu. Whether an expense in building and improvements doth not remain at home, pass to the heir, and adorn the public? And whether any of those things can be said of claret?

240. Qu. Whether fools do not make fashions, and wise men follow them?

241. Qu. Whether, for one who hurts his fortune by improvements, twenty do not ruin themselves by foreign luxury?

242. Qu. Whether in proportion as Ireland was improved and beautified by fine seats, the number of absentees would not decrease?

243. Qu. Whether he who employs men in buildings and manufactures doth not put life in the country, and whether the neighbourhood round him be not observed to thrive?

244. Qu. Whether money circulated on the landlord’s own lands, and among his own tenants, doth not return into his own pocket?

245. Qu. Whether every squire that made his domain swarm with busy hands, like a bee-hive or ant-hill, would not serve his own interest, as well as that of his country?

246. Qu. Whether a gentleman who hath seen a little of the world, and observed how men live elsewhere, can contentedly sit down in a cold, damp, sordid habitation, in the midst of a bleak country, inhabited by thieves and beggars?

247. Qu. Whether, on the other hand, a handsome seat amidst well-improved lands, fair villages, and a thriving neighbourhood may not invite a man to dwell on his own estate, and quit the life of an insignificant saunterer about town for that of a useful country-gentleman?

248. Qu. Whether it would not be of use and ornament if the towns throughout this kingdom were provided with decent churches, townhouses, workhouses, market-places, and paved streets, with some order taken for cleanliness?

249. Qu. Whether, if each of these towns were addicted to some peculiar manufacture, we should not find that the employing many hands together on the same work was the way to perfect our workmen? And whether all these things might not soon be provided by a domestic industry, if money were not wanting?

250. Qu. Whether money could ever be wanting to the demands of industry, if we had a national bank?

251. Qu. Whether when a motion was made once upon a time to establish a private bank in this kingdom by public authority, divers gentlemen did not shew themselves forward to embark in that design?

252. Qu. Whether it may not now be hoped, that our patriots will be as forward to examine and consider the proposal of a public bank calculated only for the public good?

253. Qu. Whether any people upon earth shew a more early zeal for the service of their country, greater eagerness to bear a part in the legislature, or a more general parturiency with respect to politics and public counsels?

254. Qu. Whether, nevertheless, a light and ludicrous vein be not the reigning humour; but whether there was ever greater cause to be serious?

 

FINIS.

 Part III [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

Q UERY 1.

Whether the fable of Hercules and the carter ever suited any nation like this nation of Ireland?

2. Qu. Whether it be not a new spectacle under the sun, to behold, in such a climate and such a soil, and under such a gentle government, so many roads untrodden, fields untilled, houses desolate, and hands unemployed?

3. Qu. Whether there is any country in Christendom, either kingdom or republic, depending or independent, free or enslaved, which may not afford us a useful lesson?

4. Qu. Whether the frugal Swisses have any other commodities but their butter and cheese and a few cattle, for exportation; whether, nevertheless, the single canton of Berne hath not in her public treasury two millions sterling?

5. Qu. Whether that small town of Berne, with its scanty barren territory, in a mountainous corner, without sea-ports, without manufactures, without mines, be not rich by mere dint of frugality?

6. Qu. Whether the Swisses in general have not sumptuary laws, prohibiting the use of gold, jewels, silver, silk, and lace in their apparel, and indulging the women only to wear silk on festivals, weddings, and public solemnities?

7. Qu. Whether there be not two ways of growing rich, sparing and getting? But whether the lazy spendthrift must not be doubly poor?

8. Qu. Whether money circulating be not the life of industry; and whether the want thereof doth not render a State gouty and inactive?

9. Qu. But whether, if we had a national bank, and our present cash (small as it is) were put into the most convenient shape, men should hear any public complaints for want of money?

10. Qu. Whether all circulation be not alike a circulation of credit, whatsoever medium (metal or paper) is employed, and whether gold be any more than credit for so much power?

11. Qu. Whether the wealth of the richest nations in Christendom doth not consist in paper vastly more than in gold and silver?

12. Qu. Whether Lord Clarendon doth not aver of his own knowledge, that the Prince of Orange, with the best credit, and the assistance of the richest men in Amsterdam, was above ten days endeavouring to raise L20,000 in specie, without being able to raise half the sum in all that time? (See Clarendon’s History, BK. XII)

13. Qu. Whether the whole city of Amsterdam would not have been troubled to have brought together twenty thousand pounds in one room?

14. Qu. Whether it be not absolutely necessary that there must be a bank and must be a trust? And, if so, whether it be not the most safe and prudent course to have a national bank and trust the legislature?

15. Qu. Whether objections against trust in general avail, when it is allowed there must be a trust, and the only question is where to place this trust, whether in the legislature or in private hands?

16. Qu. Whether it can be expected that private persons should have more regard to the public than the public itself?

17. Qu. Whether, if there be hazards from mismanagement, those may not be provided against in the framing of a pubic bank; but whether any provision can be made against the mismanagement of private banks that are under no check, control, or inspection?

18. Qu. Whatever may be said for the sake of objecting, yet, whether it be not false in fact, that men would prefer a private security to a public security?

19. Qu. Whether a national bank ought to be considered as a new experiment; and whether it be not a motive to try this scheme that it hath been already tried with success in other countries?

20. Qu. If power followeth money, whether this can be anywhere more properly and securely placed, than in the same hands wherein the supreme power is already placed?

21. Qu. Whether there be more danger of abuse in a private than in a public management?

22. Qu. Whether the proper usual remedy for abuses of private banks be not to bring them before Parliament, and subject them to the inspection of a committee; and whether it be not more prudent to prevent than to redress an evil?

23. Qu. Supposing there had been hitherto no such thing as a bank, and the question were now first proposed, whether it would be safer to circulate unlimited bills in a private credit, or bills to a limited value on the public credit of the community, what would men think?

24. Qu. Whether experience and example be not the plainest proof; and whether any instance can be assigned where a national bank hath not been attended with great advantage to the public?

25. Qu. Whether the evils apprehended from a national bank are not much more to be apprehended from private banks; but whether men by custom are not familiarized and reconciled to common dangers, which are therefore thought less than they really are?

26. Qu. Whether it would not be very hard to suppose all sense, honesty, and public spirit were in the keeping of only a few private men, and the public was not fit to be trusted?

27. Qu. Whether it be not ridiculous to suppose a legislature should be afraid to trust itself?

28. Qu. But, whether a private interest be not generally supported and pursued with more zeal than a public?

29. Qu. Whether the maxim, ‘What is everybody’s business is nobody’s,’ prevails in any country under the sun more than in Ireland?

30. Qu. Whether, nevertheless, the community of danger, which lulls private men asleep, ought not to awaken the public?

31. Qu. Whether there be not less security where there are more temptations and fewer checks?

32. Qu. If a man is to risk his fortune, whether it be more prudent to risk it on the credit of private men, or in that of the great assembly of the nation?

33. Qu. Where is it most reasonable to expect wise and punctual dealing, whether in a secret impenetrable recess, where credit depends on secrecy, or in a public management regulated and inspected by Parliament?

34. Qu. Whether a supine security be not catching, and whether numbers running the same risk, as they lessen the caution, may not increase the danger?

35. Qu. What real objection lies against a national bank erected by the legislature, and in the management of public deputies, appointed and inspected by the legislature?

36. Qu. What have we to fear from such a bank, which may not be as well feared without it?

37. Qu. How, why, by what means, or for what end, should it become an instrument of oppression?

38. Qu. Whether we can possibly be on a more precarious foot than we are already? Whether it be not in the power of any particular person at once to disappear and convey himself into foreign parts? or whether there can be any security in an estate of land when the demands upon it are unknown?

39. Qu. Whether the establishing of a national bank, if we suppose a concurrence of the government, be not very practicable?

40. Qu. But, whether though a scheme be never so evidently practicable and useful to the pubic, yet, if conceived to interfere with a private interest, it be not forthwith in danger of appearing doubtful, difficult, and impracticable?

41. Qu. Whether the legislative body hath not already sufficient power to hurt, if they may be supposed capable of it, and whether a bank would give them any new power?

42. Qu. What should tempt the pubic to defraud itself?

43. Qu. Whether, if the legislature destroyed the public, it would not be felo de se; and whether it be reasonable to suppose it bent on its own destruction?

44. Qu. Whether the objection to a pubic national bank, from want of secrecy, be not in truth an argument for it?

45. Qu. Whether the secrecy of private banks be not the very thing that renders them so hazardous? and whether, without that, there could have been of late so many sufferers?

46. Qu. Whether when all objections are answered it be still incumbent to answer surmises?

47. Qu. Whether it were just to insinuate that gentlemen would be against any proposal they could not turn into a job?

48. Qu. Suppose the legislature passed their word for any private banker, and regularly visited his books, would not money lodged in his bank be therefore reckoned more secure?

49. Qu. In a country where the legislative body is not fit to be trusted, what security can there be for trusting any one else?

50. Qu. If it be not ridiculous to question whether the pubic can find cash to circulate bills of a limited value when private bankers are supposed to find enough to circulate them to an unlimited value?

51. Qu. Whether the united stock of a nation be not the best security? And whether anything but the ruin of the State can produce a national bankruptcy?

52. Qu. Whether the total sum of the public treasure, power, and wisdom, all co-operating, be not most likely to establish a bank of credit, sufficient to answer the ends, relieve the wants, and satisfy the scruples of all people?

53. Qu. Whether those hazards that in a greater degree attend private banks can be admitted as objections against a public one?

54. Qu. Whether that which is an objection to everything be an objection to anything; and whether the possibility of an abuse be not of that kind?

55. Qu. Whether, in fact, all things are not more or less abused, and yet notwithstanding such abuse, whether many things are not upon the whole expedient and useful?

56. Qu. Whether those things that are subject to the most general inspection are not the least subject to abuse?

57. Qu. Whether, for private ends, it may not be sometimes expedient to object novelty to things that have been often tried, difficulty to the plainest things, and hazard to the safest?

58. Qu. Whether some men will not be apt to argue as if the question was between money and credit, and not (as in fact it is) which ought to be preferred, private credit or public credit?

59. Qu. Whether they will not prudently overlook the evils felt, or to be feared, on one side?

60. Qu. Whether, therefore, those that would make an impartial judgment ought not to be on their guard, keeping both prospects always in view, balancing the inconveniencies on each side and considering neither absolutely?

61. Qu. Whether wilful mistakes, examples without a likeness, and general addresses to the passions are not often more successful than arguments?

62. Qu. Whether there be not an art to puzzle plain cases as well as to explain obscure ones?

63. Qu. Whether private men are not often an over-match for the public; want of weight being made up for by activity?

64. Qu. If we suppose neither sense nor honesty in our leaders or representatives, whether we are not already undone, and so have nothing further to fear?

65. Qu. Suppose a power in the government to hurt the pubic by means of a national bank, yet what should give them the will to do this? Or supposing a will to do mischief, yet how could a national bank, modelled and administered by Parliament, put it in their power?

66. Qu. Whether even a wicked will entrusted with power can be supposed to abuse it for no end?

67. Qu. Whether it be not much more probable that those who maketh such objections do not believe them?

68. Qu. Whether it be not vain to object that our fellow-subjects of Great Britain would malign or obstruct our industry when it is exerted in a way which cannot interfere with their own?

66. Qu. Whether it is to be supposed they should take delight in the dirt and nakedness and famine of our people, or envy them shoes for their feet and beef for their belies?

70. Qu. What possible handle or inclination could our having a national bank give other people to distress us?

71. Qu. Whether it be not ridiculous to conceive that a project for cloathing and feeding our natives should give any umbrage to England?

72. Qu. Whether such unworthy surmises are not the pure effect of spleen?

73. Qu. Whether London is not to be considered as the metropolis of Ireland? And whether our wealth (such as it is) doth not circulate through London and throughout all England, as freely as that of any part of his Majesty’s dominions?

74. Qu. Whether therefore it be not evidently the interest of the people of England to encourage rather than to oppose a national bank in this kingdom, as well as every other means for advancing our wealth which shall not impair their own?

75. Qu. Whether it is not our interest to be useful to them rather than rival them; and whether in that case we may not be sure of their good offices?

76. Qu. Whether we can propose to thrive so long as we entertain a wrongheaded distrust of England?

77. Qu. Whether, as a national bank would increase our industry, and that our wealth, England may not be a proportionable gainer; and whether we should not consider the gains of our mother-country as some accession to our own?

78. Qu. Whether the Protestant colony in this kingdom can ever forget what they owe to England?

79. Qu. Whether there ever was in any part of the world a country in such wretched circumstances, and which, at the same time, could be so easily remedied, and nevertheless the remedy not applied?

80. Qu. What must become of a people that can neither see the plainest things nor do the easiest?

81. Qu. Be the money lodged in the bank what it will, yet whether an Act to make good deficiencies would not remove all scruples?

82. Qu. If it be objected that a national bank must lower interest, and therefore hurt the monied man, whether the same objection would not hold as strong against multiplying our gold and silver?

83. Qu. But whether a bank that utters bills, with the sole view of promoting the public weal, may not so proportion their quantity as to avoid several inconveniencies which might attend private banks?

84. Qu. Whether there be any difficulty in comprehending that the whole wealth of the nation is in truth the stock of a national bank? And whether any more than the right comprehension of this be necessary to make all men easy with regard to its credit?

85. Qu. Whether any Thing be more reasonable than that the pubic, which makes the whole profit of the bank, should engage to make good its credit?

86. Qu. Whether the prejudices about gold and silver are not strong, but whether they are not still prejudices?

87. Qu. Whether paper doth not by its stamp and signature acquire a local value, and become as precious and as scarce as gold? And whether it be not much fitter to circulate large sums, and therefore preferable to gold?

88. Qu. Whether, in order to make men see and feel, it be not often necessary to inculcate the same thing, and place it in different lights?

89. Qu. Whether it doth not much import to have a right conception of money? And whether its true and just idea be not that of a ticket, entitling to power, and fitted to record and transfer such power?

90. Qu. Whether the managers and officers of a national bank ought to be considered otherwise than as the cashiers and clerks of private banks? Whether they are not in effect as little trusted, have as little power, are as much limited by rules, and as liable to inspection?

91. Qu. Whether the mistaking this point may not create some prejudice against a national bank, as if it depended on the credit, or wisdom, or honesty, of private men, rather than on the pubic, which is really the sole proprietor and director thereof, and as such obliged to support it?

92. Qu. Though the bank of Amsterdam doth very rarely, if at all, pay out money, yet whether every man possess’d of specie be not ready to convert it into paper, and act as cashier to the bank? And whether, from the same motive, every monied man throughout this kingdom would not be cashier to our national bank?

93. Qu. Whether a national bank would not be the great means and motive for employing our poor in manufactures?

94. Qu. Whether money, though lent out only to the rich, would not soon circulate among the poor? And whether any man borrows but with an intent to circulate?

95. Qu. Whether both government and people would not in the event be gainers by a national bank? And whether anything but wrong conceptions of its nature can make those that wish well to either averse from it?

96. Qu. Whether it may not be right to think, and to have it thought, that England and Ireland, prince and people, have one and the same interest?

97. Qu. Whether, if we had more means to set on foot such manufactures and such commerce as consists with the interest of England, there would not of course be less sheep-walk, and less wool exported to foreign countries? And whether a national bank would not supply such means?

98. Qu. Whether we may not obtain that as friends which it is in vain to hope for as rivals?

99. Qu. Whether in every instance by which we prejudice England, we do not in a greater degree prejudice ourselves? See Part II. qu. 153 and 154.

100. Qu. Whether in the rude original of society the first step was not the exchanging of commodities; the next a substituting of metals by weight as the common medium of circulation; after this the making use of coin; lastly, a further refinement by the use of paper with proper marks and signatures? And whether this, as it is the last, so it be not the greatest improvement?

101. Qu. Whether we are not in fact the only people who may be said to starve in the midst of plenty?

102. Qu. Whether business in general doth not languish among us? Whether our land is not untilled? Whether its inhabitants are not upon the wing?

103. Qu. Whether there can be a worse sign than that people should quit their country for a livelihood? Though men often leave their country for health, or pleasure, or riches, yet to leave it merely for a livelihood, whether this be not exceeding bad, and sheweth some peculiar mismanagement?

104. Qu. Whether our circumstances do not call aloud for some present remedy? And whether that remedy be not in our power?

105. Qu. Whether, in order to redress our evils, artificial helps are not most wanted in a land where industry is most against the natural grain of the people?

106. Qu. Whether, of all the helps to industry that ever were invented, there be any more secure, more easy, and more effectual than a national bank?

107. Qu. Whether medicines do not recommend themselves by experience, even though their reasons be obscure? But whether reason and fact are not equally clear in favour of this political medicine?

108. Qu. Whether, although the prepossessions about gold and silver have taken deep root, yet the example of our Colonies in America doth not make it as plain as day-light that they are not so necessary to the wealth of a nation as the vulgar of all ranks imagine?

109. Qu. Whether it be not evident that we may maintain a much greater inward and outward commerce, and be five times richer than we are, nay, and our bills abroad be of far greater credit, though we had not one ounce of gold or silver in the whole island?

110. Qu. Whether wrongheaded maxims, customs, and fashions are not sufficient to destroy any people which hath so few resources as the inhabitants of Ireland.

111. Qu. Whether it would not be a horrible thing to see our matrons make dress and play their chief concern?

112. Qu. Whether our ladies might not as well endow monasteries as wear Flanders lace? And whether it be not true that Popish nuns are maintained by Protestant contributions?

113. Qu. Whether England, which hath a free trade, whatever she remits for foreign luxury with one hand, doth not with the other receive much more from abroad? Whether, nevertheless, this nation would not be a gainer, if our women would content themselves with the same moderation in point of expense as the English ladies?

114. Qu. But whether it be not a notorious truth that our Irish ladies are on a foot, as to dress, with those of five times their fortune in England?

115. Qu. Whether it be not even certain that the matrons of this forlorn country send out a greater proportion of its wealth, for fine apparel, than any other females on the whole surface of this terraqueous globe?

116. Qu. Whether the expense, great as it is, be the greatest evil; but whether this folly may not produce many other follies, an entire derangement of domestic life, absurd manners, neglect of duties, bad mothers, a general corruption in both sexes?

117. Qu. Whether therefore a tax on all gold and silver in apparel, on all foreign laces and silks, may not raise a fund for the bank, and at the same time have other salutary effects on the public?

118. Qu. But, if gentlemen had rather tax themselves in another way, whether an additional tax of ten shillings the hogshead on wines may not supply a sufficient fund for the national bank, all defects to be made good by Parliament?

119. Qu. Whether upon the whole it may not be right to appoint a national bank?

120. Qu. Whether the stock and security of such bank would not be, in truth, the national stock, or the total sum of the wealth of this kingdom?

121. Qu. Whether, nevertheless, there should not be a particular fund for present use in answering bills and circulating credit?

122. Qu. Whether for this end any fund may not suffice, provided an Act be passed for making good deficiencies?

123. Qu. Whether the sole proprietor of such bank should not be the public, and the sole director the legislature?

124. Qu. Whether the managers, officers, and cashiers should not be servants of the pubic, acting by orders and limited by rules of the legislature?

125. Qu. Whether there should not be a standing number of inspectors, one-third men in great office, the rest members of both houses, half whereof to go out, and half to come in every session?

126. Qu. Whether those inspectors should not, all in a body, visit twice a year, and three as often as they pleased?

127. Qu. Whether the general bank should not be in Dublin, and subordinate banks or compters one in each province of Munster, Ulster, and Connaught?

128. Qu. Whether there should not be such provisions of stamps, signatures, checks, strong boxes, and all other measures for securing the bank notes and cash, as are usual in other banks?

129. Qu. Whether these ten or a dozen last queries may not easily be converted into heads of a bill?

130. Qu. Whether any one concerns himself about the security or funds of the banks of Venice or Amsterdam? And whether in a little time the case would not be the same as to our bank?

131. Qu. Whether the first beginning of expedients do not always meet with prejudices? And whether even the prejudices of a people ought not to be respected?

132. Qu. Whether a national bank be not the true philosopher’s stone in a State?

133. Qu. Whether it be not the most obvious remedy for all the inconveniencies we labour under with regard to our coin?

134. Qu. Whether it be not agreed on all hands that our coin is on very bad foot, and calls for some present remedy?

135. Qu. Whether the want of silver hath not introduced a sort of traffic for change, which is purchased at no inconsiderable discount to the great obstruction of our domestic commerce?

136. Qu. Whether, though it be evident silver is wanted, it be yet so evident which is the best way of providing for this want? Whether by lowering the gold, or raising the silver, or partly one, partly the other?

137. Qu. Whether a partial raising of one species be not, in truth, wanting a premium to our bankers for importing such species? And what that species is which deserves most to be encouraged?

138. Qu. Whether it be not just, that all gold should be alike rated according to its weight and fineness?

139. Qu. Whether this may be best done, by lowering some certain species of gold, or by raising others, or by joining both methods together?

140. Qu. Whether all regulations of coin should not be made with a view to encourage industry, and a circulation of commerce, throughout the kingdom?

141. Qu. Whether the North and the South have not, in truth, one and the same interest in this matter?

142. Qu. Whether to oil the wheels of commerce be not a common benefit? And whether this be not done by avoiding fractions and multiplying small silver?

143. Qu. But, whether a pubic benefit ought to be obtained by unjust methods, and therefore, whether any reduction of coin should be thought of which may hurt the properties of private men?

144. Qu. Whether those parts of the kingdom where commerce doth most abound would not be the greatest gainers by having our coin placed on a right foot?

145. Qu. Whether, in case a reduction of coin be thought expedient, the uttering of bank bills at the same time may not prevent the inconveniencies of such a reduction?

146. Qu. But, whether any pubic expediency could countervail a real pressure on those who are least able to bear it, tenants and debtors?

147. Qu. Whether, nevertheless, the political body, as well as the natural, must not sometimes be worse in order to be better?

148. Qu. Whether, all things considered, a general raising the value of gold and silver be not so far from bringing greater quantities thereof into the kingdom that it would produce a direct contrary effect, inasmuch as less, in that case, would serve, and therefore less be wanted? And whether men do not import a commodity in proportion to the demand or want of it?

149. Qu. Whether the lowering of our gold would not create a fever in the State? And whether a fever be not sometimes a cure, but whether it be not the last cure a man would choose?

150. Qu. What if our other gold were raised to a par with Portugal gold, and the value of silver in general raised with regard to that of gold?

151. Qu. Whether the pubic ends may or may not be better answered by such augmentation, than by a reduction of our coin?

152. Qu. Provided silver is multiplied, be it by raising or diminishing the value of our coin, whether the great end is not answered?

153. Qu. Whether raising the value of a particular species will not tend to multiply such species, and to lessen others in proportion thereunto? And whether a much less quantity of cash in silver would not, in reality, enrich the nation more than a much greater in gold?

154. Qu. Whether, if a reduction be thought necessary, the obvious means to prevent all hardships and injustice be not a national bank?

155. Qu. Upon supposition that the cash of this kingdom was five hundred thousand pounds, and by lowering the various species each one-fifth of its value the whole sum was reduced to four hundred thousand pounds, whether the difficulty of getting money, and consequently of paying rents, would not be increased in the proportion of five to four?

156. Qu. Whether such difficulty would not be a great and unmerited distress on all the tenants in the nation? But if at the same time with the aforesaid reduction there were uttered one hundred thousand pounds additional to the former current stock, whether such difficulty or inconvenience would then be felt?

157. Qu. Whether, ceteris paribus, it be not true that the prices of things increase as the quantity of money increaseth, and are diminished as that is diminished? And whether, by the quantity of money is not to be understood the amount of the denominations, all contracts being nominal for pounds, shillings, and pence, and not for weights of gold or silver?

158. Qu. Whether in any foreign market, twopence advance in a kilderkin of corn could greatly affect our trade?

159. Qu. Whether in regard of the far greater changes and fluctuations of prices from the difference of seasons and other accidents, that small rise should seem considerable?

160. Qu. Whether our exports do not consist of such necessaries as other countries cannot well be without?

161. Qu. Whether upon the circulation of a national bank more land would not be tilled, more hands employed, and consequently more commodities exported?

162. Qu. Whether, setting aside the assistance of a national bank, it will be easy to reduce or lower our coin without some hardship (at least for the present) on a great number of particular persons?

163. Qu. Whether, nevertheless, the scheme of a national bank doth not entirely stand clear of this question; and whether such bank may not completely subsist and answer its ends, although there should be no alteration at all made in the value of our coin?

164. Qu. Whether, if the ill state of our coin be not redressed, that scheme would not be still more necessary, inasmuch as a national bank, by putting new life and vigour into our commerce, may prevent our feeling the ill effects of the want of such redress?

165. Qu. Whether men united by interest are not often divided by opinion; and whether such difference in opinion be not an effect of misapprehension?

166. Qu. Whether two things are not manifest, first, that some alteration in the value of our coin is highly expedient, secondly, that whatever alteration is made, the tenderest care should be had of the properties of the people, and even a regard paid to their prejudices?

167. Qu. Whether our taking the coin of another nation for more than it is worth be not, in reality and in event, a cheat upon ourselves?

168. Qu. Whether a particular coin over-rated will not be sure to flow in upon us from other countries beside that where it is coined?

169. Qu. Whether, in case the wisdom of the nation shall think fit to alter our coin, without erecting a national bank, the rule for lessening or avoiding present inconvenience should not be so to order matters, by raising the silver and depressing the gold, as that the total sum of coined cash within the kingdom shall, in denomination, remain the same, or amount to the same nominal value, after the change that it did before?

170. Qu. Whether all inconvenience ought not to be lessened as much as may be; but after, whether it would be prudent, for the sake of a small inconvenience, to obstruct a much greater good? And whether it may not sometimes happen that an inconvenience which in fancy and general discourse seems great shall, when accurately inspected and cast up, appear inconsiderable?

171. Qu. Whether in public councils the sum of things, here and there, present and future, ought not to be regarded?

172. Qu. Whether silver and small money be not that which circulates the quickest, and passeth through all hands, on the road, in the market, at the shop?

173. Qu. Whether, all things considered, it would not be better for a kingdom that its cash consisted of half a million in small silver, than of five times that sum in gold?

174. Qu. Whether there be not every day five hundred lesser payments made for one that requires gold?

175. Qu. Whether Spain, where gold bears the highest value, be not the laziest, and China, where it bears the lowest, be not the most industrious country in the known world?

176. Qu. Money being a ticket which entitles to power and records the title, whether such power avails otherwise than as it is exerted into act?

177. Qu. Whether it be not evidently the interest of every State, that its money should rather circulate than stagnate?

178. Qu. Whether the principal use of cash be not its ready passing from hand to hand, to answer common occasions of the common people, and whether common occasions of all sorts of people are not small ones?

179. Qu. Whether business at fairs and markets is not often at a stand and often hindered, even though the seller hath his commodities at hand and the purchaser his gold, yet for want of change?

180. Qu. Whether beside that value of money which is rated by weight, there be not also another value consisting in its aptness to circulate?

181. Qu. As wealth is really power, and coin a ticket conveying power, whether those tickets which are the fittest for that use ought not to be preferred?

182. Qu. Whether those tickets which singly transfer small shares of power, and, being multiplied, large shares, are not fitter for common use than those which singly transfer large shares?

183. Qu. Whether the public is not more benefited by a shilling that circulates than a pound that lies dead?

184. Qu. Whether sixpence twice paid be not as good as a shilling once paid?

185. Qu. Whether the same shilling circulating in a village may not supply one man with bread, another with stockings, a third with a knife, a fourth with paper, a fifth with nails, and so answer many wants which must otherwise have remained unsatisfied?

186. Qu. Whether facilitating and quickening the circulation of power to supply wants be not the promoting of wealth and industry among the lower people? And whether upon this the wealth of the great doth not depend?

187. Qu. Whether, without the proper means of circulation, it be not vain to hope for thriving manufacturers and a busy people?

188. Qu. Whether four pounds in small cash may not circulate and enliven an Irish market, which many four-pound pieces would permit to stagnate?

189. Qu. Whether a man that could move nothing less than a hundred-pound weight would not be much at a loss to supply his wants; and whether it would not be better for him to be less strong and more active?

190. Qu. Whether the natural body can be in a state of health and vigour without a due circulation of the extremities, even? And whether the political body, any in the fingers and toes more than the natural, can thrive without a proportionable circulation through the minutest and most inconsiderable parts thereof?

191. Qu. If we had a mint for coining only shillings, sixpences, and copper-money, whether the nation would not soon feel the good effects thereof?

192. Qu. Whether the greater waste by wearing of small coins would not be abundantly overbalanced by their usefulness?

193. Qu. Whether it be not the industry of common people that feeds the State, and whether it be possible to keep this industry alive without small money?

194. Qu. Whether the want of this be not a great bar to our employing the people in these manufactures which are open to us, and do not interfere with Great Britain?

195. Qu. Whether therefore such want doth not drive men into the lazy way of employing land under sheep-walk?

196. Qu. Whether the running of wool from Ireland can so effectually be prevented as by encouraging other business and manufactures among our people?

197. Qu. Whatever commodities Great Britain importeth which we might supply, whether it be not her real interest to import them from us rather than from any other people?

198. Qu. Whether the apprehension of many among us (who for that very reason stick to their wool), that England may hereafter prohibit, limit, or discourage our linen trade, when it hath been once, with great pains and expense, thoroughly introduced and settled in this land, be not altogether groundless and unjust?

199. Qu. Whether it is possible for this country, which hath neither mines of gold nor a free trade, to support for any time the sending out of specie?

200. Qu. Whether in fact our payments are not made by bills? And whether our foreign credit doth not depend on our domestic industry, and our bills on that credit?

201. Qu. Whether, in order to mend it, we ought not first to know the peculiar wretchedness of our state? And whether there be any knowing of this but by comparison?

202. Qu. Whether there are not single market towns in England that turn more money in buying and selling than whole counties (perhaps provinces) with us?

203. Qu. Whether the small town of Birmingham alone doth not, upon an average, circulate every week, one way or other, to the value of fifty thousand pounds? But whether the same crown may not be often paid?

204. Qu. Whether there be any woollen manufacture in Birmingham?

205. Qu. Whether bad management may not be worse than slavery? And whether any part of Christendom be in a more languishing condition than this kingdom?

206. Qu. Whether any kingdom in Europe be so good a customer at Bordeaux as Ireland?

207. Qu. Whether the police and economy of France be not governed by wise councils? And whether any one from this country, who sees their towns, and manufactures, and commerce, will not wonder what our senators have been doing?

208. Qu. What variety and number of excellent manufactures are to be met with throughout the whole kingdom of France?

209. Qu. Whether there are not everywhere some or other mills for many uses, forges and furnaces for iron-work, looms for tapestry, glass-houses, and so forth?

210. Qu. What quantities of paper, stockings, hats; what manufactures of wool, silk, linen, hemp, leather, wax, earthenware, brass, lead, tin, &c?

211. Qu. Whether the manufactures and commerce of the single town of Lyons do not amount to a greater value than all the manufactures and all the trade of this kingdom taken together?

212. Qu. Whether it be not true, that within the compass of one year there flowed from the South Sea, when that commerce was open, into the single town of St. Malo’s, a sum in gold and silver equal to four times the whole specie of this kingdom? And whether that same part of France doth not at present draw from Cadiz, upwards of two hundred thousand pounds per annum?

213. Qu. Whether, in the anniversary fair at the small town of Beaucaire upon the Rhone, there be not as much money laid out as the current cash of this kingdom amounts to?

214. Qu. Whether it be true that the Dutch make ten millions of livres, every return of the flota and galleons, by their sales at the Indies and at Cadiz?

215. Qu. Whether it be true that England makes at least one hundred thousand pounds per annum by the single article of hats sold in Spain?

216. Qu. Whether the very shreds shorn from woollen cloth, which are thrown away in Ireland, do not make a beautiful tapestry in France?

217. Qu. Whether the toys of Thiers do not employ five thousand families?

218. Qu. Whether there be not a small town Or two in France which supply all Spain with cards?

219. Qu. Whether there be not French towns subsisted merely by making pins?

220. Qu. Whether the coarse fingers of those very women, those same peasants who one part of the year till the ground and dress the vineyards, are not another employed in making the finest French point?

221. Qu. Whether there is not a great number of idle fingers among the wives and daughters of our peasants?

222. Qu. Whether, about twenty-five years ago, they did not first attempt to make porcelain in France; and whether, in a few years, they did not make it so well, as to rival that which comes from China?

223. Qu. Whether the French do not raise a trade from saffron, dyeing drugs, and the like products, which may do with us as well as with them?

224. Qu. Whether we may not have materials of our own growth to supply all manufactures, as well as France, except silk, and whether the bulk of what silk even France manufactures be not imported?

225. Qu. Whether it be possible for this country to grow rich, so long as what is made by domestic industry is spent in foreign luxury?

226. Qu. Whether part of the profits of the bank should not be employed in erecting manufactures of several kinds, which are not likely to be set on foot and carried on to perfection without great stock, public encouragement, general regulations, and the concurrence of many hands?

227. Qu. Whether our natural Irish are not partly Spaniards and partly Tartars, and whether they do not bear signatures of their descent from both these nations, which is also confirmed by all their histories?

228. Qu. Whether the Tartar progeny is not numerous in this land? And whether there is an idler occupation under the sun than to attend flocks and herds of cattle?

229. Qu. Whether the wisdom of the State should not wrestle with this hereditary disposition of our Tartars, and with a high hand introduce agriculture?

230. Qu. Whether it were not to be wished that our people shewed their descent from Spain, rather by their honour and honesty than their pride, and if so, whether they might not easily insinuate themselves into a larger share of the Spanish trade?

231. Qu. Whether once upon a time France did not, by her linen alone, draw yearly from Spain about eight millions of livres?

232. Qu. Whether the French have not suffered in their linen trade with Spain, by not making their cloth of due breadth; and whether any other people have suffered, and are still likely to suffer, through the same prevarication?

233. Qu. Whether the Spaniards are not rich and lazy, and whether they have not a particular inclination and favour for the inhabitants of this island? But whether a punctual people do not love punctual dealers?

234. Qu. Whether about fourteen years ago we had not come into a considerable share of the linen trade with Spain, and what put a stop to this?

235. Qu. Whether we may not, with common industry and common honesty, undersell any nation in Europe?

236. Qu. Whether, if the linen manufacture were carried on in the other provinces as well as in the North, the merchants of Cork, Limerick, and Galway would not soon find the way to Spain?

237. Qu. Whether the woollen manufacture of England is not divided into several parts or branches, appropriated to particular places, where they are only or principally manufactured; fine cloths in Somersetshire, coarse in Yorkshire, long ells at Exeter, saies at Sudbury, crapes at Norwich, linseys at Kendal, blankets at Witney, and so forth?

238. Qu. Whether the united skill, industry, and emulation of many together on the same work be not the way to advance it? And whether it had been otherwise possible for England to have carried on her woollen manufacture to so great perfection?

239. Qu. Whether it would not on many accounts be right if we observed the same course with respect to our linen manufacture; and that diapers were made in one town or district, damasks in another, sheeting in a third, fine wearing linen in a fourth, coarse in a fifth, in another cambrics, in another thread and stockings, in others stamped linen, or striped linen, or tickings, or dyed linen, of which last kinds there is so great a consumption among the seafaring men of all nations?

240. Qu. Whether it may not be worth while to inform ourselves of the different sorts of linen which are in request among different people?

241. Qu. Whether we do not yearly consume of French wines about a thousand tuns more than either Sweden or Denmark, and yet whether those nations pay ready money as we do?

242. Qu. Whether they are not the Swiss that make hay and gather in the harvest throughout Alsatia?

243. Qu. Whether it be not a custom for some thousands of Frenchmen to go about the beginning of March into Spain, and having tilled the lands and gathered the harvest of Spain, to return home with money in their pockets about the end of November?

244. Qu. Whether of late years our Irish labourers do not carry on the same business in England to the great discontent of many there? But whether we have not much more reason than the people of England to be displeased at this commerce?

245. Qu. Whether, notwithstanding the cash supposed to be brought into it, any nation is, in truth, a gainer by such traffic?

246. Qu. Whether the industry of our people employed in foreign lands, while our own are left uncultivated, be not a great loss to the country?

247. Qu. Whether it would not be much better for us, if, instead of sending our men abroad, we could draw men from the neighbouring countries to cultivate our own?

248. Qu. Whether, nevertheless, we are not apt to think the money imported by our labourers to be so much clear gains to this country, but whether a little reflexion and a little political arithmetic may not shew us our mistake?

249. Qu. Whether our prejudices about gold and silver are not very apt to infect or misguide our judgments and reasonings about the public weal?

250. Qu. Whether it be not a good rule whereby to judge of the trade of any city, and its usefulness, to observe whether there is a circulation through the extremities, and whether the people round about are busy and warm?

251. Qu. Whether we had not, some years since, a manufacture of hats at Athlone, and of earthenware at Arklow, and what became of those manufactures?

252. Qu. Why we do not make tiles of our own, for flooring and roofing, rather than bring them from Holland?

253. Qu. What manufactures are there in France and Venice of gilt-leather, how cheap and how splendid a furniture?

254. Qu. Whether we may not, for the same use, manufacture divers things at home of more beauty and variety than wainscot, which is imported at such expense from Norway?

255. Qu. Whether the use and the fashion will not soon make a manufacture?

256. Qu. Whether, if our gentry used to drink mead and cider, we should not soon have those liquors in the utmost perfection and plenty?

257. Qu. Whether it be not wonderful that with such pastures, and so many black cattle, we do not find ourselves in cheese?

258. Qu. Whether great profits may not be made by fisheries; but whether those of our Irish who live by that business do not contrive to be drunk and unemployed one half of the year?

259. Qu. Whether it be not folly to think an inward commerce cannot enrich a State, because it doth not increase its quantity of gold and silver? And whether it is possible a country should? not thrive, while wants are supplied, and business goes on?

260. Qu. Whether plenty of all the necessaries and comforts of life be not real wealth?

261. Qu. Whether Lyons, by the advantage of her midland situation and the rivers Rhone and Saone, be not a great magazine or mart for inward commerce? And whether she doth not maintain a constant trade with most parts of France; with Provence for oils and dried fruits, for wines and cloth with Languedoc, for stuffs with Champagne, for linen with Picardy, Normandy, and Brittany, for corn with Burgundy?

262. Qu. Whether she doth not receive and utter all those commodities, and raise a profit from the distribution thereof, as well as of her own manufactures, throughout the kingdom of France?

263. Qu. Whether the charge of making good roads and navigable rivers across the country would not be really repaid by an inward commerce?

264. Qu. Whether, as our trade and manufactures increased, magazines should not be established in proper places, fitted by their situation, near great roads and navigable rivers, lakes, or canals, for the ready reception and distribution of all sorts of commodities from and to the several parts of the kingdom; and whether the town of Athlone, for instance, may not be fitly situated for such a magazine, or centre of domestic commerce?

265. Qu. Whether an inward trade would not cause industry to flourish, and multiply the circulation of our coin, and whether this may not do as well as multiplying the coin itself?

266. Qu. Whether the benefits of a domestic commerce are sufficiently understood and attended to; and whether the cause thereof be not the prejudiced and narrow way of thinking about gold and silver?

267. Qu. Whether there be any other more easy and unenvied method of increasing the wealth of a people?

268. Qu. Whether we of this island are not from our peculiar circumstances determined to this very commerce above any other, from the number of necessaries and good things that we possess within ourselves, from the extent and variety of our soil, from the navigable rivers and good roads which we have or may have, at a less expense than any people in Europe, from our great plenty of materials for manufactures, and particularly from the restraints we lie under with regard to our foreign trade?

269. Qu. Whether commissioners of trade or other proper persons should not be appointed to draw up plans of our commerce both foreign and domestic, and lay them at the beginning of every session before the Parliament?

270. Qu. Whether registers of industry should not be kept, and the pubic from time to time acquainted what new manufactures are introduced, what increase or decrease of old ones?

271. Qu. Whether annual inventories should not be published of the fairs throughout the kingdom, in order to judge of the growth of its commerce?

272. Qu. Whether there be not every year more cash circulated at the card tables of Dublin than at all the fairs of Ireland?

273. Qu. Whether the wealth of a country will not bear proportion to the skill and industry of its inhabitants?

274. Qu. Whether foreign imports that tend to promote industry should not be encouraged, and such as have a tendency to promote luxury should not be discouraged?

275. Qu. Whether the annual balance of trade between Italy and Lyons be not about four millions in favour of the former, and yet, whether Lyons be not a gainer by this trade?

276. Qu. Whether the general rule, of determining the profit of a commerce by its balance, doth not, like other general rules, admit of exceptions?

277. Qu. Whether it would not be a monstrous folly to import nothing but gold and silver, supposing we might do it, from every foreign part to which we trade? And yet, whether some men may not think this foolish circumstance a very happy one?

278. Qu. But whether we do not all see the ridicule of the Mogul’s subjects, who take from us nothing but our silver, and bury it under ground, in order to make sure thereof against the resurrection?

279. Qu. Whether he must not be a wrongheaded patriot or politician, whose ultimate view was drawing money into a country, and keeping it there?

280. Qu. Whether it be not evident that not gold but industry causeth a country to flourish?

281. Qu. Whether it would not be a silly project in any nation to hope to grow rich by prohibiting the exportation of gold and silver?

282. Qu. Whether there can be a greater mistake in politics than to measure the wealth of the nation by its gold and silver?

283. Qu. Whether gold and silver be not a drug, where they do not promote industry? Whether they be not even the bane and undoing of an idle people?

284. Qu. Whether gold will not cause either industry or vice to flourish? And whether a country, where it flowed in without labour, must not be wretched and dissolute like an island inhabited by buccaneers?

285. Qu. Whether arts and vertue are not likely to thrive, where money is made a means to industry? But whether money without this would be a blessing to any people?

286. Qu. Whether therefore Mississippi, South Sea, and such like schemes were not calculated for pubic ruin?

287. Qu. Whether keeping cash at home, or sending it abroad, just as it most serves to promote industry, be not the real interest of every nation?

288. Qu. Whether commodities of all kinds do not naturally flow where there is the greatest demand? Whether the greatest demand for a thing be not where it is of most use? Whether money, like other things, hath not its proper use? Whether this use be not to circulate? Whether therefore there must not of course be money where there is a circulation of industry?

289. Qu. Whether all such princes and statesmen are not greatly deceived who imagine that gold and silver, any way got, will enrich a country?

290. Qu. Whether it is not a great point to know what we would be at? And whether whole States, as well as private persons, do not often fluctuate for want of this knowledge?

291. Qu. Whether gold may not be compared to Sejanus’s horse, if we consider its passage through the world, and the fate of those nations which have been successively possess’d thereof?

292. Qu. Whether the effect is not to be considered more than the kind or quantity of money?

293. Qu. Whether means are not so far useful as they answer the end? And whether, in different circumstances, the same ends are not obtained by different means?

294. Qu. If we are a poor nation, abounding with very poor people, will it not follow that a far greater proportion of our stock should be in the smallest and lowest species than would suit with England?

295. Qu. Whether, therefore, it would not be highly expedient if our money were coined of peculiar values, best fitted to the circumstances and uses of our own country; and whether any other people could take umbrage at our consulting our own convenience, in an affair entirely domestic, and that lies within ourselves?

296. Qu. Whether every man doth not know, and hath not long known, that the want of a mint causeth many other wants in this kingdom?

297. Qu. What harm did England sustain about three centuries ago, when silver was coined in this kingdom?

298. Qu. What harm was it to Spain that her provinces of Naples and Sicily had all along mints of their own?

299. Qu. Whether those who have the interests of this kingdom at heart, and are concerned in the councils thereof, ought not to make the most humble and earnest representations to his Majesty, that he may vouchsafe to grant us that favour, the want of which is ruinous to our domestic industry, and the having of which would interfere with no interest of our fellow-subjects?

300. Qu. Whether it may not be presumed that our not having a privilege which every other kingdom in the world enjoys, be not owing to our want of diligence and unanimity in soliciting for it?

301. Qu. Whether his most gracious Majesty hath ever been addressed on this head in a proper manner, and had the case fairly stated for his royal consideration, and if not, whether we may not blame ourselves?

302. Qu. If his Majesty would be pleased to grant us a mint, whether the consequences thereof may not prove a valuable consideration to the crown?

303. Qu. Whether it be not the interest of England that we should cultivate a domestic commerce among ourselves? And whether it could give them any possible jealousy, if our small sum of cash was contrived to go a little further, if there was a little more life in our markets, a little more buying and selling in our shops, a little better provision for the backs and bellies of so many forlorn wretches throughout the towns and villages of this island?

304. Qu. Whether Great Britain ought not to promote the prosperity of her Colonies, by all methods consistent with her own? And whether the Colonies themselves ought to wish or aim at it by others?

305. Qu. Whether the remotest parts from the metropolis, and the lowest of the people, are not to be regarded as the extremities and capillaries of the political body?

306. Qu. Whether, although the capillary vessels are small, yet obstructions in them do not produce great chronical diseases?

307. Qu. Whether faculties are not enlarged and improved by exercise?

308. Qu. Whether the sum of the faculties put into act, or, in other words, the united action of a whole people, doth not constitute the momentum of a State?

309. Qu. Whether such momentum be not the real stock or wealth of a State; and whether its credit be not proportional thereunto?

310. Qu. Whether in every wise State the faculties of the mind are not most considered?

311. Qu. Whether every kind of employment or business, as it implies more skill and exercise of the higher powers, be not more valued?

312. Qu. Whether the momentum of a State doth not imply the whole exertion of its faculties, intellectual and corporeal; and whether the latter without the former could act in concert?

313. Qu. Whether the divided force of men, acting singly, would not be a rope of sand?

314. Qu. Whether the particular motions of the members of a State, in opposite directions, will not destroy each other, and lessen the momentum of the whole; but whether they must not conspire to produce a great effect?

315. Qu. Whether the ready means to put spirit into this State, to fortify and increase its momentum, would not be a national bank, and plenty of small cash?

316. Qu. Whether private endeavours without assistance from the public are likely to advance our manufactures and commerce to any great degree? But whether, as bills uttered from a national bank upon private mortgages would facilitate the purchases and projects of private men, even so the same bills uttered on the public security alone may not answer pubic ends in promoting new works and manufactures throughout the kingdom?

317. Qu. Whether that which employs and exerts the force of a community deserves not to be well considered and well understood?

318. Qu. Whether the immediate mover, the blood and spirits, be not money, paper, or metal; and whether the soul or will of the community, which is the prime mover that governs and directs the whole, be not the legislature?

319. Qu. Supposing the inhabitants of a country quite sunk in sloth, or even fast asleep, whether, upon the gradual awakening and exertion, first of the sensitive and locomotive faculties, next of reason and reflexion, then of justice and piety, the momentum of such country or State would not, in proportion thereunto, become still more and more considerable?

320. Qu. Whether that which in the growth is last attained, and is the finishing perfection of a people, be not the first thing lost in their declension?

321. Qu. Whether force be not of consequence, as it is exerted; and whether great force without great wisdom may not be a nuisance?

322. Qu. Whether the force of a child, applied with art, may not produce greater effects than that of a giant? And whether a small stock in the hands of a wise State may not go further, and produce more considerable effects, than immense sums in the hands of a foolish one?

323. Qu. Whether as many as wish well to their country ought not to aim at increasing its momentum?

324. Qu. Whose fault is it if poor Ireland still continues poor?

 

FINIS

 A Discourse addressed to Magistrates and Men of Authority (1736) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

A DISCOURSE ADDRESSED TO MAGISTRATES AND MEN IN AUTHORITY.

OCCASIONED By the enormous Licence, and Irreligion of the Times.

GALLIO cared for none of those Things.
 Acts, Ch. xviii. Ver. 17.

DUBLIN: Printed by GEORGE FAULKNER. M,DCC,XXX,VIII.

A DISCOURSE ADDRESSED TO MAGISTRATES, &C. [image "img78.jpg" file=Image00077.jpg] 

T HE P RETENSIONS AND Discourse of Men, throughout these Kingdoms, would, at first View, lead one to think the Inhabitants were all Politicians; and yet, perhaps, political Wisdom hath in no Age, or Country, been more talked of, and less understood. Licence is taken for the End of Government, and popular Humour for its Origine. No Reverence for the Laws, no Attachment to the Constitution, little Attention to Matters of Consequence, and great Altercation upon Trifles, such idle Projects about Religion and Government, as if the Public had both to chuse, a general Contempt of all Authority, Divine and Humane, an Indifference about the prevailing Opinions, whether they tend to produce Order, or Disorder, to promote the Empire of God or the Devil: These are the Symptoms that strongly mark the present Age; and this, could never have been the Case, if a Neglect of Religion had not made Way for it.

WHEN the Jews accused Paul upon religious Matters, and Points of their Law, before Gallio, the Roman Magistrate; it is said, that GALLIO cared for none of those Things. And it is to be feared, there are not a few Magistrates, in this Christian Country, who think with the same Indifference on the Subject of Religion. Herein, nevertheless, they judge amiss, and are much wanting to their Duty. For, although it be admitted, that the Magistrate’s peculiar Object, is the temporal Welfare of the State; yet, this will by no Means exclude a proper Care about the prevailing Notions and Opinions of Religion, which influence the Lives and Actions of Men, and have therefore a mighty Effect on the Public. Men’s Behaviour is the Consequence of their Principles. Hence it follows, that in order to make a State thrive and flourish, Care must be taken, that good Principles be propagated in the Minds of those who compose it.

IT would be vain, to depend on the outward Form, the Constitution, and Structure of a State; while the Majority are ever governed by their inward Ways of thinking, which at Times will break out and shew themselves paramount to all Laws and Institutions whatsoever. It must be great Folly therefore, to overlook Notions, as Matters of small Moment to the State; while Experience sheweth there is nothing more important; and that a prevailing Disorder in the Principles and Opinions of its Members, is ever dangerous to Society, and capable of producing the greatest Public Evils.

MAN is an Animal, formidable both from his Passions, and his Reason; his Passions often urging him to great Evils, and his Reason furnishing Means to achieve them. To tame this Animal, and make him amenable to Order, to inure him with a Sense of Justice and Virtue, to with-hold him from ill Courses by Fear, and encourage him in his Duty by Hopes; in short, to fashion and model him for Society, hath been the Aim of civil and religious Institutions; and in all Times, the Endeavour of good and wise Men. The aptest Method for attaining this End, hath been always judged a proper Education.

IF Men’s Actions are an Effect of their Principles; that is, of their Notions, their Belief, their Persuasions; it must be admitted, that Principles early sown in the Mind, are the Seeds which produce Fruit and Harvest in the ripe State of Manhood. How lightly soever some Men may speak of Notions; yet, so long as the Soul governs the Body, Mens Notions must influence their Actions, more or less, as they are stronger or weaker; and to good or evil, as they are better or worse.

OUR Notions and Opinions, are a constant Check on our Appetites, and Balance to our Passions; and, although they may not in every Instance controll and rule, yet they will never fail, strongly to affect both the one, and the other. What is it that bridles the impetuous Desires of Men? That restrains them when they are driven by the most violent Passions? In a Word, what is it that renders this World habitable, but the prevailing Notions of Order, Virtue, and Duty? Some, perhaps, may imagine, that the Eye of the Magistrate alone, is sufficient to keep Mankind in Awe. But, if every Man’s Heart was set to do all the Mischief his Appetite should prompt him to, as oft as Opportunity and Secrecy presented themselves, there could be no Living in the World.

AND although too many of those intrusted with Civil Power, in these our Days, may be said with GALLIO, to Care for none of those Things; and many more who would pass for Men of Judgment and Knowledge, may look on Notions early imbibed, before their Grounds and Reasons are apprehended or understood, to be but mere Prejudices; yet this will detract nothing from their Truth and Usefulness. To place this Matter in a due Light, I propose to shew, that a System of Salutary Notions, is absolutely necessary to the Support of every Civil Constitution. I shall enforce this Point, by the Testimony of those who are esteemed the wisest Men; and, I shall make some Remarks on the modern prevailing Spirit, and the Tendency of the Maxims of our Times.

ORDER is necessary, not only to the Well-Being, but to the very Being of a State. Now, Order and Regularity in the Actions of Men, is not an Effect of Appetite or Passion, but of Judgment: And the Judgment is governed by Notions or Opinions. There must therefore, of Necessity, in a well-ordered State, be a certain System of Salutary Notions, a prevailing Set of Opinions, acquired either by private Reason and Reflection, or taught and instilled by the general Reason of the Public; that is, by the Law of the Land. True it is, that where Men either cannot, or will not, use their own Reason, think and examine for themselves; in such Case, the Notions taught or instilled into their Minds, are embraced rather by the Memory, than the Judgment. Nor will it be any Objection to say, that these are Prejudices; inasmuch, as they are therefore, neither the less useful, nor the less true, although their Proofs may not be understood by all Men.

PREJUDICES are Notions, or Opinions, which the Mind entertains without knowing the Grounds and Reasons of them, and which are assented to without Examination. The first Notions which take Possession of the Minds of Men, with regard to Duties social, moral, and civil, may therefore be justly styled Prejudices. The Mind of a young Creature cannot remain empty. If you do not put into it that which is good, it will be sure to receive that which is bad.

DO what you can, there will still be a Bias from Education; and if so, is it not better this Bias should lie towards Things laudable and useful to Society? This Bias still operates, although it may not always prevail. The Notions first instilled, have the earliest Influence, take the deepest Root, and generally are found to give a Colour and Complexion to the subsequent Lives of Men, inasmuch as they are in Truth the great Source of humane Actions. It is not Gold, or Honour, or Power, that move Men to act, but the Opinions they entertain of those Things. Hence it follows, that if a Magistrate should say, or think, no Matter what Notions Men embrace, I will take Heed to their Actions; therein he sheweth his Weakness, for such as are Men’s Notions, such will be their Deeds.

FOR a Man to do, as he would be done by; to love his Neighbour as himself; to honour his Superiors; to believe that God scans all his Actions, and will reward or punish them; and to think, that he who is guilty of Falshood, or Injustice, hurts himself more than any one else: Are not these such Notions, and Principles, as every wise Governor, or Legislator, would covet above all Things to have firmly rooted in the Mind of every Individual under his Care. This is allowed, even by the Enemies of Religion, who would fain have it thought the Off-spring of State Policy, honouring its Usefulness at the same Time that they disparage its Truth. What therefore cannot be acquired by every Man’s Reasoning, must be introduced by Precept, and riveted by Custom; that is to say, the Bulk of Mankind must in all civilized Societies, have their Minds by timely Instruction well seasoned and furnished with proper Notions, which, although the Grounds or Proofs thereof be unknown to them, will nevertheless influence their Conduct, and so far render them useful Members of the State. But if you strip Men of these their Notions, or if you will Prejudices, with Regard to Modesty, Decency, Justice, Charity, and the like; you will soon find them so many Monsters, utterly unfit for humane Society.

I DESIRE it may be considered, that most Men want Leisure, Opportunity, or Faculties, to derive Conclusions from their Principles, and establish Morality on a Foundation of humane Science. True it is, (as St. Paul observes) that The invisible Things of God from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen. And from thence the Duties of natural Religion may be discovered. But these Things are seen and discovered by those alone who open their Eyes, and look narrowly for them. Now, if you look throughout the World, you shall find but few of these narrow Inspectors and Inquirers, very few who make it their Business to analyse Opinions, and pursue them to their rational Source, to examine whence Truths spring, and how they are inferred. In short, you shall find all Men full of Opinions, but Knowledge only in a few.

IT is impossible from the Nature and Circumstances of humane Kind, that the Multitude should be Philosophers, or that they should know Things in their Causes. We see every Day, that the Rules, or Conclusions alone, are sufficient for the Shop-keeper to state his Account, the Sailor to navigate his Ship, or the Carpenter to measure his Timber; none of which understand the Theory; that is to say, the Grounds and Reasons either of Arithmetic or Geometry. Even so in moral, political, and religious Matters, it is manifest that the Rules and Opinions early imbibed at the first Dawn of Understanding, and without the least Glimpse of Science, may yet produce excellent Effects, and be very useful to the World: And that in Fact they are so, will be very visible to every one who shall observe what passeth round about him. It may not be amiss to inculcate, that the Difference between Prejudices and other Opinions doth not consist in this; that the former are false, and the latter true; but in this, that the former are taken upon Trust, and the latter acquired by Reasoning. He who hath been taught to believe the Immortality of the Soul, may be as right in his Notion, as he who hath reasoned himself into that Opinion. It will then by no Means follow, that because this or that Notion is a Prejudice, it must be therefore false. The not distinguishing between Prejudices and Errors, is a prevailing Oversight among our modern Free-Thinkers.

THERE may be indeed certain mere Prejudices or Opinions, which, having no Reasons either assigned or assignable to support them, are nevertheless entertained by the Mind, because they intruded betimes into it. Such may be supposed false, not because they were early learned, or learned without their Reasons; but because there are in Truth no Reasons to be given for them.

CERTAINLY, if a Notion may be concluded false, because it was early imbibed, or because it is with most Men an Object of Belief rather than of Knowledge, one may by the same Reasoning conclude several Propositions of Euclid to be false. A simple Apprehension of Conclusions as taken in themselves, without the Deductions of Science, is what falls to the Share of Mankind in general. Religious Awe, the Precepts of Parents and Masters, the Wisdom of Legislators, and the accumulated Experience of Ages, supply the Place of Proofs and Reasonings with the Vulgar of all Ranks: I would say, that Discipline, national Constitution, and Laws Humane or Divine, are so many plain Land-Marks which guide them into the Paths wherein it is presumed they ought to tread.

FROM what hath been premised, it plainly appears, that in the Bulk of Mankind there are, and must be Prejudices; that is, Opinions taken upon Trust; or in other Words, that there are Points of Faith among all Men whatsoever, as well as among Christians. And as it is evident, that the unthinking Part of every Age, Sex, and Condition among us, must necessarily receive Notions with the Submission of Faith, so it is very reasonable that they should submit their Faith to the greatest Authorities Humane and Divine, the Law and the Gospel. But if once all Reverence for these be destroyed, our Pretenders to moral Knowledge will have no Authority to imbue the Multitude with such Notions as may controll their Appetites. From all which it follows, that the modern Schemes of our Free-Thinkers, who pretend to separate Morality from Religion, how rational soever they may seem to their Admirers, are in Truth and Effect most irrational and pernicious to civil Society.

LET any one, who thinks at all, consider the Savage State of undisciplined Men, whose Minds are nurtured to no Doctrine, broke by no Instruction, governed by no Principle. Let him at the same Time reflect on a Society of Persons educated in the Principles of our Church, formed betimes to fear God, to reverence their Superiors, to be grateful to their Benefactors, forgiving to their Enemies, just and charitable to all Men; and he will then be able to judge of the Merits of those who are so active to weed out the Prejudices of Education.

AMONG the many wild Notions broached in these giddy Times, it must be owned that some of our Declaimers against Prejudice, have wrought themselves into a Sort of Esteem for Savages, as a virtuous and unprejudiced People. In Proof of which, they alledge their being free from many Vices practised in civilized Nations. To which I answer, that it is very true, among Savages there are few Instances to be found of Luxury, Avarice, or Ambition; not that the contrary Virtues take Place, but because the Opportunities and Faculties for such Vices, are wanting. For the same Reason, you do not see them in Brutes.

WHAT they esteem and admire in those Creatures is not Innocence, but Ignorance; it is not Virtue, but Necessity. Give them but the Means of transgressing, and they know no Bounds. For Example: Supply the Water-drinking Savage with strong Liquor, and he shall be drunk for several Days and Nights together. Again; we admit an uneducated Savage knows not how to supplant a Rival with the refined Treachery of a Courtier; yet, if you put his Foe once in his Power, you shall soon see what a horrible Relish and Delight the Monster hath in Cruelty.

ABOVE all others, religious Notions, or if you will, Prejudices, (since this, as hath been already observed, detracts nothing from their Truth and Usefulness) have the most Influence, they are the strongest Curb from Vice, and the most effectual Spur to worthy Conduct. And indeed, whether we consider the Reason of Things, or the Practice of Men in all Times, we shall be satisfied, that nothing truly great, and good, can enter into the Heart of one attached to no Principles of Religion, who believes no Providence, who neither fears Hell, nor hopes for Heaven.

PUNISHMENTS and Rewards have always had, and always will have the greatest Weight with Men; and as the most considerable of both Kinds are proposed by Religion, the Duties whereof fall in with the Views of the civil Magistrate; it undeniably follows, that nothing can add more Strength to a good and righteous Government, than Religion. Therefore it mainly concerns Governors to keep an attentive Eye on the Religion of their Subjects. And indeed, it is one Lesson to Magistrate and People, Prince and Subject: Keep my Commandments and live, and my Law as the Apple of thine Eye.

ALTHOUGH it is no Consequence from what hath been said, that Men should be debarred the free Use of Reason and Inquiry; yet, surely it will follow, that without good Reason, a Man should not reject those Notions which have been instilled by the Laws and Education of his Country. And even they who think they have such Reason, have nevertheless no Right of dictating to others. It is true, a Commission from Heaven is superior to all humane Prejudices, Institutions, and Regards whatsoever. And it is wise, although at the Risque of Liberty, or Life, to obey God rather than Man. But our modern Reformers of Prejudice, have nothing to plead of that Kind.

THERE is no Magistrate so ignorant as not to know that Power, physical Power, resides in the People; but Authority is from Opinion, which Authority is necessary to restrain and direct the People’s Power, and therefore Religion is the great Stay and Support of a State. Every Religion that inculcates Virtue, and discourageth Vice, is so far of publick Benefit. The Christian Religion doth not only do this, but further makes every legal Constitution sacred by commanding our Submission thereto. Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, saith St. PAUL, for the Powers that be, are ordained of God. And in Effect for seveveral Years past, while the Reverence for our Church and Religion, hath been decaying and wearing off from the Minds of Men, it may be observed, that Loyalty hath in Proportion lost Ground; and now the very Word seems quite forgotten. Submission for Conscience, as well as for Wrath, was once reckoned an useful Lesson; but now, with other good Lessons is laid aside as an obsolete Prejudice.

THAT Prince or Magistrate, however great or powerful, who thinks his own Authority sufficient to make him respected and obeyed, lies under a woful Mistake, and never sails to feel it sooner or later. Obedience to all civil Power is rooted in the religious Fear of God: It is propagated, preserved, and nourished by Religion. This makes Men obey, not with Eye-Service, but in Sincerity of Heart. Humane Regards may restrain Men from open and penal Offences; but the Fear of God is a Restraint from all Degrees of all Crimes however circumstanced. Take away this Stay and Prop of Duty, this Root of civil Authority; and all that grew from it shall soon languish. The Authority, the very Being of the Magistrate, will prove a poor and precarious Thing.

AN inward Sense of the supreme Majesty of the King of Kings, is the only Thing that can beget and preserve a true Respect for subordinate Majesty in all the Degrees of Power, the first Link of Authority being fixed at the Throne of God. But in these our Days, that Majestas imperii, that Sacredness of Character, which rooted in a religious Principle, was the great Guard and Security of the State, is through Want thereof become the publick Scorn. And indeed, what Hold can the Prince or Magistrate have on the Conscience of those who have no Conscience? How can he build on the Principles of such as have no Principles? Or how can he hope for Respect where God himself is neglected?

IT is manifest, that no Prince upon Earth can hope to govern well, or even to live easy and secure, much less respected by his People, if he do not contribute by his Example and Authority, to keep up in their Minds an awful Sense of Religion. As for a moral Sense, and moral Fitness, or eternal Relations, how insufficient those Things are for establishing general and just Notions of Morality, or for keeping Men within due Bounds, is so evident from Fact and Experience, that I need not now enter into a particular Disquisition about them.

IT must be owned, that the Claws of Rapine and Violence, may in some Degree be pared and blunted by the outward Polity of a State. But should we not rather try, if possible, to pull them quite out? The Evil Effects of Wickedness may be often redressed by publick Justice. But would it not be better to heal the Source; and by an inward Principle extirpate Wickedness from the Heart, rather than depend altogether on humane Laws for preventing or redressing the bad Effects thereof?

I might (said the Chinese Doctor Confucius) hear and decide Controversies as well as another: But what I would have is, that Men should be brought to abstain from Controversies, out of an inward Love and Regard for each other.

Too many in this Age of free Remarks, and Projects, are delighted with Republican Schemes, and imagine they might remedy whatever was amiss, and render a People great and happy, merely by a new Plan or Form of Government. This dangerous Way of thinking and talking, is grown familiar, through the foolish Freedom of the Times. But alas! Those Men do not seem to have touched either the true Cause or Cure of publick Evils: Be the Plan ever so excellent, or the Architects ever so able, yet no Man in his Wits would undertake to build a Palace with mere Mud or Dirt of the Streets. There must be fit Materials; and without a religious Principle, Men can never be fit Materials for any Society, much less for a Republique. Religion is the Centre which unites, and the Cement which connects the several Parts or Members of the political Body. Such it hath been held by all wise Men, from the remotest Times, down to our ingenious Contemporaries, who, if they are in the Right, it must be admitted that all the rest of the World have been in the Wrong.

FROM the Knowledge of its being absolutely necessary to the good Government of a State, that the Hearts and Minds of the People be inwardly imbued with good Principles, Plato tells us, that

Jupiter, to preserve the Race of Men from perishing, sent Mercury, with Orders to introduce Modesty and Justice among them, as the firmest Ties of humane Society; and without which, it could not subsist.

And elsewhere the same Author giveth it plainly as his Sense, that

Concerning those great Duties which Men’s Appetites and Passions render difficult, it should seem rather the Work of God to provide, than of humane Legislators, if it were possible to hope for a System of Laws framed and promulgated by God himself.

You see how agreeable the Mosaic and Christian Institutions are to the Wishes of the wisest Heathen.

MOSES, indeed, doth not insist on a future State, the common Basis of all political Institutions. Nor do other Lawgivers make a particular mention of all Things necessary, but suppose some Things as generally known or believed. The Belief of a future State (which it is manifest the Jews were possessed of, long before the coming of CHRIST) seems to have obtained among the Hebrews from primaeval Tradition; which might render it unnecessary for Moses to insist on that Article. But the Sadducees and Epicureans had, in Progress of Time, gone so far towards rooting out this ancient and original Sentiment, that it was in Danger of being lost, had it not been taught and promulgated in a new Light by our blessed SAVIOUR.

BUT many among us, who would pass for Asserters of Truth and Liberty, are accustomed to rail at this, and all other established Opinions, as Prejudices which People are taught whether they will or no, and before they are able to distinguish whether they are right or wrong. These Lovers of Truth would do well to consider, that in political, moral, and religious Matters, the Opinions of the Vulgar, whether they go in Coaches, or walk on Foot, are for the most Part Prejudices; and are so like to be, whatever Side of the Question they embrace; whether they follow the old Maxims of the Religion of their Country, or the modern Instructions of their new Masters. I have already observed, that a Point being useful, and inculcated betimes, can be no Argument of its Falshood, even although it should be a Prejudice; far otherwise, Utility and Truth are not to be divided; the general Good of Mankind, being the Rule or Measure of moral Truth.

I SHALL now add, that it is to be apprehended, many of those who are the most forward to banish Prejudices, would be the first to feel the Want of them. It is even pitiful to think, what would become of certain modern Declaimers on that Article, were Prejudice really set aside, and were all Men to be weighed in the exact Scale of Merit, and considered in Proportion only to their intrinsic Worth. Some Prejudices are grounded in Truth, Reason, and Nature. Such are the Respects which are paid to Knowledge, Learning, Age, Honesty, and Courage in all civilized Countries. Others are purely the Effect of particular Constitutions, such as the Respects, Rights, and Preheminencies ascribed to some Men by their Fellow-Subjects, on Account of their Birth and Quality; which in the great Empires of Turky and China, pass for nothing; and will pass for nothing elsewhere, as soon as Men have got rid of their Prejudices, and learned to despise the Constitutions of their Country. It may behove those who are concerned, to reflect on this betimes.

GOD, comprehending within himself, the Beginning, End, and Middle of all Things and Times, exerts his Energy throughout the whole Creation. He never ceaseth to influence by Instinct, by the Light of Nature, by his declared Will. And it is the Duty of Magistrates and Law-givers, to cultivate and encourage those divine Impressions in the Minds of all Men under their Care. We are not to think, it is the Work of God, and therefore not to be seconded by humane Care. Far otherwise, for that very Reason it claims our utmost Care and Diligence, it being the indispensible Duty of all good Men, throughout the whole Course of their Lives, to co-operate with the Designs of Providence. In Religion, as in Nature, God doth somewhat, and somewhat is to be done on the Part of Man. He causeth the Earth to bring forth Materials for Food and Raiment; but humane Industry must improve, cultivate, prepare, and properly apply both the one and the other; or Mankind may perish with Cold and Hunger. And according to this same Analogy, the Principles of Piety and Religion, the Things that belong to our Salvation, although originally and primarily the Work of God, yet require the Protection of humane Government, as well as the Furtherance and Aid of all wise and good Men.

AND if Religion in all Governments be necessary, yet it seemeth to be so more especially in Monarchies: Forasmuch as the frugal Manners, and more equal Fortunes in Republiques, do not so much inflame Men’s Appetites, or afford such Power or Temptation to Mischief, as the high Estate and great Wealth of Nobles under a King. Therefore, although the Magistrate, (as was already observed) hath for his peculiar Object, the temporal Well-being of the State; yet this will by no Means exempt him from a due Concern for the Religion of his Country.

WHAT was the Sense of our Ancestors on this Point, appears throughout the whole Constitution of these Kingdoms; and in order to justify this Constitution, and the Wisdom of those who framed it, I shall crave Leave to make Use of some unsuspected Testimonies ancient and modern, which will shew, that the publick Care of a national Religion, hath been always a most principal Point in the Esteem of wise Men, however run down by the prevailing Licence of our Times.

THE first Testimony I shall produce, is that of Zaleucus, the famous Law-giver of the Locrians; who in the Preamble to his Laws, begins with Religion, laying it down as the Corner Stone, or Foundation of his whole Superstructure,

That every Inhabitant, or Subject of the State, should be persuaded that there is a God, and divine Providence: That the only Way of becoming dear to God, is by endeavouring above all Things, to be good, both in Deed and in Will: That a worthy Citizen is one that prefers Integrity to Wealth.

He further admonisheth those who are difficult to persuade,

To bethink themselves of God’s Providence, and the Punishments that await evil Doers; and in all their Actions, to be ever mindful of the last Day, as if it were present, or in Case the Devil should tempt a Man to Sin; He exhorts such a one to frequent the Temples and Altars, worshiping and imploring the Divine Assistance.

ARISTOTLE, discoursing of the Means to preserve a Monarchy, admonisheth the supreme Magistrate, above all Things to shew himself zealous in religious Matters; and this particularly, for two Reasons.

1. Because the Subjects will have less to fear from one who fears God. 2. Because they will be less apt to rebel against him, whom they take to be the favourite of Heaven.

And elsewhere, this same Philosopher, recommends the Worship of the Gods, as the first Care of the State.

PLATO likewise begins his Laws with the Care of religious Rites. He even maintains Religion, or divine Worship, to be the chief Aim and Scope of humane Life.

HIPPODAMUS the Milesian, in his Scheme of a Republique, allotted a third Part of the Land for maintaining divine Worship.

THE Roman Historians and Poets do so abound with Passages ascribing the Successes of their Government to Religion, and its Declension to the Want or Neglect thereof, that it may seem impertinent to enter into a Detail of what every School-Boy knows.

To come from ancient, to modern Authority, Machiavel himself, represents Religion as absolutely necessary to maintain civil Order and Government. He observes, that for many Years, there was a most awful Sense of Religion in the old Romans; and that this did much facilitate their great Undertakings. He likewise observes, and shews by divers Instances, that the Romans were more afraid to break an Oath, than to transgress the Laws; and that those Things which even the Love of their Country and Constitution could not bring them to, they were brought to through a Sense of Religion. Upon the Whole, he concludes, that old Rome was more obliged to Numa, who established a national Religion, than to Romulus himself, the Founder of that State.

AND here, by the Bye, I shall take Notice that some may imagine, the various Forms and Institutions of Religion ought to unsettle Men’s Minds, with regard to the Truth and Certainty of any. But this Matter rightly considered, will, I think, produce a contrary Effect. It sheweth, indeed, that Men groping out their Way, by the dim Twylight of Nature did only approach, some nearer, some farther off, although all were short of the Truth. But then it sheweth likewise upon the Whole, and in General, that Religion is so natural to our Minds, so useful to Society, and of so necessary Importance to the World, as might well prove its Truth, and render it worthy of the Divine Care to propagate by Prophecies, Miracles, and the Mission of the Son of God.

PHILIP de Comines, a wise Statesman, and honest Writer, who had great Experience in Affairs, declares it to be his Opinion,

That Want of religious Faith, is the only Fountain of all Mischiefs.

AND that able Minister, the famous Monsieur Colbert; makes it his Observation,

That if once the Ecclesiastical Character, as such, is vilified, the civil Magistrate, even the Crown itself, will in Consequence thereof lose all Authority.

IT would be no hard Matter, to produce a Cloud of Testimonies in Behalf of a national Religion, from the most eminent of our own Writers; but I shall content my self with adding one only, and that from a very unsuspected Writer, Mr. Harrington, Author of the Oceana.

A Man (saith he) that pleading for Liberty of Conscience, refuseth Liberty to the national Conscience, must be most absurd. And again: If the Conviction of a Man’s private Conscience produce his private Reliligion; the Conviction of the national Conscience, must produce a national Religion.

ALL these Authorities are taken from thinking Men, and able Politicians, none of which can be supposed to say what he did not really think; and it had been very easy to have increased the Number. But, I am sorry, I was obliged to mention any at all, in Proof of so plain and fundamental a Point as that of a national Religion. It is indeed, a shameful Necessity we lie under, of proving at this Time of Day the first Elements, I will not say of Christianity, but even of natural Light, from Reasons and from Authorities. The Spirit of the Times hath rendered this unavoidable.

IF it should be asked after all, how comes it then to pass, that the fashionable and prevailing Maxims among our Betters, in a neighbouring Nation, should run directly contrary to all such Reasons and Authorities? I will answer this Question, by asking when were our Neighbours known to abound to that Degree in Highwaymen, Murderers, House-breakers, Incendiaries? When did such Numbers lay violent Hands on themselves? When was there such a general and indecent Contempt of whatever is esteemed Sacred, in the State as well as the Church? When were there known among them such publick Frauds, such open Confederacies in Villainy, as the present Age hath produced? When were they lower in the Esteem of Mankind, more divided at home, or more insulted abroad?

WE of this Land have a fatal Tendency to overlook the good Qualities, and imitate whatever is amiss in those whom we respect. This leads me to make some Remarks on the modern Spirit of Reformation, that works so strongly in both these Kingdoms.

FREEDOM of Thought is the general Plea and Cry of the Age; and we all grant, that thinking is the Way to know; and the more real Knowledge there is in the Land, the more likely it will be to thrive. We are not therefore against Freedom of Thought, but we are against those unthinking overbearing People, who, in these odd Times, under that Pretence, set up for Reformers, and new Moulders of the Constitution. We declare against those, who would seduce ignorant and unexperienced Persons from the Reverence they owe to the Laws and Religion of their Country; and under the Notion of extirpating Prejudices, would erase from their Minds all Impressions of Piety and Virtue, in order to introduce Prejudices of another Kind, destructive of Society.

WE esteem it a horrible Thing, to laugh at the Apprehensions of a future State, with the Author of the Characteristics; or with him who wrote the Fable of the Bees, to maintain that moral Virtues are the political Offspring which Flattery begot upon Pride; that in Morals there is no greater Certainty, than in Fashions of Dress; that, indeed, the Doctrine of good Manners teacheth Men to speak well of all Virtues; but requires no more of them in any Age or Country, than theoutward Appearance of those in Fashion. Two Authors of Infidel Systems these, who setting out upon opposite Principles, are calculated to draw all Mankind, by flattering either their Vanity, or their Passions, into one or other System. And yet, the People among whom such Books are published, wonder how it comes to pass, that the civil Magistrate daily loseth his Authority, that the Laws are trampled upon, and the Subject in constant Fear of being robbed, or murdered, or having his House burnt over his Head?

IT may be presumed, that the Science of finding Fault, which above all others is easiest to learn, suits best with a modern Education. Too many there are of better Fortunes than Understandings, who have made the Inquiry after Truth, a very small Part of their Care: These see somewhat, but not enough. It were to be wished, they knew either less or more. One Thing it is evident they do not know; to wit; that while they rail at Prejudice, they are undoing themselves: They do not comprehend, (what hath been before hinted) that their whole Figure, their political Existence, is owing to certain vulgar Prejudices, in Favour of Birth, Title, or Fortune, which add nothing of real Worth either to Mind or Body; and yet, cause the most worthless Person to be respected.

FREEDOM of Thought is the Prerogative of humane Kind: It is a Quality inherent in the very Nature of a thinking Being. Nothing is more evident, than that every one can think his own Way, in spite of any outward Force or Power whatsoever. It is therefore ridiculous for any Man to declaim in Defence of a Privilege, which, if he holds his Tongue, cannot be denied or taken from him: But this will not infer a boundless Freedom of Speech, an open Contempt of Laws, and a setting up of private Judgment against public Authority, Things never born in any well-ordered State; and which make the crying Distemper of our Times.

THE Constitution of these Kingdoms, hath been one while over-heated by the indiscreet Zeal of one Set of Men: Again, it hath been cold and lifeless, through the Indifference of another. We have alternately felt the furious Effects of Superstition and Fanaticism; and our present impending Danger, is from the setting up of private Judgment, or an inward Light, in Opposition to humane and divine Laws. Such an inward selfish Principle, always at work, and proceeding gradually and steadily, may be sufficient to dissolve any humane Fabric of Polity or civil Government. To pretend to be wiser than the Laws, hath never been suffered in any wise State, saith Aristotle. And indeed, what wise State would encourage or endure a Spirit of Opposition, publickly to operate against its own Decrees? Who can say to such a Spirit, Thus far shalt thou come, and no farther?

THE Magistrate, perhaps, may not be sufficiently aware, that those earnest Contenders for private Light, and free Thought, are in reality seditious Men, who set up themselves against national Laws and Constitutions. And yet, one would think, all Mankind might see, that the Spirit which prevails against the Church and Religion, proceeds from an Opposition rather to the Laws of the Land, than to the Gospel. Men quarrel not so vehemently against Articles of Faith themselves, as against the establishing of such Matters; which is the sole Effect of Law and the supreme Power. It clearly follows, the Freedom pleaded for is not so much Freedom of Thought against the Doctrines of the Gospel, as Freedom of Speech and Action against the Laws of the Land. It is strange, that those who are not blind in other Matters, should yet not see this; or, that seeing it, they should not discern the Consequences thereof.

I AM sensible, that whatever looks like a Restraint on Freedom of Inquiry, must be very disagreeable to all reasoning and inquisitive Men. But against this, I have said nothing. On the contrary, I will freely own, a judicious and impartial Search after Truth, is the most valuable Employment of the Mind. Those who have the Talents, and will be at the Pains, cannot do better than engage in that noble Pursuit: But those who are not qualified by Age or Education; those who have neither Disposition nor Leisure, nor Faculties to dig in the Mine of Truth themselves, must take it as retailed out by others. I see no Remedy. GOD who knows the Opportunities of every Man, requires Impossibilities from no Man. And where there is a sincere Love of Truth and Virtue; the Grace of God can easily supply the Defect of humane Means.

IT hath been before observed, and shewed at large, that the Bulk of Mankind must have their Minds betimes imbued with good and wholesome Notions or Principles by their Parents, Pastors, and Tutors, or else bad Notions, hurtful to themselves and others, will undoubtedly take Possession thereof. Such bad Notions have, for several Years past, been propagated with uncommon Industry in these Kingdoms: They now bring forth Fruit every Day more and more abundant. It is to be feared, that what hath been long ripening, is now near ripe. Many are the Signs and Tokens. He that runs, may read.

BUT there cannot be a higher, or more flagrant Symptom of the Madness of our Times, than that execrable Fraternity of Blasphemers, lately set up within this City of Dublin. Blasphemy against GOD, is a great Crime against the State. But that a Set of Men should, in open Contempt of the Laws, make this very Crime their Profession, distinguish themselves by a peculiar Name, and form a distinct Society, whereof the proper and avowed Business shall be, to shock all serious Christians by the most impious and horrid Blasphemies, uttered in the most publick Manner. This surely must alarm all thinking Men. It is a new Thing under the Sun reserved for our worthy Times and Country.

IT is no common Blasphemy I speak of: It is not simple Cursing and Swearing: It is not the Effect either of Habit or Surprize; but a Train of studied deliberate Indignities against the Divine Majesty; and those, of so black and hellish a Kind, as the Tongues alone which uttered them, can duly characterize and express. This is no speculative Heresy, no remote or doubtful Inference from an Author’s Tenets. It is a direct and open Attack on GOD himself. It is such a calm premeditated Insult upon Religion, Law, and the very Light of Nature, that there is no Sect or Nation of Men, whether Christians, Jews, Mahometans, or even civilized Heathens, that would not be struck with Horror and Amazement at the Thought of it, and that would not animadvert on its Authors with the utmost Severity.

DELIBERATE, atheistical Blasphemy, is of all Crimes most dangerous to the Public, inasmuch as it opens the Door to all other Crimes, and virtually contains them all. A religious Awe and Fear of GOD, being (as we have already observed) the Centre that unites, and the Cement that connects all humane Society, He, who makes it his Business, to lessen or root out from the Minds of Men this Principle, doth in Effect, endeavour to fill his Country with Highwaymen, House-breakers, Murderers, fraudulent Dealers, perjured Witnesses, and every other Pest of Society. Therefore, it would be the greatest Cruelty to our Children, Neighbours, and Country, to connive at such a Crime; a Crime! which has no natural Passion or Temptation to plead for it, but is the pure Effect of an abandoned Impudence in Wickedness; and, perhaps, of a mistaken Hope, that the Laws and Magistrates are asleep.

THE Question is not now, whether Religion shall be established by Law: The Thing is already done, (and done with good Reason, as appeareth from the Premisses) but whether a Reverence for the Laws shall be preserved. Religion considered as a System of saving Truths, hath its Sanction from Heaven; its Rewards and Penalties are Divine. But Religion, as useful and necessary to Society, hath been wisely established by Law; and so established, and wrought into the very Frame and Principles of our Government, is become a main Part of the civil Constitution.

OUR Laws, are the Laws of a Christian Country: Our Government hath been constituted and modelled by Christians; and is still administred and maintained by Men professing Belief in CHRIST. Can it then be supposed, that impious Men shall with Impunity, invent and publickly utter the most horrid Blasphemies; and at the same Time, the whole Constitution not be endangered? Or can it be supposed, that Magistrates, or Men invested with Power, should look on, and see the most sacred Part of our Constitution trampled under Foot, and yet imagine their own Dignity and Authority to be secure, which rest intirely thereupon?

I WILL venture to say, that whoever is a wise Man, and a Lover of his Country, will not only be solicitous to preserve the Honour of GOD sacred and intire; he will even discourage that prevailing Prejudice against the Dispensers of GOD’s Word, the Teachers of those Salutary Doctrines, without which the Public cannot thrive or subsist. He will be no Contemner, not even of those Rites and Ordinances enjoined by Law, as necessary to imprint and retain a Sense of Religion in the Minds of Men. He will extend his Care to the Outworks, as knowing that when these are gone, it may be difficult to preserve the rest.

NOTWITHSTANDING the vain Assertion of those Men, who would justify the present, by saying all Times are alike, it is most evident, that the Magistrates, the Laws, the very Constitution of these Realms, have lost no small Share of their Authority and Reverence, since this great Growth and spreading of impious Principles. Whatsoever be the Cause, the Effect is apparent. Whether we ascribe it to the natural Course of Things, or to a just Judgment upon those who, having been careless to preserve a due Sense of the divine Authority, have seen and shall see their own despised.

DARIUS, a Heathen Prince, made a Decree, that in every Dominion of his Kingdom, Men should tremble and fear before GOD.Nebuchadnezzar likewise, another Heathen, made a Decree, that every People, Nation, and Language which spoke any Thing amiss against GOD, should be cut in Pieces, and their Houses made a Dunghill. And if these Things were done in Persia and Babylon, surely it may be expected, that impious Blasphemers against GOD, and his Worship, should at least, be discouraged and put out of Countenance, in these Christian Countries. Now, a constant Course of disfavour from Men in Authority, would prove a most effectual Check to all such Miscreants. When therefore they are public and bold in their Blasphemies, this is no small Reflection on those who might check them if they would.

IT is not so much the Execution of the Laws, as the Countenance of those in Authority, that is wanting to the Maintenance of Religion. If Men of Rank and Power, who have a Share in distributing Justice, and a Voice in the publick Councils, shall be observed to neglect divine Worship themselves, it must needs be a great Temptation for others to do the same. But if they, and their Families, should set a good Example, it may be presumed, that Men of less Figure would be disposed to follow it. Fashions are always observed to descend, and People are generally fond of being in the Fashion, whence one would be apt to suspect, the prevailing Contempt of GOD’s Word, and estrangement from his House, to a Degree that was never known in any Christian Country, must take its Rise from the Irreligion and bad Example of those who are styled the better Sort.

OFFENCES must come, but Woe be to him, by whom the Offence cometh. A Man who is entrusted with Power and Influence in his Country, hath much to answer for, if Religion and Virtue suffer through Want of his Authority and Countenance. But in Case he should, by the Vanity of his Discourse, his Favour to wicked Men, or his own apparent Neglect of all religious Duties, countenance what he ought to condemn, and authorize by his own Example, what he ought to punish; such a one, whatever he may pretend, is in Fact a bad Patriot, a bad Citizen, and a bad Subject, as well as a bad Christian.

OUR Prospect is very terrible, and the Symptoms grow stronger every Day. The Morals of a People are in this like their Fortunes; when they feel a national Shock, the worst doth not shew itself immediately. Things make a Shift to subsist for a Time, on the Credit of old Notions and dying Opinions. But the Youth born and brought up in wicked Times, without any Byas to good from early Principle, or instilled Opinion, when they grow ripe must be Monsters indeed. And it is to be feared that Age of Monsters is not far off.

WHENCE this Impiety springs, by what Means it gains Ground among us, and how it may be remedied, are Matters that deserve the Attention of all those who have Power and Will to serve their Country. And although many Things look like a Prelude to some general Ruin; although it is much to be apprehended, we shall be worse before we are better; yet who knows what may ensue, if all Persons in Power, from the supreme Executor of the Law, down to a petty Constable, would, in their several Stations beheave themselves like Men, truly conscious and mindful, that the Authority they are cloathed with, is but a derivative Ray from the supreme Authority of Heaven? This may not a little contribute to stem that Torrent, which from small Beginnings, and under specious Pretences, hath grown to such a Head, and daily gathers Force more and more to that Degree, as threatens a general Inundation and Destruction of these Realms.

FINIS .

 Siris (1744) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

A CHAIN OF PHILOSOPHICAL REFLECTIONS AND INQUIRIES, CONCERNING THE VIRTUES OF TAR-WATER

FIRST EDITION TEXT

Berkeley’s last major philosophical work, Siris (1744), opens by advocating the medicinal use of tar-water and then continues to discuss a wide range of topics, including science, philosophy and theology. Tar-water was a medieval medicine consisting of pine tar and water. As it was foul-tasting, it slowly dropped in popularity, but was revived in the Victorian era. It is used both as a tonic and as a substitute to get rid of “strong spirits”. Both these uses were advocated by Berkeley. Nevertheless, most medical experts regarded tar-water as mere quackery.

 [image "img127.jpg" file=Image00126.jpg] 

SIRISA CHAIN OF PHILOSOPHICAL REFLEXIONS AND INQUIRIES, ETC.

 [image "img128.jpg" file=Image00127.jpg] 

F OR INTRODUCTION TO the following piece, I assure the reader that nothing could, in my present situation, have induced me to be at the pains of writing it, but a firm belief that it would prove a valuable present to the public. What entertainment soever the reasoning or notional part may afford the mind, I will venture to say, the other part seemeth so surely calculated to do good to the Body that both must be gainers. For, if the lute be not well tuned, the musician fails of his harmony. And, in our present state, the operations of the mind so far depend on the right tone or good condition of its instrument, that anything which greatly contributes to preserve or recover the health of the body is well worth the attention of the mind. These considerations have moved me to communicate to the public the salutary virtues of tar-water; to which I thought myself indispensably obliged by the duty every man owes to mankind. And, as effects are linked with their causes, my thoughts on this low but useful theme led to farther inquiries, and those on to others, remote perhaps and speculative, but I hope not altogether useless or unentertaining.

1. In certain parts of America, tar-water is made by putting a quart of cold water to a quart of tar, and stirring them well together in a vessel, which is left standing till the tar sinks to the bottom. A glass of water, being poured off for a draught, is replaced by the same quantity of fresh water, the vessel being shaken and left to stand as before. And this is repeated for every glass, so long as the tar continues to impregnate the water sufficiently, which appears by the smell and taste. But, as this method produceth tar-water of a nauseous kind, and different degrees of strength, I choose to make it in the following manner: Pour a gallon of cold water on a quart of tar, and stir, work, and mix them thoroughly together, with a wooden ladle or flat stick, for the space of five or six minutes; after which the vessel must stand close covered and unmoved three days and nights, that the tar may have full time to subside; and then the clear water, having been first carefully skimmed without shaking the vessel, is to be poured off, and kept in bottles well stopped for use, (I make this water stronger than that first prescribed in “Siris,” having found, on more general experience, that five or six minutes’ stirring, when the water is carefully cleared and skimmed, agrees with most stomachs.) no more being made from the same tar, which may still serve for common uses. (In the first edition the directions for use are as follows: “Pour a gallon of cold water on a quart of tar, and stir and mix them thoroughly with a ladle or fiat stick for the space of three or four minutes; after which the vessel must stand eight and forty hours that the tar may have time to subside, when the clear water is to be poured off and kept for use, no more,” etc. — ED.)

2. The cold infusion of tar hath been used in some of our Colonies, as a preservative or preparative against the smallpox, which foreign practice induced me to try it in my own neighbourhood, when the small-pox raged with great violence. And the trial fully answered my expectation: all those within my knowledge who took the tar-water having either escaped that distemper, or had it very favourably. In one family there was a remarkable instance of seven children who came all very well through the small-pox, except one young child which could not be brought to drink tar-water as the rest had done.

3. Several were preserved from taking the small-pox by the use of this liquor; others had it in the mildest manner; and others, that they might be able to take the infection, were obliged to intermit drinking the tar-water. I have found it may be drunk with great safety and success for any length of time, and this not only before, but also during the distemper. The general rule for taking it is about half a pint night and morning on an empty stomach, which quantity may be varied, according to the case and age of the patient, provided it be always taken on an empty stomach, and about two hours before or after a meal.(What follows to “made or kept” (eight lines) appears first in the third edition; the remainder of the section was added to the last edition. — ED.)  For children and squeamish persons it may be made weaker, or given little and often; more water or less stirring makes it weaker, as less water or more stirring makes it stronger. It should not be lighter than French, nor deeper coloured than Spanish white wine. If a spirit be not very sensibly perceived on drinking, either the tar must have been bad, or already used, or the tar-water carelessly made or kept. Particular experience will best shew how much and how strong the stomach can bear, and what are the properest times for taking it. I apprehend no danger from excess in the use of this medicine.

4. It seemed probable that a medicine of such efficacy in a distemper attended with so many purulent ulcers might be also useful in other foulnesses of the blood; accordingly, I tried it on several persons infected with cutaneous eruptions and ulcers, who were soon relieved, and soon after cured. Encouraged by these successes, I ventured to advise it in the foulest distempers, wherein it proved much more successful than salivations and wood drinks had done.

5. Having tried it in a great variety of cases, I found it succeeded beyond my hopes: — in a tedious and painful ulceration of the bowels; in a consumptive cough, and (as appeared by expectorated pus) an ulcer in the lungs; in a pleurisy and peripneumony. And when a person who for some years had been subject to erysipelatous fevers perceived the usual forerunning symptoms to come on, I advised her to drink tar-water, which prevented the erysipelas.

6. I never knew anything so good for the stomach as tar-water: it cures indigestion and gives a good appetite. It is an excellent medicine in an asthma. It imparts a kindly warmth and quick circulation to the juices without heating, and is therefore useful, not only as a pectoral and balsamic, but also as a powerful and safe deobstruent in cachetic and hysteric cases. As it is both healing and diuretic, it is very good for the gravel. I believe it to be of great use in dropsy. having known it cure a very bad anarsaca in a person whose thirst, though very extraordinary, was in a short time removed by the drinking of tar-water.

7. The usefulness of this medicine in inflammatory cases is evident, from what has been already observed. (Sect. 5.) And yet some perhaps may suspect that, as the tar itself is sulphureous, tar-water must be of a hot and inflaming nature. But it is to be noted that all balsams contain an acid spirit, which is in truth a volatile salt. Water is a menstruum that dissolves all sorts of salts, and draws them from their subjects. Tar, therefore, being a balsam, its salutary acid is extracted by water; which yet is incapable of dissolving its gross resinous parts, whose proper menstruum is spirit of wine. Therefore tar-water, not being impregnated with resin, may be safely used in inflammatory cases: and in fact it hath been found an admirable febrifuge, at once the safest cooler and cordial.

8. The volatile salts separated by infusion from tar, may be supposed to contain its specific virtues. Mr. Boyle and other later chemists are agreed that fixed salts are much the same in all bodies. But it is well known that volatile salts do greatly differ, and the easier they are separated from the subject, the more do they possess of its specific qualities. Now, the most easy separation is by the infusion of tar in cold water, which to smell and taste shewing itself well impregnated may be presumed to extract and retain the most pure volatile and active particles of that vegetable balsam.

9. Tar was by the ancients esteemed good against poisons, ulcers, the bites of venomous creatures; also for phthisical, scrofulous, paralytic, and asthmatic persons. But the method of rendering it an inoffensive medicine and agreeable to the stomach by extracting its virtues in cold water, was unknown to them. The leaves and tender tops of pine and fir are in our times used for diet drinks, and allowed to be antiscorbutic and diuretic. But the most elaborate juice, salt, and spirit of these evergreens, are to be found in tar; whose virtues extend not to animals alone, but also to vegetables. Mr. Evelyn, in his treatise on “Forest Trees,” observes with wonder, that stems of trees, smeared over with tar, are preserved thereby from being hurt by the invenomed teeth of goats, and other injuries, while every other thing of an unctuous nature is highly prejudicial to them.

10. It seems that tar and turpentine may be had, more or less, from all sorts of pines and firs whatsoever; and that the native spirits and essential salts of those vegetables are the same in turpentine and common tar. In effect, this vulgar tar, which cheapness and plenty may have rendered contemptible, appears to be an excellent balsam, containing the virtues of most other balsams; which it easily imparts to water, and by that means readily and inoffensively insinuates them into the habit of the body.

11. The resinous exudations of pines and firs are an important branch of the materia medica, and not only useful in the prescriptions of physicians, but have been also thought otherwise conducive to health. Pliny tells us that wines in the time of the old Romans were medicated with pitch and resin; and Jonstonus in his “Dendrographia” observes, that it is wholesome to walk in groves of pine-trees, which impregnate the air with balsamic particles. That all turpentines and resins are good for the lungs, against gravel also and obstructions, is no secret. And that the medicinal properties of those drugs are found in tar-water, without heating the blood, or disordering the stomach, is confirmed by experience; and particularly, that phthisical and asthmatic persons receive speedy and great relief from the use of it.

12. Balsams, as all unctuous and oily medicines, create a nauseating in the stomach. They cannot therefore be taken in substance so much or so long as to produce all those salutary effects, which, if thoroughly mixed with the blood and juices, they would be capable of producing. It must therefore be a thing of great benefit to be able to introduce any requisite quantity of their volatile parts into the finest ducts and capillaries, so as not to offend the stomach, but, on the contrary, to comfort and strengthen it in a great degree.

13. According to Pliny, liquid pitch (as he calls it) or tar was obtained by setting fire to billets of old fat pines or firs. The first running was tar, the latter or thicker running was pitch. Theophrastus is more particular: he tells us the Macedonians made huge heaps of the cloven trunks of those trees, wherein the billets were placed erect beside each other: that such heaps or piles of wood were sometimes a hundred and eighty cubits round, and sixty or even a hundred high: and that, having covered them with sods of earth to prevent the flame from bursting forth (in which case the tar was lost), they set on fire those huge heaps of pine or fir, letting the tar and pitch run out in a channel.

14. Pliny saith, it was customary for the ancients to hold fleeces of wool over the steam of boiling tar, and squeeze the moisture from them, which watery substance was called pissinum. Ray will have this to be the same with the pisselæum of the ancients; but Hardouin, in his notes on Pliny, thinks the pisselœum to have been produced from the cones of cedars. What use they made of these liquors anciently I know not; but it may be presumed they were used in medicine, though at present, for aught I can find, they are not used at all.

15. From the manner of procuring tar (sect. 13) it plainly appears to be a natural production, lodged in the vessels of the tree, whence it is only freed and let loose (not made) by burning. If we may believe Pliny, the first running or tar was called cedrium , and was of such efficacy to preserve from putrefaction that in Egypt they embalmed dead bodies with it. And to this he ascribes their mummies continuing uncorrupted for so many ages.

16. Some modern writers inform us that tar flows from the trunks of pines and firs, when they are very old, through incisions made in the bark near the root; that pitch is tar inspissated; and both are the oil of the tree grown thick and ripened with age and sun. The trees, like old men, being unable to perspire, and their secretory ducts obstructed, they are, as one may say, choked and stuffed with their own juice.

17. The method used by our Colonies in America for making tar and pitch is in effect the same with that of the ancient Macedonians; as appears from the account given in the “Philosophical Transactions.” And the relation of Leo Africanus, who describes, as an eye-witness, the making of tar on Mount Atlas, agrees in substance with the methods used by the Macedonians of old, and the people of New England at this day.

18. Jonstonus, in his “Dendrographia,” is of opinion, that pitch was anciently made of cedar, as well as of the pine and fir grown old and oily. It should seem indeed that one and the same word was used by the ancients in a large sense, so as to comprehend the juices issuing from all those trees. Tar and all sorts of exudations from evergreens are, in a general acceptation, included under the name resin. Hard coarse resin or dry pitch is made from tar, by letting it blaze till the moisture is spent. Liquid resin is properly an oily viscid juice oozing from the bark of evergreen trees, either spontaneously or by incision. It is thought to be the oil of the bark inspissated by the sun. As it issues from the tree it is liquid, but becomes dry and hard, being condensed by the sun or by fire.

19. According to Theophrastus, resin was obtained by stripping off the bark from pines, and by incisions made in the silver fir and the pitch pine. The inhabitants of Mount Ida, he tells us, stripped the trunk of the pine on the sunny side two or three cubits from the ground. He observes that a good pine might be made to yield resin every year; an indifferent every other year; and the weaker trees once in three years; and that three runnings were as much as a tree could bear. It is remarked by the same author that a pine doth not at once produce fruit and resin, but the former only in its youth, the latter in its old age.

20. Turpentine is a fine resin. Four kinds of this are in use. The turpentine of Chios or Cyprus, which flows from the turpentine tree: the Venice turpentine, which is got by piercing the larch tree: the Strasburgh turpentine, which Mr. Ray informs us is procured from the knots of the silver fir; it is fragrant and grows yellow with age: the fourth kind is common turpentine, neither transparent nor so liquid as the former; and this Mr. Ray taketh to flow from the mountain pine. All these turpentines are useful in the same intentions. Theophrastus saith, the best resin or turpentine is got from the terebinthus growing in Syria and some of the Greek islands. The next best from the silver fir and pitch pine.

21. Turpentine is on all hands allowed to have great medicinal virtues. Tar and its infusion contain those virtues. Tar-water is extremely pectoral and restorative; and, if I may judge from what experience I have had, it possesseth the most valuable qualities ascribed to the several balsams of Peru, of Tolu, of Capivi, and even to the balm of Gilead, such is its virtue in asthmas and pleurisies, in obstructions and ulcerous erosions of the inward parts. Tar in substance mixed with honey I have found an excellent medicine for coughs. Balsams, as hath been already observed, are apt to offend the stomach, but tar-water may be taken without offending the stomach. For the strengthening whereof it is the best medicine I have ever tried.

22. The folly of man rateth things by their scarceness, but Providence hath made the most useful things most common. Among those liquid oily extracts from trees and shrubs which are termed balsams, and valued for medicinal virtues, tar may hold its place as a most valuable balsam. Its fragrancy sheweth that it is possessed of active qualities, and its oiliness that it is fitted to retain them. This excellent balsam may be purchased for a penny a pound, whereas the balsam of Judea, when most plenty, was sold on the very spot that produced it, for double its weight in silver, if we may credit Pliny; who also informs us, that the best balsam of Judea flowed only from the bark, and that it was adulterated with resin and oil of turpentine. Now, comparing the virtues I have experienced in tar with those I find ascribed to the precious balm of Judea, of Gilead, or of Mecha, (as it is diversely called), I am of opinion that the latter is not a medicine of more value or efficacy than the former.

23. Pliny supposed amber to be a resin, and to distil from some species of pine — which he gathered from its smell. Nevertheless, its being dug out of the earth shews it to be a fossil, though of a very different kind from other fossils. But thus much is certain, that the medicinal virtues of amber are to be found in the balsamic juices of pines and firs. Particularly the virtues of the most valuable preparation, I mean salt of amber, are in a great degree answered by tar-water, as a detergent, diaphoretic, and diuretic.

24. There is, as hath been already observed, more or less oil and balsam in all evergreen trees, which retains the acid spirit, that principle of life and verdure; the not retaining whereof in sufficient quantity causeth other plants to droop and wither. Of these evergreen trees productive of resin, pitch and tar, Pliny enumerates six kinds in Europe; Jonstonus reckons up thrice that number of the pine and fir family. And, indeed, their number, their variety, and their likeness, make it difficult to be exact.

25. It is remarked, both by Theophrastus and Jonstonus, that trees growing in low and shady places do not yield so good tar as those which grow in higher and more exposed situations. And Theophrastus farther observes, that the inhabitants of Mount Ida in Asia, who distinguish the Idean pine from the maritime, affirm, that the tar flowing from the former is in greater plenty, as well as more fragrant than the other. Hence, it should seem the pines or firs in the mountains of Scotland might be employed that way, and rendered valuable; even where the timber, by its remoteness from water carriage, is of small value. What we call the Scotch fir is falsely so called, being in truth a wild forest pine, and (as Mr. Ray informs us) agreeing much with the description of a pine growing on Mount Olympus in Phrygia, probably the only place where it is found out of these islands; in which of late years it is so much planted and cultivated with so little advantage, while the cedar of Lebanon might perhaps be raised, with little more trouble, and much more profit and ornament.

26. The pines, which differ from the firs in the length and disposition of their leaves and hardness of the wood, do not, in Pliny’s account, yield so much resin as the fir-trees. Several species of both are accurately described and delineated by the naturalists. But they all agree so far as to seem related. Theophrastus gives the preference to that resin which is got from the silver fir and pitch-tree  before that yielded by the pine, which yet he saith is in greater plenty. Pliny, on the contrary, affirms that the pine produceth the smallest quantity. It should seem therefore that the interpreter of Theophrastus might have been mistaken, in rendering GREEK TEXT by pinus ; as well as Jonstonus, who likewise takes the pine for the GREEK TEXT of Theophrastus. Hardouin will have the pinus of Pliny to have been by others called GREEK TEXT, but by Theophrastus GREEK TEXT. Ray thinks the common fir, or picea of the Latins, to be the male fir of Theophrastus. This was probably the spruce fir; for the picea , according to Pliny, yields much resin, loves a cold and mountainous situation, and is distinguished, tonsili facilitate , by its fitness to be shorn, which agrees with the spruce-fir, whereof I have seen close-shorn hedges.

27. There seems to have been some confusion in the naming of these trees, as well among the ancients as the moderns. The ancient Greek and Latin names are by later authors applied very differently. Pliny himself acknowledged it is not easy even for the skilful to distinguish the trees by their leaves, and know their sexes and kinds; and that difficulty is since much increased, by the discovery of many new species of that evergreen tribe, growing in various parts of the globe. But descriptions are not so easily misapplied as names. Theophrastus tells that πίτυς differed from πεΰκη among other things, in that it is neither so tall nor so straight, nor hath so large a leaf. The fir he distinguished into male and female: the latter is softer timber than the male; it is also a taller and fairer tree, and this is probably the silver fir.

28. To say no more on this obscure business, which I leave to the critics, I shall observe that according to Theophrastus not only the turpentine-trees, the pines, and the firs yield resin or tar, but also the cedars and palm-trees; and the words fix and résina are taken by Pliny in so large a sense as to include the weepings of the lentiscus and cypress, and the balms of Arabia and Judea; all which perhaps are near of kin, and in their most useful qualities concur with common tar, especially the Norwegian, which is the most liquid, and best for medicinal uses of any that I have experienced. Those trees that grow on mountains, exposed to the sun or the north wind, are reckoned by Theophrastus to produce the best and purest tar; and the Idæan pines were distinguished from those growing on the plain, as yielding a thinner, sweeter, and better scented tar, all which differences I think I have observed, between the tar that comes from Norway, and that which comes from low and swampy countries.

29. Agreeable to the old observation of the Peripatetics, that heat gathereth homogeneous things, and disperseth such as are heterogeneous, we find Chemistry is fitted for the analysis of bodies. But the chemistry of nature is much more perfect than that of human art, inasmuch as it joineth to the power of heat that of the most exquisite mechanism. Those who have examined the structure of trees and plants by microscopes have discovered an admirable variety of fine capillary tubes and vessels, fitted for several purposes, as the imbibing or attracting of proper nourishment, the distributing thereof through all parts of the vegetable, the discharge of superfluities, the secretion of particular juices. They are found to have ducts answering to the tracheæ in animals, for the conveying of air; they have others answering to lacteals, arteries, and veins. They feed, digest, respire, perspire, and generate their kind, and are provided with organs nicely fitted for all those uses.

30. The sap vessels are observed to be fine tubes running up through the trunk from the root. Secretory vessels are found in the bark, buds, leaves, and flowers. Exhaling vessels, for carrying off excrementitious parts, are discovered throughout the whole surface of the vegetable. And (though this point be not so well agreed) Dr. Grew, in his “Anatomy of Plants,” thinks there appears a circulation of the sap, moving downwards in the root, and feeding the trunk upwards.

31. Some difference indeed there is between learned men, concerning the proper use of certain parts of vegetables. But, whether the discoverers have rightly guessed at all their uses or no, thus much is certain — that there are innumerable fine and curious parts in a vegetable body, and a wonderful similitude or analogy between the mechanism of plants and animals. And perhaps some will think it not unreasonable to suppose the mechanism of plants more curious than even that of animals, if we consider not only the several juices secreted by different parts of the same plant, but also the endless variety of juices drawn and formed out of the same soil, by various species of vegetables; which must therefore differ in an endless variety, as to the texture of their absorbent vessels and secretory ducts.

32. A body, therefore, either animal or vegetable, may be considered as an organized system of tubes and vessels, containing several sorts of fluids. And as fluids are moved through the vessels of animal bodies by the systole and diastole of the heart, the alternate expansion and condensation of the air, and the oscillations in the membranes and tunics of the vessels, even so, by means of air expanded and contracted in the tracheæ or vessels made up of elastic fibres, the sap is propelled through the arterial tubes of a plant, and the vegetable juices, as they are rarefied by heat or condensed by cold, will either ascend and evaporate into air, or descend in the form of a gross liquor.

33. Juices, therefore, first purified by straining through the fine pores of the root, are afterwards exalted by the action of the air and the vessels of the plant; but, above all, by the action of the sun’s light; which, at the same time that it heats, doth wonderfully rarefy and raise the sap, till it perspires and forms an atmosphere, like the effluvia of animal bodies. And, though the leaves are supposed to perform principally the office of lungs, breathing out excrementitious vapours, and drawing in alimentary; yet it seems probable, that the reciprocal actions of repulsion and attraction are performed all over the surface of vegetables as well as animals. In which reciprocation Hippocrates supposeth the manner of nature’s acting for the nourishment and health of animal bodies chiefly to consist. And, indeed, what share of a plant’s nourishment is drawn, through the leaves and bark, from that ambient heterogeneous fluid called air, is not easy to say. It seems very considerable, and altogether necessary, as well to vegetable as animal life.

34. It is an opinion received by many, that the sap circulates in plants as the blood in animals; that it ascends through capillary arteries in the trunk, into which are inosculated other vessels of the bark answering to veins, which bring back to the root the remainder of the sap, over and above what had been deposited during its ascent by the arterial vessels, and secreted for the several uses of the vegetable throughout all its parts, stem, branches, leaves, flowers, and fruit. Others deny this circulation, and affirm that the sap doth not return through the bark vessels. It is nevertheless agreed by all that there are ascending and descending juices; while some will have the ascent and descent to be a circulation of the same juices through different vessels; others will have the ascending juice to be one sort attracted by the root, and the descending another imbibed by the leaves, or extremities of the branches; lastly, others think that the same juice, as it is rarefied or condensed by heat or cold, rises and subsides in the same tube. I shall not take upon me to decide this controversy. Only I cannot help observing that the vulgar argument from analogy between plants and animals loses much of its force, if it be considered that the supposed circulating of the sap, from the root or lacteals through the arteries, and thence returning, by inosculations, through the veins or bark vessels to the root or lacteals again, is in no sort conformable or analogous to the circulation of the blood.

35. It is sufficient to observe, what all must acknowledge, that a plant or tree is a very nice and complicated machine (sect. 30, 31); by the several parts and motions whereof, the crude juices, admitted through the absorbent vessels, whether of the root, trunk, or branches, are variously mixed, separated, altered, digested, and exalted, in a very wonderful manner. The juice, as it passeth in and out, up and down, through tubes of different textures, shapes, and sizes, and is affected by the alternate compression and expansion of elastic vessels, by the vicissitudes of seasons, the changes of weather, and the various action of the solar light, grows still more and more elaborate.

36. There is therefore no chemistry like that of nature, which addeth to the force of fire the most delicate, various, and artificial percolation (sect. 29). The incessant action of the sun upon the elements of air, earth, and water, and on all sorts of mixed bodies, animal, vegetable, and fossil, is supposed to perform all sorts of chemical operations. Whence it should follow, that the air contains all sorts of chemic productions, the vapours, fumes, oils, salts, and spirits of all the bodies we know: from which general aggregate or mass, those that are proper being drawn in, through the fine vessels of the leaves, branches, and stem of the tree, undergo, in its various organs, new alterations, secretions, and digestions, till such time as they assume the most elaborate form.

37. Nor is it to be wondered that the peculiar texture of each plant or tree, co-operating with the solar fire and preexisting juices, should so alter the fine nourishment drawn from earth and air (sect. 33), as to produce various specific qualities of great efficacy in medicine; especially if it be considered that in the opinion of learned men, there is an influence on plants derived from the sun, besides its mere heat. Certainly, Dr. Grew, that curious anatomist of plants, holds the solar influence to differ from that of a mere culinary fire no otherwise than by being only a more temperate and equal heat.

38. The alimentary juice taken into the lacteals, if I may so say, of vegetables, consists of oily, aqueous, and saline particles, which being dissolved, volatilized, and diversely agitated, part thereof is spent and exhaled into the air; and that part which remains is, by the economy of the plant, and action of the sun, strained, purified, concocted, and ripened, into an inspissated oil or balsam, and deposited in certain cells placed chiefly in the bark, which is thought to answer the panniculus cidiposits in animals, defending trees from the weather, and, when in sufficient quantity, rendering them evergreen. This balsam, weeping or sweating through the bark, hardens into resin; and this most copiously in the several species of pines and firs, whose oil being in greater quantity, and more tenacious of the acid spirit, or vegetable soul (as perhaps it may not improperly be called), abides the action of the sun, and, attracting the sunbeams, is thereby exalted and enriched, so as to become a most noble medicine: such is the last product of a tree, perfectly maturated by time and sun.

39. It is remarked by Theophrastus that all plants and trees while they put forth have most humour, but when they have ceased to germinate and bear, then the humour is strongest, and most sheweth the nature of the plant, and that, therefore, trees yielding resin should be cut after germination. It seems also very reasonable to suppose the juice of old trees, whose organs bring no new sap, should be better ripened than that of others.

40. The aromatic flavours of vegetables seem to depend upon the sun’s light as much as colours. As in the production of the latter, the reflecting powers of the object, so in that of the former, the attractive and organical powers of the plant co-operate with the sun (sect. 36, 37). And as from Sir Isaac Newton’s experiments it appears that all colours are virtually in the white light of the sun, and shew themselves when the rays are separated by the attracting and repelling powers of objects, even so the specific qualities of the elaborate juices of plants seem to be virtually or eminently contained in the solar light, and are actually exhibited upon the separation of the rays, by the peculiar powers of the capillary organs in vegetables, attracting and imbibing certain rays, which produce certain flavours and qualities, in like manner as certain rays, being reflected, produce certain colours.

41. It hath been observed by some curious anatomists that the secretory vessels in the glands of animal bodies are lined with a fine down, which in different glands is of different colours. And it is thought that each particular down, being originally imbued with its own proper juice, attracts none but that sort; by which means so many various juices are secreted in different parts of the body. And perhaps there may be something analogous to this in the fine absorbent vessels of plants, which may co-operate towards producing that endless variety of juices, elaborated in plants from the same earth and air.

42. The balsam or essential oil of vegetables contains a spirit, wherein consist the specific qualities, the smell and taste, of the plant. Boerhaave holds the native presiding spirit to be neither oil, salt, earth, or water; but somewhat too fine and subtle to be caught alone and rendered visible to the eye. This when suffered to fly off, for instance, from the oil of rosemary, leaves it destitute of all flavour. This spark of life, this spirit or soul, if we may so say, of the vegetable departs without any sensible diminution of the oil or water wherein it was lodged.

43. It should seem that the forms, souls, or principles of vegetable life subsist in the light or solar emanation (sect. 40); which in respect of the macrocosm is what the animal spirit is to the microcosm — the interior tegument, the subtle instrument and vehicle of power. No wonder, then, that the ens primum or scintilla spirituosa, as it is called, of plants should be a thing so fine and fugacious as to escape our nicest search. It is evident that nature at the sun’s approach vegetates, and languishes at his recess; this terrestrial globe seeming only a matrix disposed and prepared to receive life from his light; whence Homer in his Hymns styleth earth the wife of heaven, άλοχ ’ ουρανού άστεροεντος.

“ The luminous spirit which is the form or life of a plant, from whence its differences and properties flow, is somewhat extremely volatile. It is not the oil, but a thing more subtle, whereof oil is the vehicle, which retains it from flying off, and is lodged in several parts of the plant, particularly in the cells of the bark and in the seeds. This oil, purified and exalted by the organical powers of the plant, and agitated by warmth, becomes a proper receptacle of the spirit: part of which spirit exhales through the leaves and flowers, and part is arrested by this unctuous humour that detains it in the plant. It is to be noted this essential oil, animated, as one may say, with the flavour of the plant, is very different from any spirit that can be procured from the same plant by fermentation.

45. Light impregnates air (sect. 37, 43), air impregnates vapour; and this becomes a watery juice by distillation, having risen first in the cold still with a kindly gentle heat. This fragrant vegetable water is possessed of the specific odour and taste of the plant. It is remarked that distilled oils added to water for counterfeiting the vegetable water can never equal it, artificial chemistry falling short of the natural.

46. The less violence is used to nature the better its produce. The juice of olives or grapes issuing by the lightest pressure is best. Resins that drop from the branches spontaneously, or ooze upon the slightest incision, are the finest and most fragrant. And infusions are observed to act more strongly than decoctions of plants; the more subtle and volatile salts and spirits, which might be lost or corrupted by the latter, being obtained in their natural state by the former. It is also observed that the finest, purest, and most volatile part is that which first ascends in distillation. And, indeed, it should seem the lightest and most active particles required least force to disengage them from the subject.

47. The salts, therefore, and more active spirits of the tar are got by infusion in cold water; but the resinous part is not to be dissolved thereby (sect. 7). Hence the prejudice which some perhaps may entertain against tar-water as a medicine, the use whereof might inflame the blood by its sulphur and resin, appears to be not well grounded; it being indeed impregnated with a fine acid spirit, balsamic, cooling, diuretic, and possessed of many other virtues (sect. 42, 44). Spirits are supposed to consist of salts and phlegm, probably, too, somewhat of a fine oily nature, differing from oil in that it mixeth with water, and agreeing with oil in that it runneth in rivulets by distillation. Thus much is allowed, that the water, earth, and fixed salt are the same in all plants; that, therefore, which differenceth a plant, or makes it what it is — the native spark or form, in the language of the chemists or schools — is none of those things, nor yet the finest oil, which seemeth only its receptacle or vehicle. It is observed by chemists that all sorts of balsamic wood afford an acid spirit, which is the volatile oily salt of the vegetable; herein are chiefly contained their medicinal virtues; and, by the trials I have made, it appears that the acid spirit in tar-water possesseth the virtues, in an eminent degree, of that of guaiacum, and other medicinal woods.

48. Qualities in a degree too strong for human nature to subdue, and assimilate to itself must hurt the constitution. All acids, therefore, may not be useful or innocent. But this seemeth an acid so thoroughly concocted, so gentle, bland, and temperate, and withal a spirit so fine and volatile, as readily to enter the smallest vessels, and be assimilated with the utmost ease.

49. If any one were minded to dissolve some of the resin, together with the salt or spirit, he need only mix some spirit of wine with the water. But such an entire solution of resins and gums as to qualify them for entering and pervading the animal system, like the fine acid spirit that first flies off from the subject, is perhaps impossible to obtain. It is an apothegm of the chemists, derived from Helmont, that whoever can make myrrh soluble by the human body has the secret of prolonging his days: and Boerhaave owns that there seems to be truth in this, from its resisting putrefaction. Now, this quality is as remarkable in tar, with which the ancients embalmed and preserved dead bodies. And though Boerhaave himself, and other chemists before him, have given methods for making solutions of myrrh, yet it is by means of alcohol which extracts only the inflammable parts. And it doth not seem that any solution of myrrh is impregnated with its salt or acid spirit. It may not, therefore, seem strange if this water should be found more beneficial for procuring health and long life than any solution of myrrh whatsoever.

50. Certainly divers resins and gums may have virtues, and yet not be able for their grossness to pass the lacteals and other finer vessels, nor yet, perhaps, readily impart those virtues to a menstruum that may with safety and speed convey them throughout the human body. Upon all which accounts, I believe tar-water will be found to have singular advantages. It is observed that acid spirits prove the stronger, by how much the greater degree of heat is required to raise them. And indeed there seemeth to be no acid more gentle than this obtained by the simple affusion of cold water; which carries off from the subject the most light and subtile parts, and, if one may so speak, the very flower of its specific qualities. And here it is to be noted that the volatile salt and spirit of vegetables do, by gently stimulating the solids, attenuate the fluids contained in them, and promote secretions, and that they are penetrating and active, contrary to the general nature of other acids.

51. It is a great maxim for health, that the juices of the body be kept fluid in a due proportion. Therefore, the acid volatile spirit in tar-water, at once attenuating and cooling in a moderate degree, must greatly conduce to health, as a mild salutary deobstruent, quickening the circulation of the fluids without wounding the solids, thereby gently removing or preventing those obstructions which are the great and general cause of most chronical diseases; in this manner, answering to the antihysterics, assyfœtida, galbanum, myrrh, amber, and, in general, to all the resins and gums of trees or shrubs useful in nervous cases.

52. Warm water is itself a deobstruent. Therefore the infusion of tar drunk warm is easier insinuated into all the nice capillary vessels, and acts not only by virtue of the balsam, but also by that of the vehicle. Its taste, its diuretic quality, its being so great a cordial, shew the activity of this medicine. And, at the same time that it quickens the sluggish blood of the hysterical, its balsamic oily nature abates the too rapid motion of the sharp thin blood in those who are hectic. There is a lentor and smoothness in the blood of healthy strong people; on the contrary, there is often an acrimony and solution in that of weakly morbid persons. The fine particles of tar are not only warm and active, they are also balsamic and emollient; softening and enriching the sharp and vapid blood, and healing the erosions occasioned thereby in the blood-vessels and glands.

53. Tar-water possesseth the stomachic and cardiac qualities of elixir proprietatis , Stoughton’s drops, and many such tinctures and extracts; with this difference, that it worketh its effect more safely, as it hath nothing of that spirit of wine, which, however mixed and disguised, may yet be well accounted a poison in some degree.

54. Such medicines are supposed to be diaphoretic, which, being of an active and subtle nature, pass through the whole system, and work their effect in the finest capillaries and perspiratory ducts, which they gently cleanse and open. Tar-water is extremely well fitted to work by such an insensible diaphoresis, by the fineness and activity of its acid volatile spirit. And surely those parts ought to be very fine, which can scour the perspiratory ducts, under the scarf skin or cuticle, if it be true, that one grain of sand would cover the mouths of more than a hundred thousand.

55. Another way wherein tar-water operates is by urine, than which perhaps none is more safe and effectual, for cleansing the blood and carrying off its salts But it seems to produce its principal effect as an alterative, sure and easy, much safer than those vehement, purgative, emetic, and salivating medicines, which do violence to nature.

56. An obstruction of some vessels causeth the blood to move more swiftly in other vessels which are not obstructed. Hence manifold disorders. A liquor that dilutes and attenuates resolves the concretions which obstruct. Tar-water is such a liquor. It may be said, indeed, of common water, that it attenuates; also of mercurial preparations, that they attenuate. But it should be considered that mere water only distends the vessels, and thereby weakens their tone; and that mercury by its great momentum may justly be suspected of hurting the fine capillaries, which two deobstruents therefore might easily overact their parts, and (by lessening the force of the elastic vessels) remotely produce those concretions they are intended to remove.

57. Weak and rigid fibres are looked on by the most able physicians, as sources of two different classes of distempers: a sluggish motion of the liquids occasioning weak fibres therefore tar-water is good to strengthen them, as it gently accelerates their contents. On the other hand, being an unctuous, bland fluid, it moistens and softens the dry and stiff fibres, and so proves a remedy for both extremes.

58. Common soaps are compositions of lixivial salt and oil. The corrosive acrimony of the saline particles, being softened by the mixture of an unctuous substance, they insinuate themselves into the small ducts with less difficulty and danger. The combination of these different substances makes up a very subtle and active medicine, fitted for mixing with all humours, and resolving all obstructions. Soap, therefore, is justly esteemed a most efficacious medicine in many distempers. Alkaline soap is allowed to be cleansing, attenuating, opening, resolving, sweetening; it is pectoral, vulnerary, diuretic, and hath other good qualities which are also to be found in tar-water. It is granted that oil and acid salts combined together exist in vegetables, and that consequently there are acid soaps as well as alkaline. And the saponaceous nature of the acid vegetable spirits is what renders them so diuretic, sudorific, penetrating, abstersive, and resolving. Such, for instance, is the acid spirit of guaiacum. And all these same virtues seem to be in tar-water in a mild and salutary degree.

59. It is the general opinion that all acids coagulate the blood. Boerhaave excepts vinegar, which he holds to be a soap, inasmuch as it is found to contain an oil as well as an acid spirit. Hence it is both unctuous and penetrating, a powerful antiphlogistic, and preservative against corruption and infection. Now it seems evident that tar-water is a soap as well as vinegar. For, though it be a character of resin, which is an inspissated gross oil, not to dissolve in water (sect. 47), yet the salts attract some fine particles of essential oil: which fine oil serves as a vehicle for the acid salts, and shews itself in the colour of the tar-water: for all pure salts are colourless.

And, though the resin will not dissolve in water, yet the subtle oil, in which the vegetable salts are lodged, may as well mix with water as vinegar doth, which contains both oil and salt. And, as the oil in tar-water discovers itself to the eye, so the acid salts do manifest themselves to the taste. Tar-water therefore is a soap, and as such hath the medicinal qualities of soap.

60. It operates more gently as the acid salts lose their acrimony, being sheathed in oil, and thereby approaching the nature of neutral salts, are more benign and friendly to the animal system: and more effectually, as, by the help of a volatile, smooth, insinuating oil, those same salts are more easily introduced into the capillary ducts. Therefore, in fevers and epidemical distempers it is (and I have; found it so), as well as in chronical diseases, a most safe and efficacious medicine, being good against too great fluidity as a balsamic, and good against viscidity as a soap. There is something in the fiery corrosive nature of lixivia! salts, which makes alkaline soap a dangerous remedy in all cases where an inflammation is apprehended. And, as inflammations are often occasioned by obstructions, it should seem an acid soap was much the safer deobstruent.

61. Even the best turpentines, however famous for their vulnerary and detergent qualities, have yet been observed by their warmth to dispose to inflammatory tumours. But the acid spirit (sect 7, 8) being in so great proportion in tar-water, renders it a cooler and safer medicine. And the æthereal oil of turpentine, though an admirable dryer, healer, and anodyne, when outwardly applied to wounds and ulcers, and not less useful in cleansing the urinary passages and healing their ulcerations, yet is known to be of a nature so very relaxing as sometimes to do much mischief when taken inwardly. (“When taken inwardly” not in the first three editions. — ED.) TAR-water is not attended with the same ill effects, which I believe are owing in a great measure to the æthereal oils being deprived of the acid spirit in distillation, Avhich, vellicating and contracting as a stimulus, might have proved a counterpoise to the excessive lubricating and relaxing qualities of the oil.

62. Woods in decoction do not seem to yield so ripe and elaborate a juice, as that which is deposited in the cells or loculi terebinthiaci , and spontaneously oozes from them. And indeed, though the balsam of Peru, obtained by boiling wood and scumming the decoction, be a very valuable medicine, and of great account in divers cases, particularly asthmas, nephritic pains, nervous colics, and obstructions, yet I do verily think (and I do not say this without experience) that tar-water is a more efficacious remedy in all those cases than even that costly drug.

63. It hath been already observed that the restorative pectoral antihysterical virtues of the most precious balsams and gums are possessed in a high degree by tar-water (sect. 9, 21, 22, 23). And I do not know any purpose answered by the wood drinks for which tar-water may not be used with at least equal success. It contains the virtues even of guaiacum , which seems the most efficacious of all woods, warming and sweetening the humours, diaphoretic and useful in gouts, dropsies, and rheums, as well as in the foul disease. Nor should it seem strange if the virtues obtained by boiling an old dry wood prove inferior to those extracted from a balsam.

64. There is a fine volatile spirit in the waters of Geronster, the most esteemed of all the fountains about the Spa, but whose waters do not bear transporting. The stomachic, cardiac, and diuretic qualities of this fountain somewhat resemble those of tar-water, which, if I am not greatly mistaken, contains the virtues of the best chalybeate and sulphureous waters; with this difference, that those waters are apt to affect the head in taking, which tar-water is not. Besides, there is a regimen of diet to be observed, especially with chalybeate waters, which I never found necessary with this. Tar-water layeth under no restraint either as to diet, hours, or employment. A man may study, or exercise, or repose, keep his own hours, pass his time either within or without, and take wholesome nourishment of any kind.

65. The use of mineral waters, however excellent for the nerves and stomach, is often suspended by colds and inflammatory disorders; in which they are acknowledged to be very dangerous: whereas tar-water is so far from hurting in those cases, or being discontinued on that account, that it greatly contributes to their cure (sect. 7).

66. Cordials, vulgarly so called, act immediately on the stomach, and by consent of nerves on the head. But medicines of an operation too fine and light to produce a sensible effect in the primæ vice may, nevertheless, in their passage through the capillaries, operate on the sides of those small vessels, in such manner as to quicken their oscillations, and consequently the motion of their contents, producing, in issue and effect, all the benefits of a cordial much more lasting and salutary than those of distilled spirits, which by their caustic and coagulating qualities do incomparably more mischief than good. Such a cardiac medicine is tar-water. The transient fits of mirth, produced from fermented liquors, and distilled spirits, are attended with proportionable depression of spirit in their intervals. But the calm cheerfulness arising from this water of health (as it may be justly called) is permanent. In which it emulates the virtues of that famous plant Gen Seng, so much valued in China as the only cordial that raises the spirits without depressing them. Tar-water is so far from hurting the nerves, as common cordials do, that it is highly useful in cramps, spasms of the viscera, and paralytic numbness.

67. Emetics are on certain occasions administered with great success. But the overstraining and weakening of nature may be very justly apprehended from a course of emetics. They are nevertheless prescribed and substituted for exercise. But it is well remarked in Plato’s “Timæus” that vomits and purges are the worst exercise in the world. There is something in the mild operation of tar-water, that seems more friendly to the economy, and forwards the digestions and secretions in a way more natural and benign; the mildness of this medicine being such that I have known children take it, for above six months together, with great benefit, and without any inconvenience: and, after long and repeated experience, I do esteem it a most excellent diet-drink, fitted to all seasons and ages.

68. It is I think allowed that the origin of the gout lies in a faulty digestion. And it is remarked by the ablest physicians, that the gout is so difficult to cure, because heating medicines aggravate its immediate, and cooling its remote cause. But tar-water, although it contains active principles that strengthen the digestion beyond anything I know, and consequently must be highly useful, either to prevent or lessen the following fit, or by invigorating the blood to cast it upon the extremities, yet it is not of so heating a nature as to do harm even in the fit. Nothing is more difficult or disagreeable than to argue men out of their prejudices; I shall not therefore enter into controversies on this subject, but, if men dispute and object, shall leave the decision to time and trial.

69. In the modern practice, soap, opium, and mercury, bid fairest for Universal Medicines. The first of these is highly spoken of. But then, those who magnify it most except against the use of it in such cases where the obstruction is attended with a putrefactive alkali, or where an inflammatory disposition appears. It is acknowledged to be very dangerous in a phthisis, fever, and some other cases in which tar-water is not only safe but useful.

70. Opium, though a medicine of great extent and efficacy, yet is frequently known to produce grievous disorders in hysterical or hypochondriacal persons, who make a great part, perhaps the greatest, of those who lead sedentary lives in these islands. Besides, upon all constitutions dangerous errors may be committed in the use of opium.

71. Mercury hath of late years become a medicine of very general use, the extreme minuteness, mobility, and momentum of its parts rendering it a most powerful cleanser of all obstructions, even in the most minute capillaries. But then we should be cautious in the use of it, if we consider that the very thing which gives it power of doing good above other deobstruents doth also dispose it to do mischief. I mean its great momentum, the weight of it being about ten times that of blood, and the momentum being the joint product of the weight and velocity, it must needs operate with great force; and may it not be justly feared that so great a force, entering the minutest vessels, and breaking the obstructed matter, might also break or wound the fine tender coats of those small vessels, and so bring on the untimely effects of old age, producing more, perhaps, and worse obstructions than those it removed? Similar consequences may justly be apprehended from other mineral and ponderous medicines. Therefore, upon the whole, there will not perhaps be found any medicine more general in its use, or more salutary in its effects, than tar-water.

72. To suppose that all distempers, arising from very different, and it may be from contrary causes, can be cured by one and the same medicine must seem chimerical. But it may with truth be affirmed, that the virtue of tar-water extends to a surprising variety of cases very distant and unlike (sect 3, 4, 5, 6, 21, etc.). This I have experienced in my neighbours, my family, and myself. And, as I live in a remote corner, among poor neighbours, who for want of a regular physician have often recourse to me, I have had frequent opportunities of trial, which convince me it is of so just a temperament as to be an enemy to all extremes. I have known it to do great good in a cold, watery constitution, as a cardiac and stomachic: and at the same time allay heat and feverish thirst in another. I have known it correct costive habits in some, and the contrary habit in others. Nor will this seem incredible if it be considered that middle qualities naturally reduce the extreme. Warm water, for instance, mixed with hot and cold, will lessen the heat in that, and the cold in this.

73. They who know the great virtues of common soap, whose coarse lixivial salts are the product of culinary fire, will not think it incredible that virtues of mighty force and extent should be found in a fine acid soap (sect. 58), the salts and oil whereof are a most elaborate product of nature and the solar light.

74. It is certain tar-water warms, and therefore some may perhaps still think it cannot cool. The more effectually to remove this prejudice, let it be farther considered that as, on the one hand, opposite causes do sometimes produce the same effect, for instance, heat by rarefaction and cold by condensation do both increase the air’s elasticity; so, on the other hand, the same cause shall sometimes produce opposite effects: heat for instance thins, and again heat coagulates the blood. It is not therefore strange, that tar-water should warm one habit and cool another, have one good effect on a cold constitution, and another good effect on an inflamed one; nor, if this be so, that it should cure opposite disorders. All which justifies to reason what I have often found true in fact. The salts, the spirits, the heat of tar-water are of a temperature congenial to the constitution of a man, which receives from it a kindly warmth, but no inflaming heat. It was remarkable that two children in my neighbourhood, being in a course of tar-water, upon an intermission of it, never failed to have their issues inflamed by a humour much more hot and sharp than at other times. But its great use in the small-pox, pleurisies, and fevers is a sufficient proof that tar-water is not of an inflaming nature.

75. I have dwelt the longer on this head, because some gentlemen of the faculty have thought fit to declare that tar-water must inflame, and that they would never visit any patient in a fever who had been a drinker of it. But I will venture to affirm, that it is so far from increasing a feverish inflammation, that it is on the contrary a most ready means to allay and extinguish it. It is of admirable use in fevers, being at the same time the surest, safest and most effectual, both paregoric and cordial: for the truth of which I appeal to any person’s experience who shall take a large draught of it milk warm in the paroxysm of a fever, even when plain water or herb-teas shall be found to have little or no effect. To me it seems that its singular and surprising use in fevers of all kinds, were there nothing else, would be alone sufficient to recommend it to the public.

76. The best physicians make the idea of a fever to consist in a too great velocity of the heart’s motion, and too great resistance at the capillaries. Tar-water, as it softens and gently stimulates those nice vessels, helps to propel their contents, and so contributes to remove the latter part of the disorder. And for the former, the irritating acrimony which accelerates the motion of the heart is diluted by watery, corrected by acid, and softened by balsamic remedies, all which intentions are answered by this aqueous, acid, balsamic medicine. Besides, the viscid juices coagulated by the febrile heat are resolved by tar-water as a soap, and not too far resolved, as it is a gentle acid soap; to which we may add, that the peccant humours and salts are carried off by its diaphoretic and diuretic qualities.

77. I found all this confirmed by my own experience in the late sickly season of the year one thousand seven hundred and forty-one, having had twenty-five fevers in my own family cured by this medicinal water, drunk copiously. The same method was practised on several of my poor neighbours with equal success. It suddenly calmed the feverish anxieties, and seemed every glass to refresh, and infuse life and spirit into the patient. At first some of these patients had been vomited, but afterwards I found that without vomiting, bleeding, blistering, or any other evacuation or medicine whatever, very bad fevers could be cured by the sole drinking of tar-water, milk warm, and in good quantity, perhaps a large glass every hour or oftener taken in bed. And it was remarkable that such as were cured by this comfortable cordial recovered health and spirits at once, while those who had been cured by evacuations often languished long, even after the fever had left them, before they could recover of their medicines and regain their strength.

78. In peripneumonies and pleurisies I have observed tar-water to be excellent, having known some pleuritic persons cured without bleeding, by a blister early applied to the stitch, and the copious drinking of tar-water, four or five quarts, or even more in four-and-twenty hours. And I do recommend it to farther trial, whether in all cases of a pleurisy, one moderate bleeding, a blister on the spot, and plenty of tepid tar-water may not suffice, without those repeated and immoderate bleedings, the bad effects of which are perhaps never got over. I do even suspect that a pleuritic patient betaking himself to bed betimes, and drinking very copiously of tar-water, may be cured by that alone, without bleeding, blistering, or any other medicine whatsoever: certainly I have found this succeed at a glass every half hour.

79. I have known a bloody flux of long continuance, after divers medicines had been tried in vain, cured by tar-water. But that which I take to be the most speedy and effectual remedy in a bloody flux is a clyster of an ounce of common brown resin dissolved over a fire in two ounces of oil, and added to a pint of broth, which not long since I had frequent occasion of trying when that distemper was epidemical. Nor can I say that any to whom I advised it miscarried. This experiment I was led to make by the opinion I had of tar as a balsamic: and resin is only tar inspissated.

80. Nothing that I know corroborates the stomach so much as tar-water (sect. 68). Whence it follows, that it must be of singular use to persons afflicted with the gout. And, from what I have observed in five or six instances, I do verily believe it the best and safest medicine either to prevent the gout, or so to strengthen nature against the fit, as to drive it from the vitals. Dr. Sydenham, in his Treatise of the Gout, declares that whoever finds a medicine the most efficacious for strengthening digestion will do more service in the cure of that and other chronical distempers, than he can even form a notion of. And I leave it to trial, whether tar-water be not that medicine, as I myself am persuaded it is, by all the experiments I could make. But in all trials I would recommend discretion; for instance, a man with the gout in his stomach ought not to drink cold tar-water. This Essay leaves room for future experiment in every part of it, not pretending to be a complete treatise.

81. It is evident to sense that blood, urine, and other animal juices, being let to stand, soon contract a great acrimony. Juices, therefore, from a bad digestion retained, and stagnating in the body, grow sharp and putrid. Hence a fermenting heat, the immediate cause of the gout. The curing this by cooling medicines, as they would increase the antecedent cause, must be a vain attempt. On the other hand, spices and spirituous liquors, while they contribute to remove the antecedent cause or bad digestion, would, by inflaming the blood, increase the proximate or immediate cause of the gout, to wit, the fermenting heat. The scope therefore must be, to find a medicine that shall corroborate but not inflame. Bitter herbs arc recommended; but they are weak in comparison of tar-water.

82. The great force of tar-water to correct the acrimony of the blood appears in nothing more than in the cure of a gangrene from an internal cause; which was performed on a servant of my own, by prescribing the copious and constant use of tar-water for a few weeks. From my representing tar-water as good for so many things, some perhaps may conclude it is good for nothing. But charity obligeth me to say what I know, and what I think, howsoever it may be taken. Men may censure and object as they please, but I appeal to time and experiment. Effects misimputed, cases wrong told, circumstances overlooked, perhaps, too, prejudices and partialities against truth may for a time prevail, and keep her at the bottom of her well, from whence nevertheless she emergeth sooner or later, and strikes the eyes of all those who do not keep them shut.

83. Boerhaave thinks a specific may be found for that peculiar venom which infects the blood in the small-pox, and that the prospect of so great a public benefit should stir up men to search for it. Its wonderful success in preventing and mitigating that distemper (sect. 2, 3) would incline one to suspect that tar-water is such a specific especially since I have found it of sovereign use as well during the small-pox as before it. Some think an erysipelas and the plague differ only in degree. If so, tar-water should be useful in the plague, for I have known it cure an erysipelas.

84. Tar-water, as cleansing, healing, and balsamic, is good in all disorders of the urinary passages, whether obstructed or ulcerated. Dr. Lister supposeth, indeed, that turpentines act by a caustic quality, which irritates the coats of the urinary ducts to expel sand or gravel. But it should seem this expelling diuretic virtue consisted rather in the salts than the resin, and consequently resides in the tar-water, gently stimulating by its salts, without the dangerous force of a caustic. The violent operation of ipecacuanha lies in its resin, but the saline extract is a gentle purge and diuretic, by the stimulus of its salts.

85. That which acts as a mild cordial (sect. 66), neither hurting the capillary vessels as a caustic, nor affecting the nerves, nor coagulating the juices, must in all cases be a friend to nature, and assist the vis vita, in its struggle against all kinds of contagion. And from what I have observed, tar-water appears to me a useful preservative in all epidemical disorders, and against all other infection whatsoever, as well as that of the small-pox. What effects the animipathemata have in human maladies is well known, and consequently the general benefit of such a cardiac may be reasonably supposed.

86. As the body is said to clothe the soul, so the nerves may be said to constitute her inner garment. And, as the soul animates the whole, what nearly touches the soul relates to all. Therefore the asperity of tartarous salts, and the fiery acrimony of alkaline salts, irritating and wounding the nerves, produce nascent passions and anxieties in the soul; which both aggravate distempers, and render men’s lives restless and wretched, even when they are afflicted with no apparent distemper. This is the latent spring of much woe, spleen, and tædium vitae. Small imperceptible irritations of the minutest fibres or filaments, caused by the pungent salts of wines and sauces, do so shake and disturb the microcosms of high livers, as often to raise tempests in courts and senates. Whereas the gentle vibrations that are raised in the nerves, by a fine subtle acid, sheathed in a smooth volatile oil (sect. 59, 61), softly stimulating and bracing the nervous vessels and fibres, promote a due circulation and secretion of the animal juices, and create a calm satisfied sense of health. And, accordingly, I have often known tar-water procure sleep and compose the spirits in cruel vigils, occasioned either by sickness or by too intense application of mind.

87. In diseases sometimes accidents happen from without by mismanagement, sometimes latent causes operate within, jointly with the specific taint or peculiar cause of the malady. The causes of distempers are often complicated, and there may be something in the idiosyncrasy of the patient that puzzles the physician. It may therefore be presumed that no medicine is infallible, not even in any one disorder. But, as tar-water possesseth the virtues of fortifying the stomach, as well as purifying and invigorating the blood, beyond any medicine that I know, it may be presumed of great and general efficacy in all those numerous illnesses which take their rise from foul or vapid blood, or from a bad digestion. The animal spirits arc elaborated from the blood. Such therefore as the blood is, such will be the animal spirits, more or less, weaker or stronger. This sheweth the usefulness of tar-water in all hysteric and hypochondriac cases: which, together with the maladies from indigestion, comprise almost the whole tribe of chronical diseases.

88. The scurvy may be reckoned in these climates a universal malady, as people in general are subject to it, and as it mixes more or less in almost all diseases. Whether this proceeds from want of elasticity in our air, upon which the tone of the vessels depends, and upon that the several secretions; or whether it proceeds from the moisture of our climate, or the grossness of our food, or the salts in our atmosphere, or from all these together — thus much at least seems not absurd to suppose, that as physicians in Spain and Italy are apt to suspect the venereal taint to be a latent principle, and bear a part in every illness, so far, as good reason, the scurvy should be considered by our physicians as having some share in most disorders and constitutions that fall in their way. It is certain our perspiration is not so free as in clearer air and warmer climates. Perspirable humours not discharged will stagnate and putrefy. A diet of animal food will be apt to render the juices of our bodies alkalescent. Hence ichorous and corrosive humours and many disorders. Moist air makes viscid blood; and saline air inflames this viscid blood. Hence broken capillaries, extravasated blood, spots, and ulcers, and other scorbutic symptoms. The body of a man attracts and imbibes the moisture and salts of the air and whatever floats in the atmosphere, which as it is common to all, so it affects all more or less.

89. Doctor Musgrave thinks the Devonshire scurvy a relic of the leprosy, and that it is not owing to the qualities of the air. But, as these insulars in general live in a gross saline air, and their vessels being less elastic are consequently less able to subdue and cast off what their bodies as sponges draw in, one would be tempted to suspect the air not a little concerned, especially in such a situation as that of Devonshire. In all these British islands we enjoy a great mediocrity of climate; the effect whereof is, that we have neither heat enough to exalt and dissipate the gross vapours, as in Italy, nor cold enough to condense and precipitate them, as in Sweden. So they are left floating in the air, which we constantly breathe, and imbibe through the whole surface of our bodies. And this, together with exhalations from coal fires, and the various fossils wherein we abound, doth greatly contribute to render us scorbutic and hypochondriac.

90. There are some who derive all diseases from the scurvy, which indeed must be allowed to create or mimic most other maladies. Boerhaave tells us, it produceth pleuritic colic, nephritic, hepatic pains, various fevers, hot, malignant, intermitting dysenteries, faintings, anxieties, dropsies, consumptions, convulsions, palsies, fluxes of blood. In a word, it may be said to contain the seeds and origin of almost all distempers. Insomuch that a medicine which cures all sorts of scurvy may be presumed good for most maladies.

91. The scurvy doth not only in variety of symptoms imitate most distempers, but also, when come to a height, in degree of virulence equal the most malignant. Of this we have a remarkable proof in that horrible description of the scorbutic patients in the hospitals of Paris, given by Monsieur Poupart, in the Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Sciences, for the year 1699. That author thinks he saw some resemblance in it to the plague of Athens. It is hard to imagine anything more dreadful than the case of those men, rotting alive by scurvy in its supreme degree. To obviate such putrefaction, I believe the most effectual method would be, to embalm (if one may so say) the living body with tar-water copiously drunk; and this belief is not without experience.

92. It is the received opinion that the animal salts of a sound body are of a neutral, bland, and benign nature: that is, the salts in the juices past the primae vice are neither acid or alkaline, having been subdued by the constitution, and changed into a third nature. Where the constitution wants force to do this, the aliment is not duly assimilated: and, so far as the salts retain their pristine qualities, sickly symptoms ensue, acids and alkalies not perfectly subdued producing weak ferments in the juices. Hence scurvy, cachexy, and a long train of ills.

93. A cachexy or ill habit is much of the same kind with the scurvy, proceeds from the same causes, and is attended with like symptoms, which are so manifold and various, that the scurvy may well be looked on as a general cachexy, infecting the whole habit, and vitiating all the digestions.

Some have reckoned as many sorts of the scurvy as there are taints of the blood. Others have supposed it a collection of all illnesses together. Some suppose it an accumulation of several diseases in fieri. Others take it for an assemblage of the relics of old distempers.

94. But thus much is certain, the cure of the scurvy is no more to be attempted by strongly active medicines, than (to use the similitude of an ingenious writer) a thorn in the flesh, or pitch on silk, to be removed by force. The viscid humour must be gently resolved and diluted, the tone of the vessels recovered by a moderate stimulation, and the tender fibres and capillary vessels gradually cleared from the concreted stuff that adheres and obstructs them. All which is in the aptest manner performed by a watery diluent, containing a fine vegetable soap. And although a complete cure by alteratives, operating on the small capillaries, and by insensible discharges, must require length of time, yet the good effect of this medicine on cachectic and scorbutic persons is soon perceived, by the change it produceth in their pale discoloured looks, giving a florid healthy countenance in less time than perhaps any other medicine.

95. It is supposed by physicians that the immediate cause of the scurvy lies in the blood, the fibrous part of which is too thick and the serum too thin and sharp; and that hence ariseth the great difficulty in the cure, because in the correcting of one part regard must be had to the other. It is well known how extremely difficult it is to cure an inveterate scurvy: how many scorbutic patients have grown worse by an injudicious course of evacuations: how many are even rendered incurable by the treatment of inconsiderate physicians; and how difficult, tedious, and uncertain, the cure is in the hands even of the best, who are obliged to use such variety and change of medicines, in the different stages of that malady: which nevertheless may be cured (if I may judge by what I have experienced) by the sole, regular, constant, copious use of tar-water.

96. Tar-water moderately inspissates with its balsamic virtue, and renders mild the thin and sharp part of the blood, the same as a soapy medicine dissolves the grumous concretions of the fibrous part. As a balsam it destroys the ulcerous acrimony of the humours, and as a deobstruent it opens and cleans the vessels, restores their tone, and strengthens the digestion, whose defects are the principal cause of scurvy and cachexy.

97. In the cure of the scurvy the principal aim is to subdue the acrimony of the blood and juices. But, as this acrimony proceeds from different causes, or even opposite, as acid and alkaline, what is good in one sort of scurvy proves dangerous or even mortal in another. It is well known that hot antiscorbutics, where the juices of the body are alkalescent, increase the disease. And sour fruits and vegetables produce a like effect in the scurvy, caused by an acid acrimony. Hence fatal blunders are committed by unwary practitioners, who, not distinguishing the nature of the disease, do frequently aggravate instead of curing it. If I may trust what trials I have been able to make, this water is good in the several kinds of scurvy, acid, alkaline, and muriatic, and I believe it the only medicine that cures them all without doing hurt to any. As it contains a volatile acid (sect. 7) with a fine volatile oil, why may not a medicine cool in one part and warm in another be a remedy to either extreme (sect. 72)? I have observed it to produce a kindly genial warmth without heat, a thing to be aimed at in all sorts of scurvy. Besides, the balsam in tar-water sheathes all scorbutic salts alike: and its great virtues as a digester and deobstruent are of general use in all scorbutic, and I may add, in all chronical cases whatsoever.

98. I cannot be sure that I have tried it in a scrofulous case, though I have tried it successfully in one that I suspected to be so. And I apprehend it would be very serviceable in such disorders. For although Dr. Gibbs in his treatise on the King’s Evil derives that disease from a coagulating acid, which is also agreeable to the opinion of some other physicians, and although tar-water contain an acid, yet, as it is a soap (sect. 58), it resolves instead of coagulating the juices of the body.

99. For hysterical and hypochondriacal disorders so frequent among us, it is commonly supposed that all acids are bad. But I will venture to except the acid soap of tar-water, having found by my own experience and that of many others, that it raises the spirits, and is an excellent antihysteric, nor less innocent than potent, which cannot be said of those others in common use, that often leave people worse than they found them.

100. In a high degree of scurvy a mercurial salivation is looked on by many as the only cure; which, by the vehement shock it gives the whole frame, and the sensible secretion it produceth, may be thought more adequate to such an effect. But the disorder occasioned by that violent process, it is to be feared, may never be got over. The immediate danger, the frequent bad effects, the extreme trouble and nice care attending such a course, do very deservedly make people afraid of it. And though the sensible secretion therein be so great, yet in a longer tract of time the use of tar-water may produce as great a discharge of scorbutic salts by urine and by perspiration, the effect of which last, though not so sensible, may yet be greater than that of salivation; especially if it be true that in common life insensible perspiration is to nutrition, and all sensible excretions, as five to three.

101. Many hysteric and scorbutic ailments, many taints contracted by themselves, or inherited from their ancestors, afflict the people of condition in these islands, often rendering them, upon the whole, much more unhappy than those whom poverty and labour have ranked in the lowest lot of life, which ailments might be safely removed or relieved by the sole use of tar-water; and those lives which seem hardly worth living for bad appetite, low spirits, restless nights, wasting pains and anxieties, be rendered easy and comfortable.

102. As the nerves are instruments of sensation, it follows that spasms in the nerves may produce all symptoms, and therefore a disorder in the nervous system shall imitate all distempers, and occasion, in appearance, an asthma for instance, a pleurisy, or a fit of the stone. Now, whatever is good for the nerves in general is good against all such symptoms. But tar-water, as it includes in an eminent degree the virtues of warm gums and resins, is of great use for comforting and strengthening the nerves (sect. 86), curing twitches in the nervous fibres, cramps also, and numbness in the limbs, removing anxieties, and promoting sleep: in all which cases I have known it very successful.

103. This safe and cheap medicine suits all circumstances and all constitutions, operating easily, curing without disturbing, raising the spirits without depressing them, a circumstance that deserves repeated attention, especially in these climates, where strong liquors so fatally and so frequently produce those very distresses they are designed to remedy; and, if I am not misinformed, even among the ladies themselves, who are truly much to be pitied. Their condition of life makes them a prey to imaginary woes, which never fail to grow up in minds unexercised and unemployed. To get rid of these, it is said, there are who betake themselves to distilled spirits. And it is not improbable they are led gradually to the use of those poisons by a certain complaisant pharmacy, too much used in the modern practice, palsy drops, poppy cordial, plague water, and such like, which being in truth nothing but drams disguised, yet, coming from the apothecaries, are considered only as medicines.

104. The soul of man was supposed by many ancient sages to be thrust into the human body as into a prison, for punishment of past offences. But the worst prison is the body of an indolent epicure, whose blood is inflamed by fermented liquors (sect. 66) and high sauces, or rendered putrid, sharp, and corrosive, by a stagnation of the animal juices through sloth and indolence; whose membranes are irritated by pungent salts; whose mind is agitated by painful oscillations of the nervous system (sect. 86), and whose nerves are mutually affected by the irregular passions of his mind. This ferment in the animal economy darkens and confounds the intellect. It produceth vain terrors and vain conceits, and stimulates the soul with mad desires, which, not being natural, nothing in nature can satisfy. No wonder, therefore, there are so many fine persons of both sexes, shining themselves, and shone on by fortune, who are inwardly miserable and sick of life.

105. The hardness of stubbed vulgar constitutions renders them insensible of a thousand things that fret and gall those delicate people who, as if their skin was peeled off, feel to the quick everything that touches them. The remedy for this exquisite and painful sensibility is commonly sought from fermented, perhaps from distilled, liquors, which render many lives wretched that would otherwise have been only ridiculous. The tender nerves and low spirits of such poor creatures would be much relieved by the use of tar-water, which might prolong and cheer their lives. I do therefore recommend to them the use of a cordial, not only safe and innocent, but giving health and spirits as surely as other cordials destroy them.

106. I do verily think there is not any other medicine whatsoever so effectual to restore a crazy constitution, and cheer a dreary mind, or so likely to subvert that gloomy empire of the spleen (sect. 103) which tyrannizeth over the better sort (as they are called) of these free nations; and maketh them, in spite of their liberty and property, more wretched slaves than even the subjects of absolute power, who breathe clear air in a sunny climate: while men of low degree often enjoy a tranquillity and content that no advantage of birth or fortune can equal. Such, indeed, was the case while the rich alone could afford to be debauched; but when even beggars became debauchees, the case was altered.

107. The public virtue and spirit of the British legislature never shewed itself more conspicuous in any act than in that for suppressing the immoderate use of distilled spirits among the people, whose strength and numbers constitute the true wealth of a nation: though evasive arts will, it is feared, prevail so long as distilled spirits of any kind are allowed, the character of Englishmen in general being that of Brutus, Quicquid vult , valde vult. But why should such a canker be tolerated in the vitals of a state, under any pretence or in any shape whatsoever? Better by far the whole present set of distillers were pensioners of the public, and their trade abolished by law; since all the benefit thereof put together would not balance the hundredth part of its mischief.

108. To prove the destructive effects of such spirits with regard both to the human species and individuals, we need not go so far as our Colonies, or the savage natives of America. Plain proof may be had nearer home. For, albeit there is in every town or district throughout England some tough dram-drinker, set up as the devil’s decoy, to draw in proselytes; yet the ruined health and morals, and the beggary of such numbers, evidently shew that we need no other enemy to complete our destruction, than this cheap luxury at the lower end of the state, and that a nation lighted up at both ends must soon be consumed.

109. It is much to be lamented that our insulars, who act and think so much for themselves, should yet, from grossness of air and diet, grow stupid or dote sooner than other people, who by virtue of elastic air, water drinking, and light food, preserve their faculties to extreme old age; an advantage which may perhaps be approached, if not equalled, even in these regions, by tar-water, temperance, and early hours. The last is a sure addition to life, not only in regard of time, which, being taken from sleep, the image of death, is added to the waking hours, but also in regard of longevity and duration in the vulgar sense. I may say too in regard of spirit and vivacity, which within the same compass of duration, may truly and properly be affirmed to add to man’s life: it being manifest, that one man, by a brisker motion of his spirits and succession of his ideas, shall live more in one hour than another in two: and that the quantity of life is to be estimated, not merely from the duration, but also from the intenseness of living. Which intense living, or, if I may so say, lively life, is not more promoted by early hours as a regimen, than by tar-water as a cordial; which acts, not only as a slow medicine, but hath also an immediate and cheerful effect on the spirits (sect. 66). no. It must be owned, the light attracted, secreted, and detained in tar (sect. 8, 29, 40), and afterwards drawn off in its finest balsamic particles, by the gentle menstruum of cold water, is not a violent and sudden medicine, always to produce its effect at once (such, by irritating, often do more mischief than good), but a safe and mild alterative, which penetrates the whole system, opens, heals, and strengthens the remote vessels, alters and propels their contents, and enters the minutest capillaries, and cannot therefore, otherwise than by degrees and in time, work a radical cure of chronic distempers. It gives nevertheless speedy relief in most cases, as I have found by myself and many others. I have been surprised to see persons fallen away and languishing under a bad digestion, after a few weeks recover a good stomach, and with it flesh and strength, so as to seem renewed, by the drinking of tar-water. The strength andquantity of this water to be taken by each individual person is best determined from experience. And as for the time of taking, I never knew any evil ensue from its being continued ever so long; but, on the contrary, many and great advantages, which sometimes would not perhaps begin to shew themselves till it had been taken two or three months.

111. We learn from Pliny that in the first ferment of new wine or mustum , the ancients were wont to sprinkle it with powdered resin, which gave it a certain sprightliness, quaedam saporis acumina. This was esteemed a great improver of its odour and taste, and was, I doubt not, of its salubrity also. The brown old resin, that is to say hardened tar, as being more easily pulverized and sifted, was most in request for this purpose. They used likewise to season their wine vessels with pitch or resin. And I make no doubt that if our vintners would contrive to medicate their wines with the same ingredients, they might improve and preserve them with less trouble and expense to themselves, and less danger to others. He that would know more particulars of this matter may consult Pliny and Columella. I shall only add, that I doubt not a similar improvement may be made of malt liquor.

112. The ρητίνη of Theophrastus and resina of Pliny are sometimes used in a general sense, to signify all sorts of oily viscid exudations from plants or trees. The crude watery juice that riseth early in the spring is gradually ripened and inspissated by the solar heat, becoming in orderly succession with the seasons an oil, a balsam, and at last a resin. And it is observed by chemists that turpentine dissolved over a gentle fire is, by the constant operation of heat, successively transformed into oil, balsam, pitch, and hard friable resin, which will incorporate with oil or rectified spirit, but not with water.

113. Sir John Floyer remarks, that we want a method for the use of turpentine: and again, he who shall hit, saith he, on the pleasantest method of giving turpentine will do great cures in the gout, stone, catarrhs, dropsies, and cold scurvies, rheumatisms, ulcers, and obstructions of the glands. Lastly, he subjoins, that, for the use of altering and amending the juices and fibres, it must be given frequently, and in such small quantities at a time, and in so commodious a manner, as will agree best with the stomach (sect. 9), stay longest in the body, and not purge itself off; for large doses (saith he) go through too quick, and besides offend the head. Now, the infusion of tar or turpentine in cold water seems to supply the very method that was wanted, as it leaves the more unctuous and gross parts behind (sect. 47), which might offend the stomach, intestines, and head; and, as it may be easily taken, and as often, and in such quantity and such degree of strength, as suits the case of the patient. Nor should it seem that the fine spirit and volatile oil, obtained by infusion of tar (sect. 7, 42, 58), is inferior to that of turpentine, to which it superadds the virtue of wood soot, which is known to be very great with respect to the head and nerves; and this appears evident from the manner of obtaining tar (sect. 13). And as the fine volatile parts of tar or turpentine are drawn off by infusion in cold water, and easily conveyed throughout the whole system of the human body; so it should seem the same method may be used with all sorts of balsams or resins whatsoever, as the readiest, easiest, and most inoffensive, as well as in many cases the most effectual way of obtaining and imparting their virtues.

114. After having said so much of the uses of tar, I must further add that, being rubbed on them, it is an excellent preservative of the teeth and gums: that it sweetens the breath, and that it clears and strengthens the voice. And, as its effects are various and useful, so there is nothing to be feared from the operation of an alterative so mild and friendly to nature. It was a wise maxim of certain ancient philosophers, that diseases ought not to be irritated by medicines (sect. 103). But no medicine disturbs the animal economy less than this, which, if I may trust my own experience, never produces any disorder in a patient when rightly taken.

115. I knew indeed a person who took a large glass of tar-water just before breakfast, which gave him an invincible nausea and disgust, although he had before received the greatest benefit from it. But, if the tar-water be taken and made in the manner prescribed at the beginning of this Essay, it will, if I mistake not, have enough of the salt to be useful, and little enough of the oil to be inoffensive. I mean my own manner of making it, and not the American, which makes it sometimes too strong and sometimes too weak; and however serviceable as there used, merely for a preservative against the small-pox, yet may not be fit to use in all those various cases wherein I have found tar-water so successful. Persons more delicate than ordinary may render it palatable, by mixing a drop of the chemical oil of nutmegs, or a spoonful of mountain-wine in each glass. It may not be amiss to observe that I have known some, whose nice stomachs could not bear it in the morning, take it at night going to bed without any inconvenience. For outward washes and fomentations, it may be made stronger, as by pouring on warm water; also for brute beasts, as horses, in whose disorders I have found it very useful, I believe more so than that bituminous substance called Barbadoes tar.

116. In very dangerous and acute cases much may be taken and often; as far as the stomach can bear. But in chronical cases, about half a pint night and morning may suffice or, in case so large a dose should prove disagreeable, half the quantity may be taken at four times, to wit, in the morning early, at night going to bed, and about two hours after dinner and breakfast. A medicine of so great virtue in so many different disorders, and especially in that grand enemy the fever, must needs be a benefit to mankind in general. There are nevertheless three sorts of people to whom I would peculiarly recommend it: seafaring persons, ladies, and men of studious and sedentary lives.

117. To sailors and all seafaring persons, who are subject to scorbutic disorders and putrid fevers, especially in long southern voyages, I am persuaded this tar-water would be beneficial. And this may deserve particular notice in the present course of marine expeditions, when so many of our countrymen have perished by such distempers, contracted at sea and in foreign climates. Which, it is probable, might have been prevented by the copious use of tar-water.

118. This same water will also give charitable relief to the ladies (sect. 103), who often want it more than the parish poor; being many of them never able to make a good meal, and sitting pale, puny, and forbidden like ghosts, at their own table, victims of vapours and indigestion.

119. Studious persons also, pent up in narrow holes, breathing bad air, and stooping over their books, are much to be pitied. As they are debarred the free use of air and exercise, this I will venture to recommend as the best succedaneum to both. Though it were to be wished that modern scholars would, like the ancients, meditate and converse more in walks and gardens and open air, which upon the whole would perhaps be no hinderance to their learning, and a great advantage to their health. My own sedentary course of life had long since thrown me into an ill habit, attended with many ailments, particularly a nervous colic, which rendered my life a burthen, and the more so, because my pains were exasperated by exercise. But, since the use of tar-water, I find, though not a perfect recovery from my old and rooted illness, yet such a gradual return of health and ease, that I esteem my having taken this medicine the greatest of all temporal blessings, and am convinced that, under Providence, I owe my life to it.

 

120. In the distilling of turpentine and other balsams by a gentle heat, it hath been observed that there riseth first an acid spirit (sect. 7) that will mix with water; which spirit, except the fire be very gentle, is lost. This grateful acid spirit that first comes over is, as a learned chemist and physician informs us, highly refrigeratory, diuretic, sudorific, balsamic, or preservative from putrefaction, excellent in nephritic cases, and for quenching thirst — all which virtues are contained in the cold infusion which draws forth from tar only its fine flower or quintessence, if I may so say, or the native vegetable spirit, together with a little volatile oil.

121. The distinguishing principle of all vegetables, that whereon their peculiar smell, taste, and specific properties depend, seems to be some extremely fine and subtle spirit, whose immediate vehicle is an exceeding thin volatile oil; which is itself detained in a grosser and more viscid resin or balsam, lodged in proper cells in the bark and seeds, and most abounding in autumn or winter, after the crude juices have been thoroughly concocted, ripened, and impregnated with solar light. The spirit itself is by some supposed to be an oil highly subtilized, so as to mix with water. But such volatile oil is not the spirit, but only its vehicle. Since aromatic oils being long exposed to air will lose their specific smell and taste, which fly off with the spirit or vegetable salt, without any sensible diminution of the oil.

122. Those volatile salts that are set free and raised by a gentle heat may justly be supposed essential (sect. 8), and to have pre-existed in the vegetable; whereas the lixivial fixed salts, obtained by the incineration of the subject, whose natural constituent parts have been altered or destroyed by the extreme force of fire, are, by later chemists, upon very good grounds, supposed not to have pre-existed therein — all such salts appearing, from the experiments of Signor Redi, not to preserve the virtues of the respective vegetable subjects; and to be alike purgative and in an equal degree, whatsoever may be the shape of their points, whether sharp or obtuse. But, although fixed or lixivial salts may not contain the original properties of the subject, yet volatile salts, raised by a slight heat from vegetables, are allowed to preserve their native virtues: and such salts are readily imbibed by water.

123. The most volatile of the salts, and the most attenuated part of the oil may be supposed the first and readiest to impregnate a cold infusion (sect. 1, 7). And this will assist us to account for the virtues of tar-water. That volatile acid in vegetables, which resists putrefaction and is their great preservative, is detained in a subtle oil, miscible with water; which oil is itself imprisoned in the resin or grosser part of the tar, from which it is easily set free and obtained pure by cold water.

124. The mild native acids are observed more kindly to work upon, and more thoroughly to dissolve metallic bodies, than the strongest acid spirits produced by a vehement fire; and it may be suspected they have the same advantage as a medicine. And, as no acid, by the observation of some of the best chemists, can be obtained from the substance of animals thoroughly assimilated, it should follow that the acids received into a healthy body must be quite subdued and changed by the vital powers: but it is easier to subdue and assimilate the gentler than the stronger acids (sect. 48).

125. I am very sensible that on such subjects arguments fall short of evidence: and that mine fall short even of what they might have been if I enjoyed better health, or those opportunities of a learned commerce from which I am cut off in this remote corner. I shall nevertheless go on as I have begun, and proceed, by reason, by conjecture, and by authority, to cast the best light I can on the obscure paths that lie in my way.

126. Sir Isaac Newton, Boerhaave, and Homberg, are all agree that the Acid is a fine subtle substance, pervading the whole terraqueous globe; which produceth divers kinds of bodies, as it is united to different subjects. This, according to Homberg, is the pure salt, salt the principle, in itself similar and uniform, but never found alone. And although this principle be called the salt of the earth, yet it should seem it may more properly be called the salt of the air, since earth turned up and lying fallow receives it from the air. And it should seem that this is the great principle of vegetation, derived into the earth from all sorts of manures, as well as from the air. The acid is allowed to be the cause of fermentation in all fermented liquors. Why, therefore, may it not be supposed to ferment the earth, and to constitute that fine penetrating principle, which introduces and assimilates the food of plants, and is so fugitive as to escape all the filtrations and perquisitions of the most nice observers?

127. It is the doctrine of Sir Isaac Newton and Monsieur Homberg that, as the watery acid is that which renders salt soluble in water, so it is that same which joined to the earthy part makes it a salt. Let it therefore be considered that the organs of plants are tubes (sect. 30, 31, 35) — the filling, unfolding, and distending whereof, by liquors, doth constitute what is called the vegetation or growth of the plant. But earth itself is not soluble in water, so as to form one vegetable fluid therewith. Therefore the particles of earth must be joined with a watery acid; that is, they must become salts, in order to dissolve in water; that so, in the form of a vegetable juice, they may pass through the strainers and tubes of the root into the body of the plant, swelling and distending its parts and organs, that is, increasing its bulk. Therefore the vegetable matter of the earth is in effect earth changed into salt. And to render earth fertile is to cause many of its particles to assume a saline form.

128. Hence it is observed, there are more salts in the root than in the bark, more salts in vegetables during the spring than in the autumn or winter; the crude saline juices being in the summer months partly evaporated, and partly ripened, by the action and mixture of light. Hence also it appears why the dividing of earth, so as to enlarge its surface, whereby it may admit more acid from the air, is of such use in promoting vegetation: and why ashes, lime, and burnt clay are found so profitable manures — fire being in reality the acid, as is proved in the sequel (sect. 202). Marls also and shells are useful, forasmuch as those alkaline bodies attract the acid, and raise an effervescence with it, thereby promoting a fermentation in the glebe. The excrements of animals and putrid vegetables do in like manner contribute to vegetation, by increasing the salts of the earth. And where fallows are well broken, and lie long to receive the acid of the air into all their parts; this alone will be sufficient to change many terrene particles into salts, and consequently render them soluble in water, and therefore a fit aliment for vegetables.

129. The acid, saith Homberg, is always joined to some sulphur, which determines it to this or that species, producing different salts, as it is the vegetable, bituminous, or metallic sulphur. Even the alkaline, whether volatile or lixivial salts, are supposed to be nothing but this same acid strictly detained by oil and earth, in spite of the extreme force of fire, which lodgeth in them, without being able to dislodge some remains of the acid.

130. Salts, according to Sir Isaac Newton, are dry earth and watery acid united by attraction, the acid rendering them soluble in water (sect. 127). He supposeth the watery acid to flow round the terrestrial part, as the ocean doth round the earth, being attracted thereby; and compares each particle of salt to a chaos, whereof the innermost part is hard and earthy, but the surface soft and watery. Whatever attracts and is attracted most strongly is an acid in his sense.

131. It seems impossible to determine the figures of particular salts. All acid solvents, together with the dissolved bodies, are apt to shoot into certain figures. And the figures in which the fossil salts crystallize have been supposed the proper natural shapes of them and their acids. But Homberg hath clearly shewed the contrary: forasmuch as the same acid dissolving different bodies assumes different shapes. Spirit of nitre, for instance, having dissolved copper, shoots into hexagonal crystals; the same having dissolved iron, shoots into irregular squares; and again, having dissolved silver, forms thin crystals of a triangular figure.

132. Homberg, nevertheless, holds in general, that acids are shaped like daggers, and alkalies like sheaths: and that, moving in the same liquor, the daggers run into the sheaths fitted to receive them with such violence as to raise that effervescence observed in the mixture of acids and alkalies. But it seems very difficult to conceive how or why the mere configuration of daggers and sheaths floating in the same liquor should cause the former to rush with such vehemence, and direct their points so aptly into the latter, any more than a parcel of spigots and fossets floating together in the same water should rush one into the other.

133. It should seem rather that the vehement attraction which Sir Isaac Newton attributes to all acids, whereby he supposeth them to rush towards, penetrate, shake, and divide the most solid bodies, and to ferment the liquid of vegetables, could better account for this phenomenon. It is in this attraction that Sir Isaac placeth all their activity: and indeed it should seem, the figures of salts were not of such efficacy in producing their effects, as the strong active powers whereby they are agitated and do agitate other bodies. Especially if it be true (what was before remarked) that lixivious salts arc alike purgative, whatever may be the shape of their angles, whether more or less acute or obtuse.

134. Sir Isaac Newton accounts for the watery acid’s making earthy corpuscles soluble in water, by supposing the acid to be a mean between earth and water, its particles greater than those of water, and less than those of earth, and strongly to attract both. But perhaps there is no necessary reason for supposing the parts of the acid grosser than the parts of water, in order to produce this effect; may not this as well be accounted for, by giving them only a strong attraction or cohesion with the bodies to which they are joined?

135. The acid spirit or salt, that mighty instrument in the hand of nature, residing in the air, and diffused throughout that whole element, is discernible also in many parts of the earth, particularly in fossils, such as sulphur, vitriol, and alum. It was already observed, from Homberg, that this acid is never found pure, but hath always sulphur joined with it, and is classed by the difference of its sulphurs, whether mineral, vegetable, or animal.

136. Salts are vulgarly reckoned the most active of chemical principles. But Homberg derives all their activity from the sulphurs joined with them. From which also, as hath been said, he derives all their kinds and differences (sect. 129). Salt, water, oil, and earth seem to be originally the same in all vegetables. All the difference, according to the chemists, ariseth from a spirit residing in the oil, called the rector or archaeus. This is otherwise called by chemists ens primum , or the native spirit; whereon depend, and wherein are contained, the peculiar flavour and odour, the specific qualities and virtues, of the plant.

137. These native spirits or vegetable souls are all breathed or exhaled into the Air, which seems the receptacle as well as source of all sublunary forms, the great mass or chaos which imparts and receives them. The air or atmosphere that surrounds our earth contains a mixture of all the active volatile parts of the whole habitable world, that is, of all vegetables, minerals, and animals. Whatever perspires, corrupts, or exhales, impregnates the air; which, being acted upon by the solar fire, produceth within itself all sorts of chemical operations, dispensing again those salts and spirits in new generations, which it had received from putrefactions.

138. The perpetual oscillations of this elastic and restless element operate without ceasing on all things that have life, whether animal or vegetable, keeping their fibres, vessels, and fluids in a motion, always changing; as heat, cold, moisture, dryness, and other causes alter the elasticity of the air: which accounts, it must be owned, for many effects. But there are many more which must be derived from other principles or qualities in the air. Thus iron and copper are corroded and gather rust in the air, and bodies of all sorts are dissolved or corrupted, which sheweth an acid to abound and diffuse itself throughout the air.

139. By this same air fire is kindled, the lamp of life preserved, respiration, digestion, nutrition, the pulse of the heart, and motion of all the muscles seem to be performed. Air therefore is a general agent, not only exerting its own, but calling forth the qualities or powers of all other bodies, by a division, comminution, and agitation of their particles, causing them to fly off and become volatile and active.

140. Nothing ferments, vegetates, or putrifies without air, which operates with all the virtues of the bodies included in it; that is, of all nature; there being no drug, salutary or poisonous, whose virtues are not breathed into the air. The air therefore is an active mass of numberless different principles, the general source of corruption and generation; on one hand dividing, abrading, and carrying off the particles of bodies, that is, corrupting or dissolving them; on the other, producing new ones into being; destroying and bestowing forms without intermission.

141. The seeds of things seem to lie latent in the air, ready to appear and produce their kind, whenever they light on a proper matrix. The extremely small seeds of fern, mosses, mushrooms, and some other plants are concealed and wafted about in the air, every part whereof seems replete with seeds of one kind or other. The whole atmosphere seems alive. There is everywhere acid to corrode, and seed to engender. Iron will rust, and mould will grow in all places. Virgin earth becomes fertile, crops of new plants ever and anon shew themselves; all which demonstrate the air to be a common seminary and receptacle of all vivifying principles.

142. Air may also be said to be the seminary of minerals and metals, as it is of vegetables. Mr. Boyle informs us that the exhausted ores of tin and iron being exposed to the air become again impregnated with metal, and that ore of alum having lost its salt, recovers it after the same manner. And numberless instances there are of salts produced by the air; that vast collection or treasury of active principles, from which all sublunary bodies seem to derive their forms, and on which animals depend for their life and breath.

143. That there is some latent vivifying spirit dispersed throughout the air common experience sheweth; insomuch as it is necessary both to vegetables and animals (sect. 138, 139), whether terrestrial or aquatic, neither beasts, insects, birds, nor fishes being able to subsist without air. Nor doth all air suffice, there being some quality or ingredient of which when air is deprived it becometh unfit to maintain either life or flame. And this even though the air should retain its elasticity; which, by the bye, is an argument that air doth not act only as an antagonist to the intercostal muscles. It hath both that and many other uses. It gives and preserves a proper tone to the vessels: this elastic fluid promotes all secretions: its oscillations keep every part in motion: it pervades and actuates the whole animal system, producing great variety of effects, and even opposite in different parts, cooling at the same time and heating, distending and contracting, coagulating and resolving, giving and taking, sustaining life and impairing it, pressing without and expanding within, abrading some parts, at the same time insinuating and supplying others, producing various vibrations in the fibres and ferments in the fluids; all which must needs ensue from such a subtle, active, heterogeneous and elastic fluid.

144. But there is, as we before observed, some one quality or ingredient in the air, on which life more immediately and principally depends. What that is, though men are not agreed, yet it is agreed it must be the same thing that supports the vital and the common flame; it being found that when air, by often breathing in it, is become unfit for the one, it will no longer serve for the other. The like is observable in poisonous damps or steams, wherein flame cannot be kindled, as is evident in the Grotto del Cane near Naples. And here it occurs, to recommend the plunging them in cold water, as an experiment to be tried on persons affected by breathing a poisonous vapour in old vaults, mines, deep holes, or cavities under ground: which, I am apt to think, might save the lives of several, by what I have seen practised on a dog convulsed, and in all appearance dead, but instantly reviving on being taken out of the above-mentioned Grotto, and thrown into a lake adjacent.

145. Air, the general menstruum and seminary, seemeth to be only an aggregate of the volatile parts of all natural beings, which, variously combined and agitated, produce many various effects. Small particles in a near and close situation strongly act upon each other, attracting, repelling, vibrating. Hence divers fermentations, and all the variety of meteors, tempests, and concussions both of earth and firmament. Nor is the microcosm less affected thereby. Being pent up in the viscera, vessels, and membranes of the body, by its salts, sulphurs, and elastic power, it engenders cholics, spasms, hysteric disorders, and other maladies.

146. The specific quality of air is taken to be permanent elasticity. Mr. Boyle is expressly of this opinion. And yet whether there be any such thing as permanently elastic air may be doubted, there being many things which seem to rob the air of this quality, or at least lessen and suspend its exertion. The salts and sulphurs, for instance, that float in the air abate much of its elasticity by their attraction.

147. Upon the whole, it is manifest that air is no distinct element, but a mass or mixture of things the most heterogeneous and even opposite to each other (sect. 137, 145), which become air by acquiring an elasticity and volatility from the attraction of some active subtle substance — whether it be called fire, æther, light, or the vital spirit of the world; in like manner as the particles of antimony, of themselves not volatile, are carried off in sublimation, and rendered volatile by cohering with the particles of sal ammoniac. But action and reaction being equal, the spring of this ethereal spirit is diminished by being imparted. Its velocity and subtlety are also less from its being mixed with grosser particles. Hence sound moves slower than light, as mud than water.

148. Whether air be only freed and fixed, or generated and destroyed, it is certain that air begins and ceases to exert or shew itself. Much by experiments seems to be generated, not only from animals, fruits, and vegetables, but also from hard bodies. And it is observed by Sir Isaac Newton, that air produced from hard bodies is most elastic. The transmutation of elements, each into other, hath been anciently held. In Plutarch we find it was the opinion of Heraclitus, that the death of fire was a birth to air, and the death of air a birth to water. This opinion is also maintained by Sir Isaac Newton. Though it may be questioned, whether what is thought a change be not only a disguise.

149. Fire seems the most elastic and expansive of all bodies. It communicates this quality to moist vapours and dry exhalations, when it heats and agitates their parts, cohering closely with them, overcoming their former mutual attraction, and causing them, instead thereof, reciprocally to repel each other, and fly asunder, with a force proportionable to that wherewith they had cohered, 150. Therefore in air we may conceive two parts; the one more gross, which was raised and carried off from the bodies of this terraqueous mass; the other a fine subtle spirit, by means whereof the former is rendered volatile and elastic. Together they compose a medium whose elasticity is less than that of pure aether, fire, or spirit, in proportion to the quantity of salts, vapours, and heterogeneous particles contained therein. Hence it follows that there is no such thing as the pure simple element of air. It follows also that on the highest mountains air should be more rare in proportion to the vulgar rule, of the spaces being reciprocally as the pressures: and so in fact it is said to have been found by the gentlemen of the French Academy of Sciences.

151. Æther, fire, or spirit, being attracted and clogged by heterogeneous particles, becometh less active; and the particles cohering with those of æther become more active than before. Air therefore is a mass of various particles, abraded and sublimated from wet and dry bodies of all sorts, cohering with particles of æther; the whole permeated by pure æther, or light, or fire: for these words are used promiscuously by ancient philosophers.

152. This Æther or pure invisible Fire, the most subtile and elastic of all bodies, seems to pervade and expand itself throughout the whole universe. If air be the immediate agent or instrument in natural things, it is the pure invisible fire that is the first natural mover or spring from whence the air derives its power (sect. 139, 149, 151). This mighty agent is everywhere at hand, ready to break forth into action, if not restrained and governed with the greatest wisdom. Being always restless and in motion, it actuates and enlivens the whole visible mass, is equally fitted to produce and to destroy, distinguishes the various stages of nature, and keeps up the perpetual round of generations and corruptions, pregnant with forms which it constantly sends forth and resorbs. So quick in its motions, so subtle and penetrating in its nature, so extensive in its effects, it seemeth no other than the Vegetative Soul or Vital Spirit of the World.

153. The animal spirit in man is the instrumental or physical cause both of sense and motion. To suppose sense in the world would be gross and unwarranted. But locomotive faculties are evident in all its parts. The Pythagoreans, Platonists, and Stoics held the world to be an animal; though some of them have chosen to consider it as a vegetable. However, the phænomena and effects do plainly shew there is a Spirit that moves, and a Mind or Providence that presides. This Providence, Plutarch saith, was thought to be in regard to the world what the soul is in regard to man.

154. The order and course of things, and the experiments we daily make, shew there is a Mind that governs and actuates this mundane system, as the proper real agent and cause; and that the inferior instrumental cause is pure aether, fire, or the substance of light (sect. 29, 37, 136, 149) which is applied and determined by an Infinite Mind in the macrocosm or universe, with unlimited power, and according to stated rules; as it is in the microcosm with limited power and skill by the human mind. We have no proof, either from experiment or reason, of any other agent or efficient cause than Mind or Spirit. When, therefore, we speak of corporeal agents or corporeal causes, this is to be understood in a different, subordinate, and improper sense.

155. The principles whereof a thing is compounded, the instrument used in its production, and the end for which it was intended, are all in vulgar use termed causes , though none of them be, strictly speaking, agent or efficient. There is not any proof that an extended corporeal or mechanical cause doth really and properly act, even motion itself being in truth a passion. Therefore, though we speak of this fiery substance as acting, yet it is to be understood only as a mean or instrument, which indeed is the case of all mechanical causes whatsoever. They are, nevertheless, sometimes termed agents and causes, although they are by no means active in a strict and proper signification. When therefore force, power, virtue, or action is mentioned as subsisting in an extended and corporeal or mechanical being, this is not to be taken in a true, genuine, and real, but only in a gross and popular sense, which sticks in appearances, and doth not analyze things to their first principles. In compliance with established language and the use of the world, we must employ the popular current phrase. But then in regard to truth we ought to distinguish its meaning. It may suffice to have made this declaration once for all, in order to avoid mistakes.

156. The calidum innation, the vital flame or animal spirit in man, is supposed the cause of all motions in the several parts of his body, whether voluntary or natural. That is, it is accounted the instrument, by means whereof the mind exerts and manifests herself in the motions of the body. In the same sense, may not fire be said to have force, to operate and agitate the whole system of the world, which is held together, and informed by one presiding mind, and animated throughout by one and the same fiery substance — as an instrumental and mechanical agent, not as a primary real efficient?

157. This pure spirit or invisible fire is ever ready to exert and shew itself in its effects (sect. 152), cherishing, heating, fermenting, dissolving, shining, and operating, in various manners, where a subject offers to employ or determine its force. It is present in all parts of the earth and firmament, though perhaps latent and unobserved, till some accident produceth it into act, and renders it visible in its effects.

158. There is no effect in nature, great, marvellous, or terrible, but proceeds from fire, that diffused and active principle, which, at the same time that it shakes the earth and heavens, will enter, divide, and dissolve the smallest, closest, and most compacted bodies. In remote cavities of the earth it remains quiet, till perhaps an accidental spark, from the collision of one stone against another, kindles an exhalation that gives birth to an earthquake or tempest which splits mountains or overturns cities. This same fire stands unseen in the focus of a burning glass, till subjects for it to act upon come in its way, when it is found to melt, calcine, or vitrify the hardest bodies.

159. No eye could ever hitherto discern, and no sense perceive, the animal spirit in a human body, otherwise than from its effects. The same may be said of pure fire, or the spirit of the universe, which is perceived only by means of some other bodies, on which it operates, or with which it is joined. What the chemists say of pure acids being never found alone might as well be said of pure fire.

160. The mind of man acts by an instrument necessarily. The το ηγεμονικόν, or mind presiding in the world, acts by an instrument freely. Without instrumental and second causes, there could be no regular course of nature. And without a regular course, nature could never be understood; mankind must always be at a loss, not knowing what to expect, or how to govern themselves, or direct their actions for the obtaining of any end. Therefore in the government of the world physical agents, improperly so called, or mechanical, or second causes, or natural causes, or instruments, are necessary to assist, not the governor, but the governed.

161. In the human body the mind orders and moves the limbs: but the animal spirit is supposed the immediate physical cause of their motion. So likewise in the mundane system, a mind presides: but the immediate, mechanical, or instrumental cause, that moves or animates all its parts, is the pure elementary fire or spirit of the world. The more fine and subtle part or spirit is supposed to receive the impressions of the First Mover, and communicate them to the grosser sensible parts of this world. Motion, though in metaphysical rigour and truth a passion or mere effect, yet in physics passeth for an action. And by this action all effects are supposed to be produced. Hence the various communications, determinations, accelerations of motion, constitute the laws of nature.

162. The pure æther or invisible fire contains parts of different kinds, that are impressed with different forces, or subjected to different laws of motion, attraction, repulsion, and expansion, and endued with divers distinct habitudes towards other bodies. These seem to constitute the many various qualities (sect. 37, 40, 44), virtues, flavours, odours, and colours which distinguish natural productions. The different modes of cohesion, attraction, repulsion, and motion appear to be the source from whence specific properties are derived, rather than different shapes or figures. This, as hath been already observed, seems confirmed by the experiment of fixed salts operating one way, notwithstanding the difference of their angles. The original particles, productive of odours, flavours, and other properties, as well as of colours, are, one may suspect, all contained and blended together in that universal and original seminary of pure and elementary fire; from which they are diversely separated and attracted, by the various subjects of the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms; which thereby become classed into kinds, and endued with those distinct properties which continue till their several forms, or specific proportions of fire, return into the common mass.

 

163. As the soul acts immediately on pure fire, so pure fire operates immediately on air; that is, the abrasions of all terrestrial things being rendered volatile and elastic by fire (sect. 149, 150, 152), and at the same time lessening the volatility and expansive force of the fire, whose particles they attract and adhere to (sect. 147), there is produced a new fluid, more volatile than water or earth, and more fixed than fire. Therefore, the virtues and operations imputed to air must be ultimately attributed to fire, as that which imparts activity to air itself.

164. The element of æthereal fire or light seems to comprehend, in a mixed state, the seeds, the natural causes and forms (sect. 43), of all sublunary things. The grosser bodies separate, attract, and repel the several constituent particles of that heterogeneous element; which, being parted from the common mass, make distinct essences, producing and combining together such qualities and properties as are peculiar to the several subjects, and thence often extracted in essential oils or odoriferous waters, from whence they exhale into the open air, and return into their original element.

165. Blue, red, yellow, and other colours, have been discovered by Sir Isaac Newton to depend on the parted rays or particles of light. And, in like manner, a particular odour or flavour seemeth to depend on peculiar particles of light or fire (sect. 40); as appears from heats being necessary to all vegetation whatsoever, and from the extreme minuteness and volatility of those vegetable souls or forms, flying off from the subjects without any sensible diminution of their weight. These particles, blended in one common ocean, should seem to conceal the distinct forms, but, parted and attracted by proper subjects, disclose or produce them. As the particles of light, which, when separated, form distinct colours, being blended are lost in one uniform appearance.

166. Agreeably thereto an rethereal substance or fire was supposed by Heraclitus to be the seed of the generation of all things, or that from which all things drew their original. The Stoics also taught that all substance was originally fire, and should return to fire: that an active subtle fire was diffused or expanded throughout the whole universe; the several parts whereof were produced, sustained, and held together, by its force. And it was the opinion of the Pythagoreans, as Laertius informs us, that heat or fire was the principle of life, animating the whole system, and penetrating all the elements (sect. 152, 153). The Platonists, too, as well as the Pythagoreans, held fire to be the immediate natural agent, or animal spirit; to cherish, to warm, to heat, to enlighten, to vegetate, to produce the digestions, circulations, secretions, and organical motions, in all living bodies, vegetable or animal, being effects of that element, which, as it actuates the macrocosm, so it animates the microcosm. In the Timæus of Plato, there is supposed something like a net of fire and rays of fire in a human body. Doth not this seem to mean the animal spirit, flowing, or rather darting, through the nerves?

167. According to the Peripatetics, the form of heaven, or the fiery æthereal substance, contains the form of all inferior beings (sect. 43). It may be said to teem with forms, and impart them to subjects fitted to receive them. The vital force thereof in the Peripatetic sense is vital to all, but diversely received according to the diversity of the subjects. So all colours are virtually contained in the light; but their actual distinctions of blue, red, yellow, and the rest, depend on the difference of the objects which it illustrates. Aristotle, in the book “De Mundo,” supposeth a certain fifth essence, an ethereal nature, unchangeable and impassive; and next in order a subtle flaming substance, lighted up or set on fire by that æthereal and Divine nature. He supposeth, indeed, that God is in heaven, but that his power, or a force derived from him, doth actuate and pervade the universe.

168. If we may credit Plutarch, Empedocles thought æther or heat to be Jupiter. Æther by the ancient philosophers was used to signify promiscuously sometimes fire and sometimes air. For they distinguish two sorts of air. Plato, in the Timæus, speaking of air, saith there are two kinds; the one more fine and subtile, called æther; the other more gross, and replete with vapours. This æther or purer medium seems to have been the air or principle from which all things, according to Anaximenes, derived their birth, and into which they were back again resolved at their death. Hippocrates, in his treatise “De Diæta,” speaketh of a fire pure and invisible; and this fire, according to him, is that which, stirring and giving movement to all things, causes them to appear, or, as he styles it, come into evidence, that is, to exist, every one in its time, and according to its destiny.

169. This pure fire, æther, or substance of light was accounted in itself invisible and imperceptible to all our senses, being perceived only by its effects, such as heat, flame, and rarefaction. To which we may add, that the Moderns pretend farther to have perceived it by weight, inasmuch as the aromatic oils which most abound with fire, as being the most readily and vehemently inflamed, are above all others the heaviest. And by an experiment of Mr. Homberg’s, four ounces of regulus of antimony, being calcined by a burning-glass for an hour together, were found to have imbibed and fixed seven drachms of the substance of light.

170. Such is the rarefying and expansive force of this element, as to produce, in an instant of time, the greatest and most stupendous effects: a sufficient proof not only of the power of fire, but also of the wisdom with which it is managed, and withheld from bursting forth every moment to the utter ravage and destruction of all things. And it is very remarkable that this same element, so fierce and destructive, should yet be so variously tempered and applied as to be withal the salutary warmth, the genial, cherishing, and vital flame of all living creatures. It is not therefore to be wondered that Aristotle thought the heat of a living body to be somewhat Divine and celestial, derived from that pure æther to which he supposed the incorporeal Deity (χωριστόν είδος) to be immediately united, or on which he supposed it immediately to act.

171. The Platonists held that intellect resided in soul, and soul in an æthereal vehicle. And that as the soul was a middle nature, reconciling intellect with æther, so æther was another middle nature, which reconciled and connected the soul with grosser bodies (sect. 152, 154). Galen likewise taught that, admitting the soul to be incorporeal, it hath for its immediate tegument or vehicle a body of æther or fire, by the intervention whereof it moveth other bodies, and is mutually affected by them. This interior clothing was supposed to remain upon the soul, not only after death, but after the most perfect purgation, which, in length of time, according to the followers of Plato and Pythagoras, cleansed the soul,

 

— “purumque reliquit

Æthereum sensum, atque aurai simplicis ignem.”

 

This tunicle of the soul, whether it be called pure æther, or luciform vehicle, or animal spirit, seemeth to be that which moves and acts upon the gross organs, as it is determined by the soul from which it immediately receives impression, and in which the moving force truly and properly resides. Some Moderns have thought fit to deride all that is said of æthereal vehicles, as mere jargon or words without a mean ing. But they should have considered that all speech concerning the soul is altogether, or for the most part, metaphorical; and that, agreeably thereunto, Plato speaketh of the mind or soul, as a driver that guides and governs a chariot, which is, not unfitly, styled αύγήειόες, a luciform sethereal vehicle or όχημα — terms expressive of the purity, lightness, subtlety, and mobility of that fine celestial nature in which the soul immediately resides and operates.

172. It was a tenet of the Stoics that the world was an animal, and that Providence answered to the reasonable soul in man. But then the Providence or mind was supposed by them to be immediately resident or present in fire, to dwell therein, and to act thereby. Briefly, they conceived God to be an intellectual and fiery spirit, πνεύμα νοερόν και πνρώϋες. Therefore, though they looked on fire (sect. 166) as the τό ηγεμονικόν or governing principle of the world, yet it was not simply fire, but animated with a mind.

173. Such are the bright and lively signatures of a Divine Mind, operating and displaying itself in fire and light throughout the world, that, as Aristotle observes, in his book “De Mundo,” all things seem full of divinities, whose apparitions on all sides strike and dazzle our eyes. And it must be owned the chief philosophers and Avise men of antiquity, how much soever they attributed to second causes and the force of fire, yet they supposed a Mind or Intellect always resident therein, active or provident, restraining its force, and directing its operations.

174. Thus Hippocrates, in his treatise “De Diæta,” speaks of a strong but invisible fire (sect. 168), that rules all things without noise. Herein, saith he, reside soul, understanding, prudence, growth, motion, diminution, change, sleep, and waking. This is what governs all things, and is never in repose. And the same author, in his tract “De Carnibus,” after a serious preface, setting forth that he is about to declare his own opinion, expresseth it in these terms:— “That which we call heat, θερμόν , appears to me something immortal, which understands all things, which sees and knowS both what is present and what is to come.”

175. This same heat is also what Hippocrates calls nature, the author of life and death, good and evil. It is farther to be noted of this heat, that he maketh it the object of no sense. It is that occult universal nature, and inward invisible force, which actuates and animates the whole world, and was worshipped by the ancients under the name of Saturn; which Vossius judges not improbably to be derived from the Hebrew word satar, to lie hidden or concealed. And what hath been delivered by Hippocrates agrees with the notions of other philosophers: Heraclitus (sect. 157), for instance, who held fire to be the principle and cause of the generation of all things, did not mean thereby an inanimate element, but, as he termed it, πυρ άειζωον , an everlasting fire.

176. Theophrastus, in his book “De Igne,” distinguisheth between heat and fire. The first he considers as a principle or cause; not that which appeareth to sense as a passion or accident existing in a subject, and which is in truth the effect of that unseen principle. And it is remarkable that he refers the treating of this invisible fire or heat to the investigation of the First Causes. Fire, the principle, is neither generated nor destroyed, is everywhere and always present (sect. 157); while its effects in different times and places shew themselves more or less, and are very various, soft and cherishing, or violent and destructive, terrible or agreeable, conveying good and evil, growth and decay, life and death, throughout the mundane system.

177. It is allowed by all that the Greeks derived much of their philosophy from the Eastern nations. And Heraclitus is thought by some to have drawn his principles from Orpheus, as Orpheus did from the Egyptians; or, as others write, he had been auditor of Hippasus, a Pythagorean, who held the same notion of fire, and might have derived it from Egypt by his master Pythagoras, who had travelled into Egypt, and been instructed by the sages of that nation. One of whose tenets it was, that fire was the principle of all action; which is agreeable to the doctrine of the Stoics, that the whole of things is administered by a fiery intellectual spirit. In the Asclepian Dialogue, we find this notion, that all parts of the world vegetate by a fine subtile aether, which acts as an engine or instrument, subject to the will of the supreme God.

178. As the Platonists held intellect to be lodged in soul, and soul in æther (sect. 171); so it passeth for a doctrine of Trismegistus in the Pimander, that mind is clothed by soul, and soul by spirit. Therefore, as the animal spirit of man, being subtile and luminous, is the immediate tegument of the human soul, or that wherein and whereby she acts; even so the spirit of the world, that active fiery ethereal substance of light, that permeates and animates the whole system, is supposed to clothe the soul, which clothes the mind of the universe.

179. The Magi likewise said of God, that he had light for his body and truth for his soul. And in the Chaldaic oracles, all things are supposed to be governed by a πυρ νοερυν, or intellectual fire. And in the same oracles, the creative mind is said to be clothed with fire, ίσσάμενος πνρι πυρ, which oriental reduplication of the word fire seems to imply the extreme purity and force thereof. Thus also in the Psalms, “Thou art clothed with light as with a garment.” Where the word rendered light might have been rendered fire; the Hebrew letters being the same with those in the word which signifies fire, all the difference being in the pointing, which is justly counted a late invention. That other Scripture sentence is remarkable: “Who maketh his ministers a flaming fire:” which might, perhaps, be rendered more agreeably to the context, as well as consistently with the Hebrew, after this manner: “Who maketh flaming fire his ministers:” and the whole might run thus: “Who maketh the winds his messengers, and flaming fire his ministers.”

180. A notion of something Divine in fire, animating the whole world, and ordering its several parts, was a tenet of very general extent (sect. 156, 157, 163, 166, 167, 168, 170, 172, 173, 174, 175, 177, &c.), being embraced in the most distant times and places, even among the Chinese themselves; who make tien, æther, or heaven, the sovereign principle or cause of all things, and teach that the celestial virtue, by them called li , when joined to a corporeal substance, doth fashion, distinguish, and specificate all natural beings. This li of the Chinese seems to answer the forms of the Peripatetics, and both bear analogy to the foregoing philosophy of fire.

181. The heaven is supposed pregnant with virtues and forms, which constitute and discriminate the various species of things. And we have more than once observed that, as the light, fire, or celestial æther, being parted by refracting or reflecting bodies, produceth variety of colours; even so, that same apparently uniform substance, being parted and secreted by the attracting and repelling powers of the divers secretory ducts of plants and animals, that is, by natural chemistry, produceth or imparteth the various specific properties of natural bodies. Whence the tastes, and odours, and medicinal virtues so various in vegetables.

182. The tien is considered and adored by the learned Chinese as living and intelligent æther, the πυρ votpùv of the Chaldeans and the Stoics. And the worship of things celestial, the sun and stars, among the Eastern nations less remote, was on account of their fiery nature, their heat and light, and the influence thereof. Upon these accounts, the sun was looked on by the Greek theologers as the spirit of the world, and the power of the world. The cleansing quality, the light and heat of fire, are natural symbols of purity, knowledge, and power, or, if I may so say, the things themselves, so far as they are perceptible to our senses, or in the same sense as motion is said to be action. Accordingly, we find a religious regard was paid to fire, both by Greeks and Romans, and indeed by most, if not all, the nations of the world.

183. The worship of Vesta at Rome was, in truth, the worship of fire.

 

“Nec tu aliud Vestam quam vivam intellige flam mam,”

 saith Ovid in his Fasti. And as in old Rome the eternal fire was religiously kept by virgins, so in Greece, particularly at Delphi and Athens, it was kept by widows. It is well known that Vulcan or fire was worshipped with great distinction by the Egyptians. The Zabii or Sabeans are also known to have been worshippers of fire. It appears too, from the Chaldean oracles, that fire was regarded as Divine by the sages of that nation. And it is supposed that Ur of the Chaldeans was so called from the Hebrew word signifying fire, because fire was publicly worshipped in that city. That a religious worship was paid to fire by the ancient Persians and their Magi is attested by all antiquity. And the sect of Persees, or old Gentiles, of whom there are considerable remains at this day both in the Mogul’s country and in Persia, doth testify the same.

184. It doth not seem that their prostrations before the perpetual fires, preserved with great care in their Pyreia, or fire temples, were merely a civil respect, as Dr. Hyde would have it thought. Although he brings good proof that they do not invoke the fire on their altars, or pray to it, or call it God: and that they acknowledge a supreme invisible Deity. Civil respects are paid to things as related to civil power: but such relation doth not appear in the present case. It should seem, therefore, that they worship God as present in the fire, which they worship or reverence not ultimately or for itself, but relatively to the supreme Being. Which it is not unlikely was elsewhere the case at first, though the practice of men, especially of the vulgar, might in length of time degenerate from the original institution, and rest in the object of sense.

185. Doctor Hyde, in his History of the Religion of the Ancient Persians, would have it thought that they borrowed the use and reverence of perpetual fires, from the Jewish practice prescribed in the Levitical law of keeping a perpetual fire burning on the altar. Whether that was the case or not, thus much one may venture to say: it seems probable that, whatever was the original of this custom among the Persians, the like customs among the Greeks and Romans were derived from the same source.

186. It must be owned there are many passages in Holy Scripture (sect. 179) that would make one think the supreme Being was in a peculiar manner present and manifest in the element of fire. Not to insist that God is more than once said to be a consuming fire, which might be understood in a metaphorical sense, the Divine apparitions were by fire, in the bush, at Mount Sinai, on the tabernacle, in the cloven tongues. God is represented in the inspired writings, as descending in fire, as attended by fire, or with fire going before him. Celestial things, as angels, chariots, and such-like phænomena, are invested with fire, light, and splendour. Ezekiel in his visions beheld fire and brightness, lamps, burning coals of fire, and flashes of lightning.

In a vision of Daniel, the throne of God appeared like a fiery flame, and his wheels like burning fire. Also a fiery flame issued and came forth from before him.

187. At the transfiguration, the apostles saw our Saviour’s face shining as the sun, and his raiment white as light, also a lucid cloud, or body of light, out of which the voice came; which visible light and splendour were, not many centuries ago, maintained by the Greek church to have been Divine, and uncreated, and the very glory of God; as may be seen in the History wrote by the Emperor John Cantacuzene. And of late years Bishop Patrick gives it as his opinion, that in the beginning of the world the Shechinah, or Divine presence, which was then frequent and ordinary, appeared by light or fire. In commenting on that passage, where Cain is said to have gone out from the presence of the Lord, the Bishop observes, that if Cain after this turned a downright idolater, as many think, it is very likely he introduced the worship of the sun, as the best resemblance he could find of the glory of the Lord, which was wont to appear in a flaming light. It would be endless to enumerate all the passages of Holy Scripture, which confirm and illustrate this notion, or represent the Deity as appearing and operating by fire; the misconstruction of which might possibly have misled the Gnostics, Basilidians, and other ancient heretics into an opinion that Jesus Christ was the visible corporeal sun.

186. We have seen that in the most remote ages and countries, the vulgar as well as the learned, the institutions of lawgivers as well as the reasonings of philosophers have ever considered the element of fire in a peculiar light, and treated it with more than common regard, as if it were something of a very singular and extraordinary nature. Nor are there wanting authors of principal account among the Moderns who entertain like notions concerning fire, especially among those who are most conversant in that element, and should seem best acquainted with it.

189. Mr. Homberg, the famous modern chemist, who brought that art to so great perfection, holds the substance of light or fire to be the true chemic principle sulphur (sect. 129), and to extend itself throughout the whole universe. It is his opinion that this is the only active principle. That mixed with various things it formeth several sorts of natural productions: with salts making oil, with earth bitumen, with mercury metal. That this principle of sulphur, fire, or the substance of light, is in itself imperceptible, and only becomes sensible as it is joined with some other principle, which serves as a vehicle for it. That, although it be the most active of all things, yet it is at the same time the most firm bond and cement to combine and hold the principles together, and give form to the mixed bodies. And that in the analysis of bodies it is always lost, escaping the skill of the artist, and passing through the closest vessels.

190. Boerhaave, Niemventyt, and divers other moderns are in the same way of thinking. They with the ancients distinguish a pure elementary invisible fire from the culinary, or that which appears in ignited bodies (sect. 163, 166). This last they will not allow to be pure fire. The pure fire is to be discerned by its effects alone; such as heat, dilatation of all solid bodies, and rarefaction of fluids, the segregating heterogeneous bodies, and congregating those that are homogeneous. That therefore which smokes and flames is not pure fire, but that which is collected in the focus of a concave mirror or burning-glass. This fire seems the source of all the operations in nature: without it nothing either vegetates or putrefies, lives or moves or ferments, is dissolved or compounded or altered, throughout this whole natural world in which we subsist. Were it not for this, the whole would be one great stupid inanimate mass. But this active element is supposed to be everywhere, and always present, imparting different degrees of life, heat, and motion to the various animals, vegetables, and other natural productions, as well as to the elements themselves wherein they are produced and nourished.

191. As water acts upon salt, or aquafortis upon iron, so fire dissolves all other bodies. Fire, air, and water are all three menstruums: but the two last seem to derive all their force and activity from the first (sect. 149). And indeed there seems to be, originally or ultimately, but one menstruum in nature, to which all other menstruums may be reduced. Acid salts are a menstruum, but their force and distinct powers are from sulphur. Considered as pure, or in themselves, they are all of the same nature. But, as obtained by distillation, they are constantly joined with some sulphur, which characterizeth and cannot be separated from them. This is the doctrine of Monsieur Homberg. But what is it that characterizeth or differenceth the sulphurs themselves? If sulphur be the substance of light, as that author will have it, whence is it that animal, vegetable, and metallic sulphurs impart different qualities to the same acid salt? Can this be explained upon Homberg’s principles? And are we not obliged to suppose that light, separated by the attracting and repelling powers in the strainers, ducts, and pores of those bodies, doth form several distinct kinds of sulphur, all which, before such separation, were lost and blended together, in one common mass of light or fire, seemingly homogeneous?

192. In the analysis of inflammable bodies, the fire or sulphur is lost, and the diminution of weight sheweth the loss (sect. 169). Oil is resolved into water, earth, and salt, none of which is inflammable. But the fire or vinculum which connected those things, and gave the form of oil, escapes from the artist. It disappears but is not destroyed. Light or fire imprisoned made part of the compound, gave union to the other parts, and form to the whole. But, having escaped, it mingles with the general ocean of æther, till, being again parted and attracted, its enters and specificates some new subject of the animal, vegetable, or mineral kingdom. Fire, therefore, in the sense of philosophers, is always fire, though not always flame.

193. Solar fire or light, in calcining certain bodies, is observed to add to their weight. There is therefore no doubt but light can be fixed, and enter the composition of a body. And though it should lie latent for a long time, yet, being set free from its prison, it shall still shew itself to be fire. Lead, tin, or regulus of antimony, being exposed to the fire of a burning-glass, though they lose much in smoke and steam, are nevertheless found to be considerably increased in weight, which proves the introduction of light or fire into their pores. It is also observed that urine produceth no phosphorus unless it be long exposed to the solar light. From all which it maybe concluded, that bodies attract and fix the light; whence it should seem, as some have observed, that fire without burning is an ingredient in many things, as water without wetting.

194. Of this there cannot be a better proof than the experiment of Monsieur Homberg, who made gold of mercury by introducing light into its pores, but at such trouble and expense, that I suppose nobody will try the experiment for profit. By this junction of light and mercury, both bodies became fixed, and produced a third different from either, to wit, real gold. For the truth of which fact, I refer to the Memoirs of the French Academy of Sciences. From the foregoing experiment it appears that gold is only a mass of mercury penetrated and cemented by the substance of light, the particles of those bodies attracting and fixing each other. This seems to have been not altogether unknown to former philosophers; Marcilius Ficinus, the Platonist, in his commentary on the first book of the second Ennead of Plotinus, and others likewise before him, regarding mercury as the mother, and sulphur as the father of metals; and Plato himself, in his Timæus describing gold to be a dense fluid with a shining yellow light, which well suits a composition of light and mercury.

195. Fire or light mixeth with all bodies (sect. 157), even with water; witness the flashing lights in the sea, whose waves seem frequently all on fire. Its operations are various according to its kind, quantity, and degree of vehemence. One degree keeps water fluid, and another turns it into elastic air (sect. 149). And air itself seems to be nothing else but vapours and exhalations, rendered elastic by fire. Nothing flames but oil; and sulphur with water, salt, and earth compose oil, which sulphur is fire: therefore fire enclosed attracts fire, and causeth the bodies whose composition it enters to burn and blaze.

196. Fire collected in the focus of a glass operates in vacuo, and therefore is thought not to need air to support it. Calx of lead hath gone off with an explosion in vacuo, which Nieuwentyt and others take for a proof that fire can burn without air. But Mr. Hales attributes this effect to air enclosed in the red lead, and perhaps too in the receiver, which cannot be perfectly exhausted. When common lead is put into the fire in order to make red lead, a greater weight of this comes out than was put in of common lead. Therefore the red lead should seem impregnated with fire. Mr. Hales thinks it is with air. The vast expansion of compound aqua fortis, Mr. Nieuwentyt will have to proceed from fire alone. Mr. Hales contends that air must necessarily co-operate. Though, by Nieuwentyt’s experiment, it should seem the phosphorus burns equally with and without air.

197. Perhaps they who hold the opposite sides in this question may be reconciled by observing that air is in reality nothing more than particles of wet and dry bodies volatilized and rendered elastic by fire (sect. 147, 150, 151). Whatever, therefore, is done by air must be ascribed to fire; which fire is a subtle invisible thing, whose operation is not to be discerned but by means of some grosser body, which serves not for a pabulum to nourish the fire, but for a vehicle to arrest and bring it into view. Which seems the sole use of oil, air, or any other thing that vulgarly passeth for a pabulum or food of that element.

198. To explain this matter more clearly, it is to be observed that fire, in order to become sensible, must have some object to act upon. This, being penetrated and agitated by fire, affects us with light, heat, or some other sensible alteration. And this subject so wrought upon may be called culinary fire. In the focus of a burning-glass exposed to the sun, there is real actual fire; though not discerned by the sense till it hath somewhat to work on, and can shew itself in its effects, heating, flaming, melting, and the like. Every ignited body is, in the foregoing sense, culinary fire. But it will not therefore follow that it is convertible into pure elementary fire. This, for aught that appears, may be ingenerable and incorruptible by the course of nature. It may be fixed and imprisoned in a compound (sect. 169, 192, 193), and yet retain its nature, though lost to sense, and though it return into the invisible elementary mass, upon the analysis of the compounded body: as is manifest in the solution of stone lime by water.

199. It should seem, therefore, that what is said of air’s being the pabulum of fire, or being converted into fire, ought to be understood only in this sense; to wit, that air, being less gross than other bodies, is of a middle nature, and therefore more fit to receive the impressions of a fine æthereal fire (sect. 163), and impart them to other things. According to the ancients, soul serveth for a vehicle to intellect (sect. 178), and light or fire for a vehicle to the soul; and, in like manner, air may be supposed a vehicle to fire, fixing it in some degree, and communicating its effects to other bodies.

200. The pure invisible fire or æther doth permeate all bodies, even the hardest and most solid, as the diamond. This alone, therefore, cannot, as some learned men have supposed, be the cause of muscular motion, by a mere impulse of the nerves communicated from the brain to the membranes of the muscles, and thereby to the enclosed æther, whose expansive motion, being by that means increased, is thought to swell the muscles and cause a contraction of the fleshy fibres. This, it should seem, the pure æther cannot do immediately and of itself, because, supposing its expansive motion to be increased, it must still pass through the membranes, and consequently not swell them, inasmuch as æther is supposed freely to pervade the most solid bodies. It should seem, therefore, that this effect must be owing, not to pure æther, but to æther in some part fixed and arrested by the particles of air.

201. Although this æther be extremely elastic, yet, as it is sometimes found by experience to be attracted, imprisoned, and retained in gross bodies (sect. 169), so we may suppose it to be attracted, and its expansive force diminished, though it should not be quite fixed, by the loose particles of air, which combining and cohering therewith may bring it down, and qualify it for intercourse with grosser things. Pure fire may be said to animate air, and air other things. Pure fire is invisible; therefore flame is not pure fire. Air is necessary both to life and flame. And it is found by experiment that air loseth in the lungs the power of feeding flame. Hence it is concluded that the same thing in air contributes both to life and flame. Vital flame survives culinary flame in vacuo: therefore it requires less of that thing to sustain it.

202. What this may be, whether some certain proportion, or some peculiar parts, of æther, is not easy to say. But thus much seems plain, that whatever is ascribed to acid may be also ascribed to fire or æther. The particles of æther fly asunder with the greatest force: therefore, agreeably to Sir Isaac Newton’s doctrine, when united they must attract each other with the greatest force. Therefore they constitute the acid. For, whatsoever strongly attracts and is attracted, may be called an acid, as Sir Isaac Newton informs us in his tract “De Acido.” Hence it should seem that the sulphur of Homberg, and the acid of Sir Isaac are at bottom one and the same thing, to wit, pure fire or æther.

203. The vital flame or æthereal spirit, being attracted and imprisoned in grosser bodies, seemeth to be set free and carried off by the superior attraction of a subtle and pure flame. Hence, perhaps, it is, that lightning kills animals, and turns spirituous liquors vapid in an instant.

204. Hippocrates, in his book concerning the Heart, observeth that the soul of man is not nourished by meats and drinks from the lower belly, but by a pure and luminous substance darting its rays, and distributing a non-natural nourishment, as he terms it, in like manner as that from the intestines is distributed to all parts of the body. This luminous non-natural nourishment, though it be secreted from the blood, is expressly said not to come from the lower belly. It is plain, therefore, he thought it came into the blood, either by respiration, or by attraction through the pores. And it must be acknowledged that somewhat igneous or æthereal, brought by the air into the blood, seems to nourish, though not the soul itself, yet the interior tunicle of the soul, the auraii simplicis ignem.

205. That there is really such a thing as vital flame, actually kindled, nourished, and extinguished, like common flame, and by the same means, is an opinion of some moderns, particularly of Dr. Willis in his tract “De Sanguinis Accensione”: that it requires constant eventilation, through the trachæa and pores of the body for the discharge of a fuliginous and excrementitious vapour; and that this vital flame, being extremely subtile, might not be seen any more than shining flies or ignes fatui by daylight. And yet it hath sometimes become visible on divers persons, of which there are undoubted instances. This is Dr. Willis’s notion: and perhaps there may be some truth in this, if it be so understood as that light or fire might indeed constitute the animal spirit or immediate vehicle of the soul.

206. There have not been wanting those, who, not content to suppose Light the most pure and refined of all corporeal beings, have gone farther, and bestowed upon it some attributes of a yet higher nature. Julianus, the Platonic philosopher, as cited by Ficinus, saith it was a doctrine in the theology of the Phoenicians, that there is diffused throughout the universe a pellucid and shining nature, pure and impassive, the act of a pure intelligence. And Ficinus himself undertakes to prove that light is incorporeal by several arguments: because it enlightens and fills a great space in an instant, and without opposition: because several lights meet without resisting each other: because light cannot be defiled by filth of any kind: because the solar light is not fixed in any subject: lastly, because it contracts and expands itself so easily without collision, condensation, rarefaction, or delay, throughout the vastest space. These reasons are given by Ficinus, in his comment on the first book of the second Ennead of Plotinus.

207. But it is now well known that light moves, and that its motion is not instantaneous: that it is capable of condensation, rarefaction, and collision: that it can be mixed with other bodies, enter their composition, and increase their weight (sect. 169, 192, 193). All which seems sufficiently to overthrow those arguments of Ficinus, and shew light to be corporeal. There appears indeed some difficulty at first sight, about the non-resistance of rays or particles of light occurring one to another, in all possible directions or from all points. Particularly, if we suppose the hollow surface of a large sphere studded with eyes looking inwards one at another, it may perhaps seem hard to conceive how distinct rays from every eye should arrive at every other eye without justling, repelling, and confounding each other.

208. But these difficulties may be got over by considering, in the first place, that visible points are not mathematical points, and consequently that we are not to suppose every point of space a radiating point. Secondly, by granting that many rays do resist and intercept each other, notwithstanding which the act of vision may be performed. Since as every point of the object is not seen, so it is not necessary that rays from every such point arrive at the eye. We often see an object, though more dimly, when many rays are intercepted by a gross medium.

209. Besides, we may suppose the particles of light to be indefinitely small, that is, as small as we please, and their aggregate to bear as small a proportion to the void as we please, there being nothing in this that contradicts the phænomena. And there needs nothing more, in order to conceive the possibility of rays passing from and to all visible points, although they be not incorporeal. Suppose a hundred ports placed round a circular sea, and ships sailing from each port to every other; the larger the sea, and the smaller the vessels are supposed, the less danger will there be of their striking against each other. But, as there is by hypothesis no limited proportion between the sea and the ships, the void and solid particles of light, so there is no difficulty that can oblige us to conclude the sun’s light incorporeal from its free passage; especially when there are so many clear proofs of the contrary. As for the difficulty, therefore, attending the supposition of a sphere studded with eyes looking at each other, this is removed only by supposing the particles of light exceeding small relatively to the empty spaces.

210. Plotinus supposeth that from the sun’s light, which is corporeal, there springs forth another equivocal light which is incorporeal, and as it were the brightness of the former. Marcilius Ficinus also, observing it to be a doctrine in the “Timæus” of Plato, that there is an occult fire or spirit diffused throughout the universe, intimates that this same occult invisible fire or light is, as it were, the sight of the mundane soul. And Plotinus in his fourth Ennead sheweth it to be his opinion that the world seeth itself and all its parts. The Platonic philosophers do wonderfully refine upon light, and soar very high: from coal to flame; from flame to light; from this visible light to the occult light of the celestial or mundane soul, which they supposed to pervade and agitate the substance of the universe by its vigorous and expansive motion.

211. If we may believe Diogenes Laertius, the Pythagorean philosophers thought there was a certain pure heat or fire, which had somewhat Divine in it, by the participation whereof men became allied to the gods. And according to the Platonist, heaven is not defined so much by its local situation as by its purity. The purest and most excellent fire, that is heaven, saith Ficinus. And again, the hidden fire that everywhere exerts itself, he calls celestial. He represents fire as most powerful and active, dividing all things, abhorring all composition or mixture with other bodies. And, as soon as its gets free, relapsing instantly into the common mass of celestial fire, which is everywhere present and latent.

212. This is the general source of life, spirit, and strength, and therefore of health to all animals, who constantly receive its illapses clothed in air, through the lungs and pores of the body. The same spirit, imprisoned in food and medicines, is conveyed into the stomach, the bowels, the lacteals, circulated and secreted by the several ducts, and distributed throughout the system (sect. 37, 42, 44). Plato, in his “Timæus,” enumerating the ignited juices, names wine in the first place, and tar in the second. But wine is pressed from the grape, and fermented by human industry. Therefore of all ignited juices purely natural, tar or resin must in his account be esteemed the first.

213. The vivifying luminous æther exists in all places, even the darkest caverns; as is evident from hence, that many animals see in those dark places, and that fire may be kindled in them by the collision or attrition of bodies. It is also known that certain persons have fits of seeing in the dark. Tiberius was said to have had this faculty or distemper. I myself knew an ingenious man who had experienced it several times in himself. And Dr. Willis, in his tract “De Sanguinis Accensione,” mentions another of his own knowledge. This luminous æther or spirit is therefore said by Virgil to nourish or cherish the innermost earth, as well as the heavens and celestial bodies.

 

“Principio coelum ac terras, camposque liquentes,

Lucentemque globum Lunae, Titaniaque astra Spiritus intus alit.:’

214. The principles of motion and vegetation in living bodies seem to be delibations from the invisible fire or spirit of the universe (sect. 43, 157, 164, 171): which though present to all things, is not nevertheless one way received by all; but variously imbibed, attracted, and secreted, by the fine capillaries, and exquisite strainers in the bodies of plants and animals, whereby it becomes mixed and detained in their juices.

215. It hath been thought by some observers of nature that the fine glandular vessels admit from the common mass of the blood only such juices as are homogeneous to those with which they were originally imbued. How they came to be so imbued doth not appear. But thus much is plain; that fine tubes attract fluids, that the glands are fine tubes, and that they attract very different juices from the common mass. The same holds also with regard to the capillary vessels of vegetables (sect. 30, 31, 33, 35), it being evident that, through the fine strainers in the leaves and all over the body of the plant, there be juices or fluids of a particular kind drawn in, and separated from the common mass of air and light. And that the most elaborate spirit, whereon the character or distinguishing virtue and properties of the plant depend, is of a luminous (sect. 37, 43) and volatile nature, being lost or escaping into air or æther, from essential oils and odoriferous waters, without any sensible diminution of them.

216. As different kinds of secreted light or fire produce different essences, virtues, or specific properties, so also different degrees of heat produce different effects. Thus, one degree of heat keeps the blood from coagulating, and another degree coagulates the blood. Thus, a more violent fire hath been observed to set free and carry off that very light, which a more moderate fire had introduced and fixed in the calcined regulus of antimony. In like manner, one kind or quantity of this æthereal fiery spirit may be congenial and friendly to the spirits of a man, while another may be noxious.

217. And experience sheweth this to be true. For, the fermented spirit of wine or other liquors produceth irregular motions, and subsequent depressions in the animal spirits. Whereas the luminous spirit lodged and detained in the native balsam of pines and firs is of a nature so mild, and benign, and proportioned to the human constitution, as to warm without heating, to cheer but not inebriate, and to produce a calm and steady joy like the effect of good news, without that sinking of spirits which is a subsequent effect of all fermented cordials. I may add, without all other inconvenience, except that it may like any other medicine be taken in too great a quantity for a nice stomach. In which case it may be right to lessen the dose, or to take it only once in the four and twenty hours, empty, going to bed (when it is found to be least offensive), or even to suspend the taking of it for a time, till nature shall seem to crave it, and rejoice in its benign and comfortable spirit.

218. Tar-water, serving as a vehicle to this spirit, is both diuretic and diaphoretic, but seems to work its principal effect by assisting the vis vitae , as an alterative and cordial, enabling nature, by an accession of congenial spirit, to assimilate that which could not be assimilated by her proper force, and so to subdue the fomes morbi . And this should seem in most cases the best and safest course. Great evacuations weaken nature as well as the disease. And it is to be feared that they who use salivations and copious bleedings, may, though they should recover of the distemper, in their whole life be never able to recover of the remedies.

219. It is true, indeed, that in chronical cases there is need of time to complete a cure; and yet I have known this tar-water in disorders of the lungs and stomach to prove a very speedy remedy, and to allay the anxiety and heat of a fever in an instant, giving ease and spirits to the patient. This I have often experienced, not without surprise at seeing these salutary effects follow so immediately in a fever on taking a glass of tar-water. Such is the force of these active vivifying principles contained in this balsam.

220. Force or power, strictly speaking, is in the Agent alone who imparts an equivocal force to the invisible elementary fire, or animal spirit of the world (sect. 153, 156, 157); and this to the ignited body or visible flame, which produceth the sense of light and heat. In this chain the first and last links are allowed to be incorporeal: the two intermediate are corporeal — being capable of motion, rarefaction, gravity, and other qualities of bodies. It is fit to distinguish these things, in order to avoid ambiguity concerning the nature of fire.

221. Sir Isaac Newton in his “Optics,” asks, Is not fire a body heated so hot as to emit light copiously? for what else, adds he, is a red-hot iron than fire? Now, it should seem that to define fire by heat would be to explain a thing by itself. A body heated so hot as to emit light is an ignited body; that is, hath fire in it, is penetrated and agitated by fire, but is not itself fire. And although it should in the third foregoing acceptation, or vulgar sense, pass for fire, yet it is not the pure elementary fire (sect. 190) in the second or philosophic sense — such as was understood by the sages of antiquity, and such as is collected in the focus of a burning-glass; much less is it the vis, force, or power of burning, destroying, calcining, melting, vitrifying, and raising the perceptions of light and heat: this is truly and really in the incorporeal Agent, and not in the vital spirit of the universe. Motion, and even power in an equivocal sense, may be found in this pure æthereal spirit, which ignites bodies, but is not itself the ignited body; being an instrument or medium by which the real agent (sect. 160)doth operate on grosser bodies.

222. It hath been shewed in Sir Isaac Newton’s “Optics,” that light is not reflected by impinging on bodies, but by some other cause. And to him it seems probable that as many rays as impinge on the solid parts of bodies are not reflected, but stifled and retained in the bodies. And it is certain the great porosity of all known bodies affords room for much of this light or fire to be lodged therein. Gold itself, the most solid of all metals, seems to have far more pores than solid parts, from water being pressed through it in the Florentine experiment, from magnetic effluvia passing, and from mercury entering, its pores so freely. And it is admitted that water, though impossible to be compressed, hath at least forty times more pores than solid parts. And, as acid particles, joined with those of earth in certain proportions, are so closely united with them as to be quite hid and lost to all appearance, as in mercurius dulcis and common sulphur, so also may we conceive the particles of light or fire to be absorbed and latent in grosser bodies.

223. It is the opinion of Sir Isaac Newton that somewhat unknown remains in vacuo , when the air is exhausted. This unknown medium he calls æther. He supposeth it to be more subtile in its nature, and more swift in its motion, than light, freely to pervade all bodies, and by its immense elasticity to be expanded throughout all the heavens. Its density is supposed greater in free and open spaces than within the pores of compact bodies. And in passing from the celestial bodies to great distances, it is supposed to grow denser and denser continually; and thereby cause those great bodies to gravitate towards one another, and their respective parts towards their centres, every body endeavouring to pass from the denser parts of the medium towards the rarer.

224. The extreme minuteness of the parts of this medium, and the velocity of their motion, together with its gravity, density, and elastic force, are thought to qualify it for being the cause of all the natural motions in the universe. To this cause are ascribed the gravity and cohesion of bodies. The refraction of light is also thought to proceed from the different density and elastic force of this æthereal medium in different places. The vibrations of this medium, alternately concurring with, or obstructing the motions of the rays of light, are supposed to produce the fits of easy reflection and transmission. Light by the vibrations of this medium is thought to communicate heat to bodies. Animal motion and sensation are also accounted for by the vibrating motions of this æthereal medium, propagated through the solid capillaments of the nerves. In a word, all the phænomena and properties of bodies, that were before attributed to attraction, upon later thoughts seem ascribed to this æther, together with the various attractions themselves.

225. But, in the philosophy of Sir Isaac Newton, the fits (as they are called) of easy transmission and reflection seem as well accounted for by vibrations excited in bodies by the rays of light, and the refraction of light by the attraction of bodies. To explain the vibrations of light by those of a more subtle medium seems an uncouth explication. And gravity seems not an effect of the density and elasticity of æther, but rather to be produced by some other cause: which Sir Isaac himself insinuates to have been the opinion even of those ancients who took vacuum, atoms, and the gravity of atoms, for the principles of their philosophy; tacitly attributing (as he well observes) gravity to some other cause distinct from matter, from atoms, and consequently from that homogeneous æther or elastic fluid. The elasticity of which fluid is supposed to depend upon, to be defined and measured by, its density; and this by the quantity of matter in one particle, multiplied by the number of particles contained in a given space; and the quantity of matter in any one particle to be determined by its gravity. Should not therefore gravity seem the original property and first supposed? On the other hand, if force be considered as prescinded from gravity and matter, and as existing only in points or centres, what can this amount to but an abstract, spiritual, incorporeal force?

226. It doth not seem necessary, from the phænomena, to suppose any medium more active and subtle than light or fire. Light being allowed to move at the rate of about ten millions of miles in a minute, what occasion is there to conceive another medium of still smaller and more moveable parts? Light or fire seems the same with æther. So the ancients understood, and so the Greek word implies. It pervades all things (sect. 157), is everywhere present. And this same subtile medium, according to its various quantities, motions, and determinations, sheweth itself in different effects or appearances, and is æther, light, or fire.

227. The particles of æther fly asunder with the greatest force; therefore when united they must (according to the Newtonian doctrine) attract each other with the greatest force; therefore they are acids, or constitute the acid (sect. 130); but this united with earthly parts maketh alkali, as Sir Isaac teacheth in his tract “De Acido;” alkali, as appears in cantharides and lixivial salts, is a caustic; caustics are fire; therefore acid is fire; therefore æther is fire; and if fire, light. We are not therefore obliged to admit a new medium distinct from light, and of a finer and more exquisite substance, for the explication of phænomena which appear to be as well explained without it. How can the density or elasticity of æther account for the rapid flight of a ray of light from the sun, still swifter as it goes farther from the sun? Or how can it account for the various motions and attractions of different bodies? Why oil and water, mercury and iron, repel, or why other bodies attract each other? Or why a particle of light should repel on one side and attract on the other, as in the case of the Icelandic crystal? To explain cohesion by hamate atoms is accounted ignotum per ignotius. And is it not as much so to account for the gravity of bodies by the elasticity of æther?

228. It is one thing to arrive at general laws of nature from a contemplation of the phænomena; and another to frame an hypothesis, and from thence deduce the phænomena. Those who suppose epicyles, and by them explain the motions and appearances of the planets, may not therefore be thought to have discovered principles true in fact and nature. And, albeit we may from the premises infer a conclusion, it will not follow that we can argue reciprocally, and from the conclusion infer the premises. For instance, supposing an elastic fluid, whose constituent minute particles are equidistant from each other, and of equal densities and diameters, and recede one from another with a centrifugal force which is inversely as the distance of the centres; and admitting that from such supposition it must follow that the density and elastic force of such fluid are in the inverse proportion of the space it occupies when compressed by any force; yet we cannot reciprocally infer that a fluid endued with this property must therefore consist of such supposed equal particles: for it would then follow that the constituent particles of air were of equal densities and diameters; whereas it is certain that air is an heterogeneous mass, containing in its composition an infinite variety of exhalations, from the different bodies which make up this terraqueous globe.

229. The phænomena of light, animal spirit, muscular motion, fermentation, vegetation, and other natural operations, seem to require nothing more than the intellectual and artificial fire of Heraclitus, Hippocrates, the Stoics (sect. 166, 168), and other ancients. Intellect, superadded to æthereal spirit, fire, or light, moves, and moves regularly; proceeding in a method, as the Stoics, or increasing and diminishing by measure, as Heraclitus expressed it. The Stoics held that fire comprehended and included the spermatic reasons or forms (λογους σπερματικοί)ç) of all natural things. As the forms of things have their ideal existence in the intellect, so it should seem that seminal principles have their natural existence in the light (sect. 164); a medium consisting of heterogeneous parts, differing from each other in divers qualities that appear to sense, and not improbably having many original properties, attractions, repulsions, and motions, the laws and natures whereof are indiscernible to us, otherwise than in their remote effects. And this animated heterogeneous fire should seem a more adequate cause, whereby to explain the phænomena of nature, than one uniform æthereal medium.

230. Aristotle, indeed, excepts against the elements being animated. Yet nothing hinders why that power of the soul styled by him κινητική, or locomotive, may not reside therein, under the direction of an Intellect — in such sense and as properly as it is said to reside in animal bodies. It must nevertheless be owned, that albeit that philosopher acknowledged a Divine force or energy in fire, yet to say that fire is alive, or that having a soul it should not be alive, seem to him equally absurd. See his second book “De Partibus Animalium.”

231. The laws of attraction and repulsion are to be regarded as laws of motion; and these only as rules or methods observed in the productions of natural effects, the efficient and final causes whereof are not of mechanical consideration. Certainly, if the explaining a phænomenon be to assign its proper efficient and final cause (sect. 154, 155, 160), it should seem the mechanical philosophers never explained any thing; their province being only to discover the laws of nature, that is, the general rules and methods of motion, and to account for particular phænomena by reducing them under, or shewing their conformity to, such general rules.

232. Some corpuscularian philosophers of the last age have indeed attempted to explain the formation of this world and its phænomena by a few simple laws of mechanism. But, if we consider the various productions of nature, in the mineral, vegetable, and animal parts of the creation, I believe we shall see cause to affirm, that not any one of them has hitherto been, or can be, accounted for on principles merely mechanical; and that nothing could be more vain and imaginary than to suppose with Descartes, that merely from a circular motion’s being impressed by the supreme Agent on the particles of extended substance, the whole world, with all its several parts, appurtenances, and phænomena, might be produced, by a necessary consequence, from the laws of motion.

233. Others suppose that God did more at the beginning, having then made the seeds of all vegetables and animals, containing their solid organical parts in miniature, the gradual filling and evolution of which, by the influx of proper juices, doth constitute the generation and growth of a living body. So that the artificial structure of plants and animals daily generated requires no present exercise of art to produce it, having been already framed at the origin of the world, which with all its parts hath ever since subsisted; going like a clock or machine by itself, according to the laws of nature, without the immediate hand of the artist. But how can this hypothesis explain the blended features of different species in mules and other mongrels? or the parts added or changed, and sometimes whole limbs lost, by marking in the womb? or how can it account for the resurrection of a tree from its stump, or the vegetative power in its cuttings? in which cases we must necessarily conceive something more than the mere evolution of a seed.

234. Mechanical laws of nature or motion direct us how to act, and teach us what to expect. Where intellect presides there will be method and order, and therefore rules, which if not stated and constant would cease to be rules. There is therefore a constancy in things, which is styled the Course of Nature (sect. 160). All the phænomena in nature are produced by motion. There appears an uniform working in things great and small, by attracting and repelling forces. But the particular laws of attraction and repulsion are various. Nor are we concerned at all about the forces, neither can we know or measure them otherwise than by their effects, that is to say, the motions; which motions only, and not the forces, are indeed in the bodies (sect. 155). Bodies are moved to or from each other, and this is performed according to different laws. The natural or mechanic philosopher endeavours to discover those laws by experiment and reasoning. But what is said of forces residing in bodies, whether attracting or repelling, is to be regarded only as a mathematical hypothesis, and not as any thing really existing in nature.

235. We are not therefore seriously to suppose, with certain mechanic philosophers, that the minute particles of bodies have real forces or powers, by which they act on each other, to produce the various phænomena in nature. The minute corpuscles are impelled and directed, that is to say, moved to and from each other, according to various rules or laws of motion. The laws of gravity, magnetism, and electricity are divers. And it is not known what other different rules or laws of motion might be established by the Author of nature. Some bodies approach together, others fly asunder, and perhaps some others do neither. When salt of tartar flows per deliquium, it is visible that the particles of water floating in the air are moved towards the particles of salt, and joined with them. And when we behold vulgar salt not to flow per deliquium , may we not conclude that the same law of nature and motion doth not obtain between its particles and those of the floating vapours? A drop of water assumes a round figure, because its parts are moved towards each other. But the particles of oil and vinegar have no such disposition to unite. And when flies walk in water, without wetting their feet, it is attributed to a repelling force or faculty in the flies’ feet. But this is obscure, though the phænomenon be plain.

236. It is not improbable, and seems not unsupported by experiments, that as in algebra, where positive quantities cease there negative begin, even so in mechanics, where attracting forces cease there repelling forces begin: or (to express it more properly) where bodies cease to be moved towards, they begin to be moved from each other. This Sir Isaac Newton infers from the production of air and vapours, whose particles fly asunder with such vehement force. We behold iron move towards the loadstone, straws towards amber, heavy bodies towards the earth. The laws of these motions are various. And when it is said that all the motions and changes in the great world arise from attraction — the elasticity of the air, the motion of water, the descent of heavy, and the ascent of light bodies, being all ascribed to the same principle; when from insensible attractions of most minute particles at the smallest distance are derived cohesion, dissolution, coagulation, animal secretion, fermentation, and all chemical operations; and when it is said that without such principles there never would have been any motion in the world, and without the continuance thereof all motion would cease; in all this we know or understand no more than that bodies are moved according to a certain order, and that they do not move themselves.

237. So likewise, how to explain all those various motions and effects, by the density and elasticity of æther, seems incomprehensible (sect. 153, 162). For instance, why should the acid particles draw those of water and repel each other? Why should some salts attract vapours in the air, and others not? Why should the particles of common salt repel each other, so as not to subside in water? Why should the most repellent particles be the most attractive upon contact? Or why should the repellent begin where the attractive faculty leaves off? These, and numberless other effects, seem inexplicable on mechanical principles; or otherwise than by recourse to a mind or spiritual agent (sect. 154, 220). Nor will it suffice from present phænomena and effects, through a chain of natural causes and subordinate blind agents, to trace a Divine Intellect as the remote original cause, that first created the world, and then set it a-going. We cannot make even one single step in accounting for the phænomena, without admitting the immediate presence and immediate action of an incorporeal agent, who connects, moves, and disposes all things, according to such rules, and for such purposes, as seem good to him.

238. It is an old opinion, adopted by the moderns, that the elements and other natural bodies are changed each into other (sect. 148). Now, as the particles of different bodies are agitated by different forces, attracting and repelling, or, to speak more accurately, are moved by different laws, how can these forces or laws be changed, and this change accounted for by an elastic æther? Such a medium — distinct from light or fire — seemeth not to be made out by any proof, nor to be of any use in explaining the phænomena. But if there be any medium employed, as a subordinate cause or instrument in attraction, it would rather seem to be light (sect. 152, 156); since, by an experiment of Mr. Boyle’s, amber, that shewed no sign of attraction in the shade, being placed where the sunbeams shone upon it, immediately attracted light bodies. Besides, it hath been discovered by Sir Isaac Newton, and an admirable discovery it was, that light is an heterogeneous medium, consisting of particles endued with original distinct properties (sect. 40, 181). And upon these, if I may venture to give my conjectures, it seemeth probable the specific properties of bodies, and the force of specific medicines, may depend. Different sides of the same ray shall, one approach and the other recede from the Icelandic crystal; can this be accounted for by the elasticity of a fine medium, or by the general laws of motion, or by any mechanical principles whatever? And if not, what should hinder but there may be specific medicines, whose operation depends not upon mechanical principles, how much soever that notion hath been exploded of late years?

239. Why may we not suppose certain idiosyncrasies, sympathies, oppositions, in the solids, or fluids, or animal spirit of a human body, with regard to the fine insensible parts of minerals or vegetables, impregnated by rays of light of different properties; not depending on the different size, figure, number, solidity, or weight of those particles, nor on the general laws of motion, nor on the density or elasticity of a medium, but merely and altogether on the good pleasure of the Creator, in the original formation of things? From whence divers unaccountable and unforeseen motions may arise in the animal economy; from whence also various peculiar and specific virtues may be conceived to arise, residing in certain medicines, and not to be explained by mechanical principles. For, although the general known laws of motion are to be deemed mechanical, yet peculiar motions of the insensible parts, and peculiar properties depending thereon, are occult and specific.

240. The words attraction and repulsion may, in compliance with custom, be used where, accurately speaking, motion alone is meant. And in that sense it may be said that peculiar attractions or repulsions in the parts are attended with specific properties in the whole. The particles of light are vehemently moved to or from, retained, or rejected by, objects: which is the same thing as to say, with Sir Isaac Newton, that the particles of acids are endued with great attractive force (sect. 202), wherein their activity consists; whence fermentation and dissolution; and that the most repellent are, upon contact, the most attracting particles.

241. Gravity and fermentation are received for two most extensive principles. From fermentation are derived the motion and warmth of the heart and blood in animals, subterraneous heat, fires, and earthquakes, meteors, and changes in the atmosphere. And that attracting and repelling forces operate in the nutrition and dissolution of animal and vegetable bodies is the doctrine both of Hippocrates and Sir Isaac Newton. The former of these celebrated authors, in his Treatise concerning Diet or Regimen, observes that in the nourishment of man, one part repels and another attracts. And again in the same Treatise, two carpenters, saith he, saw a piece of timber: one draws, the other pushes: these two actions tend to one and the same end, though in a contrary direction, one up, the other down: this imitates the nature of man: GREEK TEXT.

242. It is the general maxim of Hippocrates, that the manner wherein nature acts consisteth in attracting what is meet and good, and in repelling what is disagreeable or hurtful. He makes the whole of the animal economy to be administered by the faculties or powers of nature. Nature alone, saith he, sufficeth for all things to animals. She knows of herself what is necessary for them. Whence it is plain he means a conscious intelligent nature, that presides and moves the æthereal spirit. And though he declares all things are accomplished on man by necessity, yet it is not a blind fate or chain of mere corporeal causes, but a Divine Necessity, as he himself expressly calls it. And what is this but an overruling intelligent power that disposeth of all things?

 

243 Attraction cannot produce, and in that sense account for, the phænomena, being itself one of the phænomena produced and to be accounted for (sect. 160, 235). Attraction is performed by different laws, and cannot therefore in all cases be the effect of the elasticity of one uniform medium. The phænomena of electrical bodies, the laws and variations of magnetism, and, not to mention other kinds, even gravity, are not explained by elasticity, a phænomenon not less obscure than itself. But then, although it shew not the agent, yet it sheweth a rule and analogy innature, to say, that the solid parts of animals are endued with attractive powers whereby from contiguous fluids they draw like to like; and that glands have peculiar powers attractive of peculiar juices (sect. 41). Nature seems better known and explained by attractions and repulsions, than by those other mechanical principles of size, figure, and the like; that is, by Sir Isaac Newton, than Descartes. And natural philosophers exeel, as they are more or less acquainted with the laws and methods observed by the Author of nature.

244. The size and shape of particles and general laws of motion can never explain the secretions, without the help of attraction, obscure perhaps as to its cause, but clear as a law. Numberless instances of this might be given. Lemery the younger thought himself obliged to suppose the particles of light or fire (contrary to all reason) to be of a very gross kind, even greater than the pores of the burnt limestone, in order to account for their being detained or imprisoned therein; but this phænomenon is easily reduced to attraction. There would be no end of enumerating the like cases. The activity and force of æthereal spirit or fire, by the laws of attraction, is imparted to grosser particles (sect. 152, 163), and thereby wonderfully supports the economy of living bodies. By such peculiar compositions and attractions, it seems to be effected that denser fluids can pass where air itself cannot (as oil through leather), and therefore through the nicest and finest strainers of an animal or vegetable.

245. The ancients had some general conception of attracting and repelling powers (sect. 241, 242) as natural principles. Galilæi had particularly considered the attraction of gravity, and made some discovery of the laws thereof. But Sir Isaac Newton, by his singular penetration, profound knowledge in geometry and mechanics, and great exactness in experiments, hath cast a new light on natural science. The laws of attraction and repulsion were in many instances discovered, and first discovered, by him. He shewed their general extent, and therewith, as with a key, opened several deep secrets of nature, in the knowledge whereof he seems to have made a greater progress than all the sects of corpuscularians together had done before him. Nevertheless, the principle of attraction itself is not to be explained by physical or corporeal causes.

246. The Cartesians attempted to explain it by the nisus of a subtle element, receding from the centre of its motion, and impelling grosser bodies towards it. Sir Isaac Newton in his later thoughts seems (as was before observed) to have adopted somewhat not altogether foreign from this notion, ascribing that to his elastic medium (sect. 237, 238) which Descartes did to his second element. But the great men of antiquity resolved gravity into the immediate action of an intelligent incorporeal being. To which also Sir Isaac Newton himself attests and subscribes: although he may perhaps sometimes be thought to forget himself, in his manner of speaking of physical agents, which in a strict sense are none at all; and in supposing real forces to exist in bodies, in which, to speak truly, attraction and repulsion should be considered only as tendencies or motions, that is, as mere effects, and their laws as laws of motion.

247. Though it be supposed the chief business of a natural philosopher to trace out causes from the effects, yet this is to be understood not of agents (sect. 155), but of principles; that is, of component parts, in one sense, or of, laws or rules, in another. In strict truth, all agents are incorporeal, and as such are not properly of physical consideration. The astronomer, therefore, the mechanic, or the chemist, not as such, but by accident only, treat of real causes, agents, or efficients. Neither doth it seem, as is supposed by the greatest of mechanical philosophers, that the true way of proceeding in their science is, from known motions in nature to investigate the moving forces. Forasmuch as force is neither corporeal, nor belongs to any corporeal thing (sect. 220); nor yet to be discovered by experiments or mathematical reasonings, which reach no farther than discernible effects, and motions in things passive and moved.

248. Vis or force is to the soul what extension is to the body, saith St. Augustine, in his tract concerning the Quantity of the Soul; and without force there is nothing done or made, and consequently there can be no agent. Authority is not to decide in this case. Let any one consult his own notions and reason, as well as experience, concerning the origin of motion, and the respective natures, properties, and differences of soul and body, and he will, if I mistake not, evidently perceive, that there is nothing active in the latter. Nor are they natural agents or corporeal forces which make the particles of bodies to cohere. Nor is it the business of experimental philosophers to find them out.

249. The mechanical philosopher, as hath been already observed, inquires properly concerning the rules and modes of operation alone, and not concerning the cause; forasmuch as nothing mechanical is or really can be a cause (sect. 236, 247). And although a mechanical or mathematical philosopher may speak of absolute space, absolute motion, and of force, as existing in bodies, causing such motion and proportional thereto; yet what these forces are, which are supposed to be lodged in bodies, to be impressed on bodies, to be multiplied, divided, and communicated from one body to another, and which seem to animate bodies like abstract spirits, or souls, hath been found very difficult, not to say impossible, for thinking men to conceive and explain; as may be seen by consulting Borellus “De Vi Percussionis,” and Torricelli in his “Lezioni Academiche,” among other authors.

250. Nor, if we consider the proclivity of mankind to realize their notions, will it seem strange that mechanic philosophers and geometricians should, like other men, be misled by prejudice, and take mathematical hypotheses for real beings existing in bodies, so far as even to make it the very aim and end of their science to compute or measure those phantoms; whereas it is very certain that nothing in truth can be measured or computed besides the very effects or motions themselves. Sir Isaac Newton asks, Have not the minute particles of bodies certain forces or powers by which they act on one another, as well as on the particles of light, for producing most of the phænomena in nature? But, in reality, those minute particles are only agitated according to certain laws of nature, by some other agent, wherein the force exists and not in them, which have only the motion; which motion in the body moved, the Peripatetics rightly judge to be a mere passion, but in the mover to be ενέργεια or act.

251. It passeth with many, I know not how, that mechanical principles give a clear solution of the phænomena. The Democritic hypothesis, saith Dr. Cudworth, doth much more handsomely and intelligibly solve the phænomena, than that of Aristotle and Plato. But, things rightly considered, perhaps it will be found not to solve any phænomenon at all: for all phænomena are, to speak truly, appearances in the soul or mind; and it hath never been explained, nor can it be explained, how external bodies, figures, and motions, should produce an appearance in the mind. These principles, therefore, do not solve — if by solving is meant assigning the real, either efficient or final, cause of appearances, but only reduce them to general rules.

252. There is a certain analogy, constancy, and uniformity in the phænomena or appearances of nature, which are a foundation for general rules: and these are a grammar for the understanding of nature, or that series of effects in the visible world whereby we are enabled to foresee what will come to pass in the natural course of things. Plotinus observes, in his third Ennead, that the art of presaging is in some sort the reading of natural letters denoting order, and that so far forth as analogy obtains in the universe, there may be vaticination. And in reality, he that foretels the motions of the planets, or the effects of medicines, or the results of chemical or mechanical experiments, may be said to do it by natural vaticination.

253. We know a thing when we understand it; and we understand it when we can interpret or tell what it signifies. Strictly, the sense knows nothing. We perceive indeed sounds by hearing, and characters by sight. But we are not therefore said to understand them. After the same manner, the phænomena of nature are alike visible to all: but all have not alike learned the connexion of natural things, or understand what they signify, or know how to vaticinate by them. There is no question, saith Socrates in Theæteto, concerning that which is agreeable to each person; but concerning what will in time to come be agreeable, of which all men are not equally judges. He who foreknoweth what will be in every kind is the wisest. According to Socrates, you and the cook may judge of a dish on the table equally well, but while the dish is making, the cook can better foretel what will ensue from this or that manner of composing it. Nor is this manner of reasoning confined only to morals or politics; but extends also to natural science.

254. As the natural connexion of signs with the things signified is regular and constant, it forms a sort of Rational Discourse (sect. 152), and is therefore the immediate effect of an intelligent cause. This is agreeable to the philosophy of Plato, and other ancients. Plotinus indeed saith, that which acts naturally is not intellection, but a certain power of moving matter, which doth not know but only do. And it must be owned that, as faculties are multiplied by philosophers according to their operations, the will may be distinguished from the intellect. But it will not therefore follow that the Will which operates in the course of nature is not conducted and applied by intellect, although it be granted that neither will understands, nor intellect wills. Therefore, the phænomena of nature, which strike on the senses and are understood by the mind, do form not only a magnificent spectacle, but also a most coherent, entertaining, and instructive Discourse; and to effect this, they are conducted, adjusted, and ranged by the greatest wisdom. This Language or Discourse is studied with different attention, and interpreted with different degrees of skill. But so far as men have studied and remarked its rules, and can interpret right, so far they may be said to be knowing in nature. A beast is like a man who hears a strange tongue but understands nothing.

255. Nature, saith the learned Doctor Cudworth, is not master of art or wisdom: nature is ratio mersa et confnsa, reason immersed and plunged into matter, and as it were fuddled in it and confounded with it. But the formation of plants and animals, the motions of natural bodies, their various properties, appearances, and vicissitudes, in a word, the whole series of things in this visible world, which we call the Course of Nature, is so wisely managed and carried on that the most improved human reason cannot thoroughly comprehend even the least particle thereof; — so far is it from seeming to be produced by fuddled or confounded reason.

256. Natural productions, it is true, are not all equally perfect. But neither doth it suit with the order of things, the structure of the universe, or the ends of Providence, that they should be so. General rules, we have seen (sect. 249, 252), are necessary to make the world intelligible: and from the constant observations of such rules, natural evils will sometimes unavoidably ensue: things will be produced in a slow length of time, and arrive at different degrees of perfection.

257. It must be owned, we are not conscious of the systole and diastole of the heart, or the motion of the diaphragm. It may not nevertheless be thence inferred, that unknowing nature can act regularly, as well as ourselves. The true inference is, that the self-thinking individual, or human person, is not the real author of those natural motions. And, in fact, no man blames himself if they are wrong, or values himself if they are right. The same may be said of the fingers of a musician, which some object to be moved by habit which understands not; it being evident that what is done by rule must proceed from something that understands the rule; therefore, if not from the musician himself, from some other active intelligence, the same perhaps which governs bees and spiders, and moves the limbs of those who walk in their sleep.

258. Instruments, occasions, and signs (sect. 160) occur in, or rather make up, the whole visible Course of Nature. These, being no agents themselves, are under the direction of one Agent concerting all for one end, the supreme good. All those motions, whether in animal bodies, or in other parts of the system of nature which are not effects of particular wills, seem to spring from the same general cause with the vegetation of plants — an æthereal spirit actuated by a Mind.

259. The first poets and theologers of Greece and the East considered the generation of things as ascribed rather to a Divine cause, but the physici to natural causes, subordinate to, and directed still by a Divine; except some corporealists and mechanics, who vainly pretended to make a world without a God. The hidden force that unites, adjusts, and causeth all things to hang together, and move in harmony — which Orpheus and Empedocles styled Love — this principle of union is no blind principle, but acts with intellect. This Divine Love and Intellect are not themselves obvious to our view, or otherwise discerned than in their effects. Intellect enlightens, Love connects, and the Sovereign Good attracts all things.

260. All things are made for the supreme good, all things tend to that end: and we may be said to account for a thing, when we show that it is so best. In the Phædon, Socrates declares it to be his opinion that he who supposed all things to have been disposed and ordered by a Mind (sect. 154, 160) should not pretend to assign any other cause of them. He blames physiologers for attempting to account for phænomena, particularly for gravity and cohesion, by vortexes and æther; overlooking the το αγαθόν and TO δéov, the strongest bond and cement which holds together all the parts of the universe, and not discerning the cause itself from those things which only attend it.

261. As in the microcosm, the constant regular tenor of the motions of the viscera and contained juices doth not hinder particular voluntary motions to be impressed by the mind on the animal spirit; even so, in the mundane system, the steady observance of certain laws of nature, in the grosser masses and more conspicuous motions, doth not hinder but a voluntary agent may sometimes communicate particular impressions to the fine æthereal medium, which in the world answers the animal spirit in man. Which two (if they are two), although invisible and inconceivably small, yet seem the real latent springs whereby all the parts of this visible world are moved — albeit they are not to be regarded as a true cause, but only an instrument of motion; and the instrument not as a help to the Creator, but only as a sign to the creature.

262. Plotinus supposeth that the soul of the universe is not the original cause or author of the species, but receives them from Intellect, the true principle of order and distinction, the source and giver of forms. Others consider the vegetative soul only as some lower faculty of a higher soul which animates the fiery æthereal spirit (sect. 178). As for the blots and defects which appear in the course of this world — which some have thought to proceed from a fatality or necessity in nature, and others from an evil principle — that same philosopher observes, that it may be the governing Reason produceth and ordaineth all those things; and, not intending that all parts should be equally good, maketh some worse than others by design; as all parts in an animal are not eyes; and in a city, comedy, or picture, all ranks, characters, and colours are not equal or alike; even so excesses, defects, and contrary qualities conspire to the beauty and harmony of the world.

263. It cannot be denied that, with respect to the universe of things, we in this mortal state are like men educated in Plato’s cave, looking on shadows with our backs turned to the light. But though our light be dim, and our situation bad, yet if the best use be made of both, perhaps something may be seen. Proclus, in his Commentary on the Theology of Plato, observes there are two sorts of philosophers. The one placed Body first in the order of beings, and made the faculty of thinking depend thereupon, supposing that the principles of all things are corporeal: that Body most really or principally exists, and all other things in a secondary sense, and by virtue of that. Others, making all corporeal things to be dependent upon Soul or Mind, think this to exist in the first place and primary sense, and the being of Bodies to be altogether derived from, and presuppose that of the Mind.

264. Sense and experience acquaint us with the course and analogy of appearances or natural effects. Thought, reason, intellect introduce us into the knowledge of their causes. Sensible appearances, though of a flowing, unstable, and uncertain nature, yet having first occupied the mind, they do by an early prevention render the aftertask of thought more difficult; and, as they amuse the eyes and ears, and are more suited to vulgar uses and the mechanic arts of life, they easily obtain a preference, in the opinion of most men, to those superior principles, which are the later growth of the human mind arrived to maturity and perfection, but, not affecting the corporeal sense, are thought to be so far deficient in point of solidity and reality — sensible and real, to common apprehensions, being the same thing. Although it be certain that the principles of science are neither objects of sense nor imagination; and that intellect and reason are alone the sure guides to truth.

265. The successful curiosity of the present age, in arts, and experiments, and new systems, is apt to elate men, and make them overlook the Ancients. But, notwithstanding that the encouragement and purse of princes, and the united endeavours of great societies in these later ages, have extended experimental and mechanical knowledge very far, yet it must be owned that the ancients too were not ignorant of many things (sect. 166, 167, 168, 241, 242, &c.), as well in physics as metaphysics, which perhaps are more generally, though not first, known in these modern times.

266. The Pythagoreans and Platonists had a notion of the true system of the world. They allowed of mechanical principles, but actuated by soul or mind: they distinguished the primary qualities in bodies from the secondary, making the former to be physical causes, and they understood physical causes in a right sense: they saw that a mind infinite in power, unextended, invisible, immortal, governed, connected, and contained all things: they saw there was no such thing as real absolute space: that mind, soul, or spirit truly and really exists: that bodies exist only in a secondary and dependent sense: that the soul is the place of forms: that the sensible qualities are to be regarded as acts only in the cause, and as passions in us: they accurately considered the differences of intellect, rational soul, and sensitive soul, with their distinct acts of intellection, reasoning, and sensation, points wherein the Cartesians and their followers, who consider sensation as a mode of thinking, seem to have failed. They knew there was a subtle æther pervading the whole mass of corporeal beings, and which was itself actually moved and directed by a mind: and that physical causes were only instruments, or rather marks and signs.

267. Those ancient philosophers understood the generation of animals to consist in the unfolding and distending of the minute imperceptible parts of pre-existing animalcules, which passeth for a modern discovery; this they took for the work of nature, but nature animate and intelligent (sect. 172): they understood that all things were alive and in motion: they supposed a concord and discord, a union and disunion, in particles, some attracting, others repelling each other; and that those attractions and repulsions, so various, regular, and useful, could not be accounted for, but by an intelligence presiding and directing all particular motions, for the conservation and benefit of the whole.

268. The Egyptians, who impersonated nature, had made her a distinct principle, and even deified her under the name of Isis. But Osiris was understood to be Mind or Reason, chief and sovereign of all. Osiris, if we may believe Plutarch, was the first, pure, unmixed, and holy principle, not discernible by the lower faculties; a glimpse whereof, like lightning darting forth, irradiates the understanding; with regard to which Plutarch adds, that Plato and Aristotle termed one part of philosophy εποπτικοί ’; to wit, when having soared above common mixed objects, and got beyond the precincts of sense and opinion, they arrive to contemplate the first and most simple Being free from all matter and composition. This is that ουσία όντως ουσα of Plato which employeth mind alone; which alone governs the world. And the soul is that which immediately informs and animates nature.

269. Although the Egyptians did symbolically represent the supreme Divinity sitting on a lotus, and that gesture hath been interpreted to signify the most holy and venerable Being to be utterly at rest reposing within himself; yet, for any thing that appears, this gesture might denote dignity as well as repose. And it cannot be denied, that Jamblichus, so knowing in the Egyptian notions, taught that there was an intellect that proceeded to generation, drawing forth the latent powers into light in the formation of things. Nor was this to be understood of an external world, subsisting in real absolute space; for it was a doctrine of those ancient sages, that soul was the place of forms, as may be seen in the twelfth book of the arcane part of divine wisdom, according to the Egyptians. This notion was embraced by divers philosophers of Greece, who may be supposed to have derived it from the same source from whence many of their other opinions were drawn.

270. The doctrine of real, absolute, external Space induced some modern philosophers to conclude it was a part or attribute of God, or that God himself was space; inasmuch as incommunicable attributes of the Deity appeared to agree thereto, such as infinity, immutability, indivisibility, incorporeity, being uncreated, impassive, without beginning or ending — not considering that all these negative properties may belong to nothing. For, nothing hath no limits, cannot be moved, or changed, or divided, is neither created nor destroyed. A different way of thinking appears in the Hermaic as well as other writings of the ancients. With regard to absolute space, it is observed in the Asclepian Dialogue, that the word space or place hath by itself no meaning; and again, that it is impossible to understand what space alone or pure space is. And Plotinus acknowledged no place but soul or mind, expressly affirming that the soul is not in the world, but the world in the soul. And farther, the place of the soul, saith he, is not body, but soul is in mind, and body in the soul. See the third chapter of the fifth book of the fifth Ennead.

271. Concerning absolute space, that phantom of the mechanic and geometrical philosophers (sect. 250), it may suffice to observe that it is neither perceived by any sense, nor proved by any reason, and was accordingly treated by the greatest of the ancients as a thing merely visionary. From the notion of absolute space springs that of absolute motion; (Our judgment in these matters is not to be overborne by a presumed evidence of mathematical notions and reasonings, since it is plain the mathematicians of this age embrace obscure notions, and uncertain opinions, and arc puzzled about them, contradicting each other and disputing like other men: witness their doctrine of Fluxions, about which, within these ten years, I have seen published about twenty tracts and dissertations, whose authors being utterly at variance, and inconsistent with each other, instruct by-standers what to think of their pretensions to evidence.) and in these are ultimately founded the notions of external existence, independence, necessity, and fate. Which Fate, the idol of many moderns, was by old philosophers differently understood, and in such a sense as not to destroy the αΰτιζοΰσιον of God or man. Parmenides, who thought all things to be made by necessity or fate, understood justice and Providence to be the same with fate; which, how fixed and cogent soever with respect to man, may yet be voluntary with respect to God. Empedocles declared fate to be a cause using principles and elements. Heraclitus taught that fate was the general reason that runs through the whole nature of the universe; which nature he supposed to be an æthereal body, the seed of the generation of all things. Plato held fate to be the eternal reason or law of nature. Chrysippus supposed that fate was a spiritual power which disposed the world in order; that it was the reason and law of those things which are administered by Providence.

272. All the foregoing notions of fate, as represented by Plutarch, do plainly shew that those ancient philosophers did not mean by fate, a blind, headlong, unintelligent principle, but an orderly settled course of things, conducted by a wise and provident Mind. And as for the Egyptian doctrine, it is indeed asserted in the Pimander, that all things are produced by fate. But Jamblichus, who drew his notions from Egypt, affirms that the whole of things is not bound up in fate; but that there is a principle of the soul higher than nature, whereby we may be raised to a union with the gods, and exempt ourselves from fate. And in the Asclepian Dialogue it is expressly said that fate follows the decrees of God. And indeed, as all the motions in nature are evidently the product of reason (sect. 154), it should seem there is no room for necessity in any other sense than that of a steady regular course.

273. Blind fate and blind chance are at bottom much the same thing, and one no more intelligible than the other. Such is the mutual relation, connexion, motion, and sympathy of the parts of this world, that they seem as it were animated and held together by one soul: and such is their harmony, order, and regular course, as sheweth the soul to be governed and directed by a Mind. It was an opinion of remote antiquity that the world was an Animal (sect. 153, 172). If we may trust the Hermaic writings, the Egyptians thought all things did partake of life. This opinion was also so general and current among the Greeks that Plutarch asserts all others held the world to be an animal, and governed by Providence, except Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus. And although an animal containing all bodies within itself could not be touched or sensibly affected from without, yet it is plain they attributed to it an inward sense and feeling, as well as appetites and aversions; and that from all the various tones, actions, and passions of the universe, they suppose one symphony, one animal act and life to result.

274. Jamblichus declares the world to be one animal, in which the parts, however distant each from other, are nevertheless related and connected by one common nature. And he teacheth, what is also a received notion of the Pythagoreans and Platonics, that there is no chasm in nature, but a Chain or Scale of beings rising by gentle uninterrupted gradations from the lowest to the highest, each nature being informed and perfected by the participation of a higher. As air becomes igneous, so the purest fire becomes animal, and the animal soul becomes intellectual: which is to be understood not of the change of one nature into another, but of the connexion of different natures; each lower nature being, according to those philosophers, as it were a receptacle or subject for the next above it to reside and act in.

275. It is also the doctrine of Platonic philosophers, that Intellect is the very life of living things, the first principle and exemplar of all, from whence by different degrees are derived the inferior classes of life: first the rational, then the sensitive, after that the vegetal; but so as in the rational animal there is still somewhat intellectual, again in the sensitive there is somewhat rational, and in the vegetal somewhat sensitive, and lastly, in mixed bodies, as metals and minerals, somewhat of vegetation. By which means the whole is thought to be more perfectly connected. Which doctrine implies that all the faculties, instincts, and motions of inferior beings, in their several respective subordinations, are derived from, and depend upon Mind and Intellect.

276. Both Stoics and Platonics held the world to be alive; though sometimes it be mentioned as a sentient animal, sometimes as a plant or vegetable. But in this, notwithstanding what hath been surmised by some learned men, there seems to be no Atheism. For, so long as the world is supposed to be quickened by elementary fire or spirit, which is itself animated by soul, and directed by understanding, it follows that all parts thereof originally depend upon, and may be reduced unto the same indivisible stem or principle, to wit, a Supreme Mind which is the concurrent doctrine of Pythagoreans, Platonics, and Stoics.

277. There is, according to those philosophers, a life infused throughout all things: the πυρ ΐ ’οιρόν, πϋρ τεγνικον, an intellectual and artificial fire (sect. 166, 168, 174, 175, etc.) an inward principle, animal spirit, or natural life, producing and forming within as art doth without; regulating, moderating, and reconciling the various motions, qualities, and parts of this mundane system. By virtue of this life the great masses are held together in their orderly courses, as well as the minutest particles governed in their natural motions, according to the several laws of attraction, gravity, electricity, magnetism, and the rest. It is this gives instincts, teaches the spider her web, and the bee her honey. This it is that directs the roots of plants to draw forth juices from the earth, and the leaves and corticle vessels to separate and attract such particles of air, and elementary fire, as suit their respective natures.

278. Nature seems to be not otherwise distinguished from the anima mu?idi than as life is from soul, and, upon the principles of the oldest philosophers, may not improperly or incongruously be styled the life of the world. Some Platonics, indeed, regard life as the act of nature, in like manner as intellection is of the mind or intellect. As the First Intellect acts by understanding, so nature according to them acts or generates by living. But life is the act of the soul, and seems to be very nature itself, which is not the principle but the result of another and higher principle, being a life resulting from soul, as cogitation from intellect.

279. If nature be supposed the life of the world, animated by one soul, compacted into one frame, and directed or governed in all parts by one mind: this system cannot be accused of Atheism; though perhaps it may of mistake or impropriety. And yet, as one presiding mind gives unity to the infinite aggregate of things, by a mutual communion of actions and passions, and an adjustment of parts, causing all to concur in one view to one and the same end — the ultimate and supreme good of the whole, it should seem reasonable to say, with Ocellus Lucanus the Pythagorean, that as life holds together the bodies of animals, the cause whereof is the soul; and as a city is held together by concord, the cause whereof is law, even so the world is held together by harmony, the cause whereof is God. And in this sense the world or universe maybe considered either as one animal or one city (sect. 172, 277).

280. Aristotle disapproves the opinion of those who hold a soul to be diffused throughout the world; and for this reason, because the elements are not alive. Though perhaps it may not be easy to prove that blood and animal spirit are more alive in man, than water and fire in the world. That philosopher, in his books of the Soul, remarks upon an opinion set forth in the Orphies, of the soul’s entering from the universe into living creatures being borne by winds — that this cannot be true of plants, or of certain animals which do not breathe. But air vessels are by later experiments allowed to be found in all plants and animals. And air may in some sort not improperly be said to be the carrier or vehicle of the soul, inasmuch as it is the vehicle of fire, which is the spirit immediately moved and animated by the soul (sect. 163, 171).

281. The living fire, the living, omniform seminary of the world, and other expressions of the like nature, occurring in the Ancient and Platonic philosophy, how can they be understood exclusive of light or elemental fire, the particles of which are known to be heterogeneous, and, for aught we know, may some of them be organised, and, notwithstanding their wonderful minuteness, contain original seeds which, being formed and sown in a proper matrix, do gradually unfold and manifest themselves, still growing to a just proportion of the species.

282. May not this æthereal seminary, consistently with the notions of that philosophy which ascribed much of generation to celestial influence, be supposed to impregnate plants and animals with the first principles, the stamina, or those animalcules which Plato, in his “Timæus,” saith are invisible for their smallness, but, being sown in a proper matrix, are therein gradually distended and explicated by nourishment, and at length the animals brought forth to light? Which notion hath been revived and received of late years by many, who perhaps are not aware of its antiquity, or that it was to be found in Plato. Timæus Locrensis, in his book of the Soul of the World, supposeth even souls to be derived from the celestial luminaries, excepting only the rational or intellectual part. But what influence or influx is there from the celestial bodies which hath not light for its vehicle? (sect. 43).

283. What other nature there should be intermediate between the soul of the world (sect. 171) and this gross corporeal system, which might be the vehicle of life, or, to use the language of philosophers, might receive or be impressed with the forms of things, is difficult to comprehend. It is a vulgar remark, that the works of art do not bear a nice microscopical inspection, but the more helps are used, and the more nicely you pry into natural productions, the more do you discover of the fine mechanism of nature, which is endless or inexhaustible; new and other parts, more subtle and delicate than the precedent, still continuing to offer themselves to view. And these microscopical observations have confirmed the ancient theory concerning generation, delivered in the “Timæus” of Plato. But that theory or hypothesis, how agreeable soever to modern discoveries, is not alone sufficient to explain the phænomena, without the immediate action of a mind. And Ficinus, notwithstanding what himself and other Platonics say of a plastic nature, is obliged to own that with the mundane force or soul it is to be understood there is joined an intelligence, upon which the seminal nature constantly depends, and by which it is governed.

284. Alcinous, in his tract of the Doctrine of Plato, saith that God hath given the world both mind and soul: others include both in the word soul, and suppose the soul of the world to be God. Philo appears to be of this opinion in several parts of his writings. And Virgil, who was no stranger to the Pythagorean and Platonic tenets, writes to the same purpose:

 

Deum namque ire per omnes Terrasque, tractusque maris, cœlumque profundum.

Hinc pecudes, armenta, viros, genus omne ferarum,

Quemque sibi tenues nascentem arcessere vitas.

 

Thus much the schools of Plato and Pythagoras seem agreed in, to wit, that the Soul of the World (sect. 153, 172), whether having a distinct mind of its own, or directed by a superior mind (sect. 154, 279), doth embrace all its parts, connect them by an invisible and indissoluble Chain, and preserve them ever well adjusted and in good order.

285. Naturalists, whose proper province it is to consider phænomena, experiments, mechanical organs and motions, principally regard the visible frame of things or corporeal world, supposing soul to be contained in body. And this hypothesis may be tolerated in physics, as it is not necessary in the arts of dialling or navigation to mention the true system or earth’s motion. But those who, not content with sensible appearances, would penetrate into the real and true causes (the object of theology, metaphysics, or the philosophia prima), will rectify this error, and speak of the world as contained by the soul, and not the soul by the world.

286. Aristotle hath observed there were indeed some who thought so grossly as to suppose the universe to be one only corporeal and extended nature: but in the first book of his Metaphysics he justly remarks they were guilty of a great mistake; forasmuch as they took into their account the elements of corporeal beings alone, whereas there are incorporeal beings also in the universe; and while they attempted to assign the causes of generation and corruption, and account for the nature of all things, they did at the same time destroy the very cause of motion.

287. It is a doctrine among other speculations contained in the Hermaic writings that all things are One. And it is not improbable that Orpheus, Parmenides, and others among the Greeks, might have derived their notion of To ν , THE ONE, from Egypt. Though that subtle metaphysician Parmenides, in his doctrine of εν εστως, seems to have added something of his own. If we suppose that one and the same Mind is the universal principle of order and harmony throughout the world, containing and connecting all its parts, and giving unity to the system, there seems to be nothing atheistical or impious in this supposition.

288. Number is no object of sense: it is an act of the mind. The same thing in a different conception is one or many. Comprehending God and the creatures in one general notion, we may say that all things together make one universe, or το παν. But if we should say that all things make one God; — this would, indeed, be an erroneous notion of God, but would not amount to Atheism, so long as mind or intellect was admitted to be the GREEK TEXT, the governing part. It is, nevertheless, more respectful, and consequently the truer notion of God, to suppose him neither made up of parts, nor to be himself a part of any whole whatsoever.

289. All those who conceived the universe to be an animal must, in consequence of that notion, suppose all things to be one. But to conceive God to be the sentient soul of an animal is altogether unworthy and absurd. There is no sense nor sensory, nor any thing like a sense or sensory, in God. Sense implies an impression from some other being, and denotes a dependence in the soul which hath it. Sense is a passion: and passions imply imperfection. God knoweth all things, as pure mind or intellect; but nothing by sense, nor in nor through a sensory. Therefore to suppose a sensory of any kind — whether space or any other — in God, would be very wrong, and lead us into false conceptions of His nature. The presuming there was such a thing as real, absolute, uncreated space seems to have occasioned that modern mistake. But this presumption was without grounds.

290. Body is opposite to spirit or mind. We have a notion of spirit from thought and action. We have a notion of body from resistance. So far forth as there is real power, there is spirit. So far forth as there is resistance, there is inability or want of power: that is, there is a negation of spirit. We are embodied, that is, we are clogged by weight, and hindered by resistance. But in respect of a perfect spirit, there is nothing hard or impenetrable: there is no resistance to the Deity: nor hath he any body: nor is the supreme Being united to the world as the soul of an animal is to its body; which necessarily implieth defect, both as an instrument, and as a constant weight and impediment.

291. Thus much it consists with piety to say — that a Divine Agent doth by his virtue permeate and govern the elementary fire or light (sect. 157, 172), which serves as animal spirit to enliven and actuate the whole mass, and all the members of this visible world. Nor is this doctrine less philosophical than pious. We see all nature alive or in motion. We see water turned into air, and air rarefied and made elastic (sect. 149, 152, 200) by the attraction of another medium, more pure indeed, more subtle, and more volatile, than air. But still, as this is a moveable, extended, and consequently a corporeal being (sect. 207), it cannot be itself the principle of motion, but leads us naturally and necessarily to an incorporeal spirit or agent. We are conscious that a spirit can begin, alter, or determine motion; but nothing of this appears in body. Nay, the contrary is evident, both to experiment and reflection.

292. Natural phænomena are only natural appearances. They are, therefore, such as we see and perceive them. Their real and objective natures are, therefore, the same; passive without anything active, fluent and changing without anything permanent in them. However, as these make the first impressions, and the mind takes her first flight and spring, as it were, by resting her foot on these objects, they are not only first considered by all men, but most considered by most men. They and the phantoms that result from those appearances, the children of imagination grafted upon sense — such for example as pure space (sect. 270) — are thought by many the very first in existence and stability, and to embrace and comprehend all other beings.

293. Now, although such phantoms as corporeal forces, absolute motions, and real spaces do pass in physics for causes and principles (sect. 220, 249, 250), yet are they in truth but hypotheses; nor can they be the objects of real science. They pass nevertheless in physics, conversant about things of sense, and confined to experiments and mechanics. But when we enter the province of the philosophia prima , we discover another order of beings, mind and its acts, permanent being, not dependent on corporeal things, nor resulting, nor connected, nor contained; but containing, connecting, enlivening the whole frame; and imparting those motions, forms, qualities, and that order and symmetry, to all those transient phænomena, which we term the Course of Nature.

294. It is with our faculties as with our affections: what first seizes holds fast (sect. 264). It is a vulgar theme, that man is a compound of contrarieties, which breed a restless struggle in his nature, between flesh and spirit, the beast and the angel, earth and heaven, ever weighed down and ever bearing up. During which conflict the character fluctuates: when either side prevails, it is then fixed for vice or virtue. And life from different principles takes a different issue. It is the same in regard to our faculties. Sense at first besets and overbears the mind. The sensible appearances are all in all: our reasonings are employed about them: our desires terminate in them: we look no farther for realities or causes; till intellect begins to dawn, and cast a ray on this shadowy scene. We then perceive the true principle of unity, identity, and existence. Those things that before seemed to constitute the whole of Being, upon taking an intellectual view of things, prove to be but fleeting phantoms.

295. From the outward form of gross masses which occupy the vulgar, a curious inquirer proceeds to examine the inward structure and minute parts, and, from observing the motions in nature, to discover the laws of those motions. By the way, he frames his hypothesis and suits his language to this natural philosophy. And these fit the occasion and answer the end of a maker of experiments or mechanic, who means only to apply the powers of nature, and reduce the phænomena to rules. But if, proceeding still in his analysis and inquiry, he ascends from the sensible into the intellectual world, and beholds things in a new light and a new order, he will then change his system, and perceive that what he took for substances and causes are but fleeting shadows: that the mind contains all, and acts all, and is to all created beings the source of unity and identity, harmony and order, existence and stability.

296. It is neither acid, nor salt, nor sulphur, nor air, nor æther, nor visible corporeal fire (sect. 155) — much less the phantom fate or necessity — that is the real agent, but, by a certain analysis, a regular connexion and climax, we ascend through all those mediums to a glimpse of the First Mover, invisible, incorporeal, unextended, intellectual source of life and being. There is, it must be owned, a mixture of obscurity and prejudice in human speech and reasonings. This is unavoidable, since the veils of prejudice and error are slowly and singly taken off one by one. But, if there are many links in the Chain which connects the two extremes of what is grossly sensible and purely intelligible, and it seem a tedious work, by the slow helps of memory, imagination, and reason — oppressed and overwhelmed, as we are, by the senses, through erroneous principles, and long ambages of words and notions — to struggle upwards into the light of truth, yet, as this gradually dawns, farther discoveries still correct the style and clear up the notions.

297. The Mind, her acts and faculties, furnish a new and distinct class of objects (sect. 163, 266), from the contemplation whereof arise certain other notions, principles, and verities, so remote from, and even so repugnant to, the first prejudices which surprise the sense of mankind that they may well be excluded from vulgar speech and books, as abstract from sensible matters, and more fit for the speculation of truth, the labour and aim of a few, than for the practice of the world, or the subjects of experimental or mechanical inquiry. Nevertheless, though, perhaps, it may not be relished by some modern readers, yet the treating in physical books concerning metaphysical and divine matters can be justified by great authorities among the ancients: not to mention that he who professedly delivers the elements of a science is more obliged to method and system, and tied down to more rigorous laws, than a mere essay writer. It may, therefore, be pardoned if this rude Essay doth, by insensible transitions, draw the reader into remote inquiries and speculations, that were not, perhaps, thought of either by him or by the author at first setting out.

298. There are traces of profound thought as well as primeval tradition in the Platonic, Pythagorean, Egyptian, and Chaldaic philosophy (sect. 179, 266). Men in those early days were not overlaid with languages and literature. Their minds seem to have been more exercised, and less burdened, than in later ages; and, as so much nearer the beginning of the world, to have had the advantage of patriarchal lights handed down through a few hands. It cannot be affirmed indeed (how probable soever it may seem) that Moses was that same Mochus, with whose successors, priests and prophets, Pythagoras is said to have conversed at Sidon. Yet the study of philosophy appears to be of very great antiquity and remote original; inasmuch as Timæus Locrensis, that ancient Pythagorean, author of the book concerning the Soul of the World, speaks of a most ancient philosophy, even in his time, ά πρεσβνστα ψιλοσοψίa, stirring up and recovering the soul from a state of ignorance to the contemplation of Divine things. And, though the books attributed to Mercurius Trismegistus were none of them wrote by him, and are allowed to contain some manifest forgeries, yet it is also allowed that they contain tenets of the ancient Egyptian philosophy, though dressed, perhaps, in a more modern garb. To account for which, Jamblichus observes that the books under his name contain indeed mercurial opinions, though often expressed in the style of the Greek philosophers; as having been translated from the Egyptian tongue into Greek.

299. The difference of Isis from Osiris (sect. 268) resembles that of the moon from the sun, of the female from the male, of natura naturata (as the schoolmen speak) from natura naturans. But Isis, though mostly taken for nature, yet (as the Pagan divinities were very fluctuating things) it sometimes signified τό παν. And we find in Montfauçon an Isis of the ordinary form with this inscription, Θεού παντός. And in the mensa Isiaca, which seems to exhibit a general system of the religion and superstition of the Egyptians, Isis on her throne possesseth the centre of the table. Which may seem to signify that the universe or τό πάν was the centre of the ancient secret religion of the Egyptians; their Isis or το πάν comprehending both Osiris the Author of nature and his work.

300. Plato and Aristotle considered God as abstracted or distinct from the natural world. But the Egyptians considered God and nature as making one whole, or all things together as making one universe. In doing which they did not exclude the intelligent mind, but considered it as containing all things. Therefore, whatever was wrong in their way of thinking, it doth not, nevertheless, imply or lead to Atheism.

301. The human mind is so much clogged and borne downward, by the strong and early impressions of sense (sect. 264), that it is wonderful how the ancients should have made even such a progress, and seen so far into intellectual matters, without some glimmering of a divine tradition. Whoever considers a parcel of rude savages left to themselves, how they are sunk and swallowed up in sense and prejudice, and how unqualified by their natural force to emerge from this state, will be apt to think that the first spark of philosophy was derived from heaven; and that it was (as a heathen writer expresseth it) Θεοπαράΰοτος φιλοσοφία.

302. The lapsed state of human kind is a thing to which the ancient philosophers were not strangers. The λΰσις, the φυγή, the παλιγγενεσία , shew that the Egyptians and Pythagoreans, the Platonists and Stoics, had all some notion of this doctrine, the outlines of which seem to have been sketched out in those tenets. Theology and philosophy gently unbind the ligaments that chain the soul down to the earth, and assist her flight towards the sovereign Good. There is an instinct or tendency of the mind upwards, which sheweth a natural endeavour to recover and raise ourselves from our present sensual and low condition, into a state of light, order, and purity.

303. The perceptions of sense are gross: but even in the senses there is a difference. Though harmony and proportion are not objects of sense, yet the eye and the ear are organs which offer to the mind such materials by means whereof she may apprehend both the one and the other. By experiments of sense we become acquainted with the lower faculties of the soul; and from them, whether by a gradual (sect. 275) evolution or ascent, we arrive at the highest. Sense supplies images to memory. These become subjects for fancy to work upon. Reason considers and judges of the imaginations. And these acts of reason become new objects to the understanding. In this scale, each lower faculty is a step that leads to one above it. And the uppermost naturally leads to the Deity; which is rather the object of intellectual knowledge than even of the discursive faculty, not to mention the sensitive. There runs a Chain throughout the whole system of beings. In this Chain one link drags another. The meanest things are connected with the highest. The calamity therefore is neither strange nor much to be complained of, if a low sensual reader shall, from mere love of the animal life, find himself drawn on, surprised and betrayed, into some curiosity concerning the intellectual.

304. There is, according to Plato, properly no knowledge, but only opinion concerning things sensible and perishing (sect. 263, 264); not because they are naturally abstruse and involved in darkness, but because their nature and existence are uncertain, ever fleeting and changing. Or rather, because they do not in strict truth exist at all, being always generating or in fieri , that is, in a perpetual flux, without any thing stable or permanent in them to constitute an object of real science. The Pythagoreans and Platonics distinguish between TO γιγνόμενον and TO ov, that which ever generated and that which exists. Sensible things and corporeal forms are perpetually producing and perishing, appearing and disappearing, never resting in one state, but always in motion and change; and therefore, in effect, not one being but a succession of beings: while TO OV is understood to be somewhat of an abstract or spiritual nature, and the proper object of intellectual knowledge. Therefore, as there can be no knowledge of things flowing and unstable, the opinion of Protagoras and Theætetus, that sense was science, is absurd. And indeed nothing is more evident than that the apparent sizes and shapes, for instance, of things are in a constant flux, ever differing as they are viewed at different distances, or with glasses more or less accurate. As for those absolute magnitudes and figures, which certain Cartesians and other moderns suppose to be in things; that must seem a vain supposition, to whoever considers it is supported by no argument of reason, and no experiment of sense.

305. As understanding perceiveth not, that is, doth not hear, or see, or feel, so sense knoweth not: and although the mind may use both sense and fancy, as means whereby to arrive at knowledge, yet sense or soul, so far forth as sensitive, knoweth nothing. For, as it is rightly observed in the “Theætetus” of Plato, science consists not in the passive perceptions, but in the reasoning upon them.

306. In the ancient philosophy of Plato and Pythagoras, we find distinguished three sorts of objects: — In the first place, a form or species that is neither generated nor destroyed, unchangeable, invisible, and altogether imperceptible to sense, being only understood by the Intellect. A second sort there is, ever fluent and changing (sect. 292, 293), generating and perishing, appearing and vanishing; this is comprehended by Sense and Opinion. The third kind is Matter, which, as Plato teacheth, being neither an object of understanding nor of sense, is hardly to be made out by a certain spurious way of reasoning — λογισμω τινι νόθω μόγις πιστόν. (See his “Timæus.”) The same doctrine is contained in the Pythagoric treatise “De Anima Mundi,” which, distinguishing ideas, sensible things, and matter, maketh the first to be apprehended by Intellect, the second by Sense, and the last, to wit, Matter, λογισμω νόθω. Whereof Themistius the Peripatetic assigns the reason. For, saith he, that act is to be esteemed spurious, whose object hath nothing positive, being only a mere privation, as silence or darkness. And such he accounteth Matter.

307. Aristotle maketh a threefold distinction of objects, according to the three speculative sciences. Physics he supposeth to be conversant about such things as have a principle of motion in themselves; Mathematics about things permanent but not abstracted; and Theology about Being abstracted and immoveable; which distinction may be seen in the ninth book of his “Metaphysics.” Where by abstracted, χωριστόν, he understands separable from corporeal beings and sensible qualities.

308. That philosopher held that the mind of man was a tabula rasa, and that there were no innate ideas. Plato, on the contrary, held original ideas in the mind; that is, notions which never were or can be in the sense, such as being, beauty, goodness, likeness, parity. Some, perhaps, may think the truth to be this: — that there are properly no ideas, or passive objects, in the mind but what were derived from sense: but that there are also besides these her own acts or operations; such are notions.

309. It is a maxim of the Platonic philosophy, that the soul of man was originally furnished with native inbred notions, and stands in need of sensible occasions, not absolutely for producing them, but only for awakening, rousing, or exciting, into act what was already pre-existent, dormant, and latent in the soul; as things are said to be laid up in the memory, though not actually perceived until they happen to be called forth and brought into view by other objects. This notion seemeth somewhat different from that of innate ideas, as understood by those moderns who have attempted to explode them. To understand and to be are, according to Parmenides, the same thing. And Plato in his seventh Letter makes no difference between νους and επιστήμη, mind and knowledge. Whence it follows that mind, knowledge, and notions, either in habit or in act, always go together.

310. And albeit Aristotle considered the soul in its original state as a blank paper, yet he held it to be the proper place of forms — την ψυχήν είναι τόπον ε ’ίϋων (sect. 269). Which doctrine, first maintained by others, he admits, under this restriction, that it is not to be understood of the whole soul, but only of the νοητική; as is to be seen in his third book “De Anima.” Whence, according to Themistius in his commentary on that treatise, it may be inferred that all beings are in the soul. For, saith he, the forms are the beings. By the form every thing is what it is. And he adds, it is the soul that imparteth forms to matter; τήν ύλην μορφώσα ποικίλαις μορφαϊς. Therefore they are first in the soul. He farther adds that the mind is all things, taking the forms of all things it becomes all things by intellect and sense. Alexander Aphrodisæus saith as much, affirming the mind to be all things, κατά τε το νοειν και το αισθάνεσθαι. And this in fact is Aristotle’s own doctrine, in his third book “De Anima,” where he also asserts, with Plato, that actual knowledge and the thing known are all one. To δ’ αυτό εστιν ή κατ ενέργειαν επιστήμη τω πράγματι. Whence it follows, that the things are where the knowledge is, that is to say, in the mind. Or, as it is otherwise expressed, that the soul is all things. More might be said to explain Aristotle’s notion, but it would lead too far.

311. As to an absolute actual existence of sensible or corporeal things (sect. 264, 292, 294), it doth not seem to have been admitted either by Plato or Aristotle. In the “Theætetus” we are told that if any one saith a thing is, or is made, he must withal say, for what, or of what, or in respect of what, it is, or is made; for, that any thing should exist in itself or absolutely is absurd. Agreeably to which doctrine it is also farther affirmed by Plato, that it is impossible a thing should be sweet and sweet to nobody. It must, nevertheless, be owned with regard to Aristotle, that even in his “Metaphysics” there are some expressions which seem to favour the absolute existence of corporeal things. For instance, in the eleventh book, speaking of corporeal sensible things, what wonder, saith he, if they never appear to us the same, no more than to sick men, since we are always changing and never remain the same ourselves? And again, he saith, sensible things, although they receive no change in themselves, do nevertheless in sick persons produce different sensations and not the same. These passages would seem to imply a distinct and absolute existence of the objects of sense.

312. But it must be observed, that Aristotle distinguisheth a twofold existence, potential and actual. It will not therefore follow that, according to Aristotle, because a thing is, it must actually exist. This is evident from the eighth book of his “Metaphysics,” where he animadverts on the Megaric philosophers, as not admitting a possible existence distinct from the actual: from whence, saith he, it must follow, that there is nothing cold, or hot, or sweet, or any sensible thing at all, where there is no perception. He adds that, in consequence of that Megaric doctrine, we can have no sense but while we actually exert it: we are blind when we do not see, and therefore both blind and deaf several times in a day.

313. The εντελέχειαt πρώται of the Peripatetics, that is, the sciences, arts, and habits, were by them distinguished from the acts or εντελέχειαι ύεντεραι, and supposed to exist in the mind, though not exerted or put into act. This seems to illustrate the manner in which Socrates, Plato, and their followers, conceive innate notions to be in the soul of man (sect. 309). It was the Platonic doctrine, that human souls or minds descended from above, and were sowed in generation; that they were stunned, stupified, and intoxicated by this descent and immersion into animal nature; and that the soul, in this ονείρωΕις or slumber, forgets her original notions, which are smothered and oppressed by many false tenets and prejudices of sense. Insomuch that Proclus compares the soul, in her descent invested with growing prejudices, to Glaucus diving to the bottom of the sea, and there contracting divers coats of seaweed, coral, and shells, which stick close to him, and conceal his true shape.

314. Hence, according to this philosophy, the mind of man is so restless to shake off that slumber, to disengage and emancipate herself from those prejudices and false opinions that so straitly beset and cling to her, to rub off those covers that disguise her original form, and to regain her primeval state and first notions: hence that perpetual struggle to recover the lost region of light, that ardent thirst and endeavour after truth and intellectual ideas, which she would neither seek to attain, or rejoice in, nor know when attained, except she had some prenotion or anticipation of them, and they had lain innate and dormant, like habits and sciences in the mind, or things laid up, which are called out and roused by recollection or reminiscence. So that learning seemeth in effect reminiscence.

315. The Peripatetics themselves distinguish between reminiscence and mere memory. Themistius observes that the best memories commonly go with the worst parts; but that reminiscence is most perfect in the most ingenious minds. And, notwithstanding the tabula rasa of Aristotle (sect. 308), yet some of his followers have undertaken to make him speak Plato’s sense. Thus Plutarch the Peripatetic teacheth, as agreeable to his master’s doctrine, that learning is reminiscence, and that the νους καβ ’ ε ξν is in children. Simplicius also, in his commentary on the third book of Aristotle, περί ψυχής, speaketh of a certain interior reason in the soul, acting of itself, and originally full of its Own proper notions, πλήρης ά<ρ ’ εαυτόν των οικείων γνωσίων.

316. And, as the Platonic philosophy supposed intellectual notions to be originally inexistent, or innate in the soul (sect. 309, 314), so likewise it supposed sensible qualities to exist (though not originally) in the soul, and there only. Socrates saith to Theætetus, You must not think the white colour that you see is in any thing without your eyes, or in your eyes, or in any place at all. And in the “Timæus,” Plato teacheth that the figure and motion of the particles of fire dividing the parts of our bodies produce that painful sensation we call heat. And Plotinus, in the sixth book of his second Ennead, observes that heat and other qualities are not qualities in the things themselves, but acts: that heat is not a quality, but act in the fire: that fire is not really what we perceive in the qualities, light, heat, and colour. From all which it is plain that whatever real things they suppose to exist independent of the soul, those were neither sensible things nor clothed with sensible qualities.

317. Neither Plato nor Aristotle by Matter, ϋλη, understood corporeal substance, whatever the moderns may understand by that word. To them certainly it signified no positive actual being. Aristotle describes it as made up of negatives, having neither quantity, nor quality, nor essence. And not only the Platonists and Pythagoreans, but also the Peripatetics themselves declare it to be known, neither by sense, nor by any direct and just reasoning, but only by some spurious or adulterine method, as hath been observed before. Simon Portius, a famous Peripatetic of the sixteenth century, denies it to be any substance at all, for, saith he, Nequit per se subsistere, quia sequeretur, id quod non est in act it esse in adu. If Jamblichus may be credited, the Egyptians supposed Matter so far from including aught of substance or essence, that, according to them, God produced it by a separation from all substance, essence, or being, άπό υνσιύτητυς άποχισθείσης νλότητος. That Matter is actually nothing, but potentially all things, is the doctrine of Aristotle, Theophrastus, and all the ancient Peripatetics.

318. According to those philosophers, Matter is only a puna potentia , a mere possibility. But Anaximander, successor to Thales, is represented as having thought the supreme Deity to be infinite Matter. Nevertheless, though Plutarch ealleth it Matter, yet it was simply το άπειρον, which means no more than infinite or indefinite. And although the moderns teach that Space is real and infinitely extended, yet, if we consider that it is no intellectual notion, nor yet perceived by any of our senses, we shall perhaps be inclined to think with Plato in his “Timæus,” that this also is the result of λογισμός νόθος, or spurious reasoning, and a kind of waking dream. Plato observes that we dream, as it were, when we think of place, and believe it necessary that whatever exists should exist in some place. Which place or space (sect. 250, 270), he also observes, is μετ ’ άναισϋησίας απτόν, that is, to be felt as darkness is seen, or silence heard, being a mere privation.

319. If any one should think to infer the reality or actual being of Matter from the modern tenet — that gravity is always proportionable to the quantity of matter, let him but narrowly scan the modern demonstration of that tenet, and he will find it to be a vain circle, concluding in truth no more than this — that gravity is proportionable to weight, that is, to itself. Since Matter is conceived only as defect and mere possibility; and since God is absolute perfection and act; it follows there is the greatest distance and opposition imaginable between God and Matter. Insomuch that a material God would be altogether inconsistent.

320. The force that produces, the intellect that orders, the goodness that perfects all things is the supreme Being. Evil, defect, negation, is not the object of God’s creative power. From motion the Peripatetics trace out a first immoveable Mover. The Platonics make God author of all good, author of no evil, and unchangeable. According to Anaxagoras there was a confused mass of all things in one chaos; but mind supervening, επελθών, distinguished and divided them. Anaxagoras, it seems, ascribed the motive faculty to mind; which mind some subsequent philosophers have accurately discriminated from soul and life, ascribing to it the sole faculty of intellection.

321. But still God was supposed the first agent, the source and original of all things; which he produceth, not occasionally or instrumentally, but with actual and real efficacy. Thus the treatise “De Secretiore Parte Divinæ Sapientiæ secundum Ægyptios,” in the tenth book, saith of God, that he is not only the first Agent, but also that he it is who truly acts or creates, qui vere efficit.

322. Varro, Tully, and St. Augustin, understand the soul to be vis, the power or force that acts, moves, enlivens. Now although, in our conception, vis, or spirit, might be distinguished from mind, it would not thence follow that it acts blindly or without mind, or that it is not closely connected with intellect. If Plutarch is to be trusted in his account of the opinions of philosophers, Thales held the mind of the world to be God; Democritus held the soul of the world to be an igniform deity (sect. 166, i68, 277); Pythagoras taught that God was the monad and the good, or τ ’ άγαβόν ; Socrates also and Plato pronounced him to be TO lv (sect. 287), the single, self-originate one, essentially good. Each of which appellations and forms of speech directly tends to and determines in Mind,, saith Plutarch.

323. Whence that author concludes, that, in the sense of those philosophers, God is a Mind, χωριστόν εΐόος — not an abstract idea compounded of inconsistencies, and prescinded from all real things, as some moderns understand abstraction; but a really existing Spirit, distinct or separate from all sensible and corporeal beings. And although the Stoics are represented as holding a corporeal deity, or that the very system of the world is God, yet it is certain they did not, at bottom, dissent from the forementioned doctrine; inasmuch as they supposed the world to be an animal (sect. 276, 279), consisting of soul or mind, as well as body.

324. This notion was derived from the Pythagoreans, who held the world, as Timæus Locrus teacheth, to be one perfect animal, endued with soul and reason: but then they believed it to have been generated: whereas the Stoics looked on the world as the supreme God, including therein mind or intellect. For the elementary fire, or, if one may so speak, the animal spirit of the world, seemeth, according to them, to have been the vehicle of the soul (sect. 277, 284), the vehicle of intellect, or νους ; since they styled the Divinity πυρ νοερόν (sect. 272), or intellectual fire.

325. The Egyptians, if we may credit the Plermaic writings, maintained God to be all things, not only actual, but possible. He is styled by them, That which is made and that which is unmade. And therein it is said, Shall I praise thee for those things thou hast made manifest, or for the things thou hast hidden? Therefore, in their sense, to manifest was to create; the things created having been before hidden in God.

326. Now, whether the νους be abstracted from the sensible world, and considered by itself, as distinct from, and presiding over, the created system; or whether the whole Universe, including mind together with the mundane body, is conceived to be God (sect. 300), and the creatures to be partial manifestations of the Divine essence — there is no Atheism in either case, whatever misconceptions there may be; so long as mind or intellect is understood to preside over, govern, and conduct, the whole frame of things. And this was the general prevailing opinion among the philosophers.

327. Nor if any one, with Aristotle in his “Metaphysics,” should deny that God knows anything without himself — seeing that God comprehends all things — could this be justly pronounced an atheistical opinion. Nor even was the following notion of the same author to be accounted Atheism, to wit that there are some things beneath the knowledge of God, as too mean, base, and vile; however wrong this notion may be, and unworthy of the Divine perfection.

328. Might we not conceive that God may be said to be All in divers senses; as he is the cause and origin of all beings; as the νους is the νοητά , a doctrine both of Platonics and Peripatetics (sect. 309, 310); as the νους is the place of all forms; and as it is the same which comprehends and orders (sect. 320) and sustains the whole mundane system. Aristotle declares that the Divine force or influence permeates the entire universe (sect. 173), and that what the pilot is in a ship, the driver in a chariot, the precentor in a choir, the law in a city, the general in an army, the same God is in the world. This he amply sets forth in his book “De Mundo;” a treatise which, having been anciently ascribed to him, ought not to be set aside from the difference of style; which (as Patricius rightly observes), being in a letter to a king, might well be supposed to differ from the other dry and crabbed parts of his writings.

329. And, although there are some expressions to be met with in the philosophers, even of the Platonic and Aristotelic sects, which speak of God as mixing with, or pervading all nature and all the elements; yet this must be explained by force and not by extension, which was never attributed to the mind (sect. 290, 293, 297, 319), either by Aristotle or Plato. This they always affirmed to be incorporeal: and, as Plotinus remarks, incorporeal things are distant each from other not by place, but (to use his expression) by alterity.

330. These disquisitions will probably seem dry and useless to such readers as are accustomed to consider only sensible objects. The employment of the mind on things purely intellectual is to most men irksome; whereas the sensitive powers, by constant use, acquire strength. Hence, the objects of sense more forcibly affect us (sect. 264, 294), and are too often counted the chief good. For these things men fight, cheat, and scramble. Therefore, in order to tame mankind, and introduce a sense of virtue, the best human means is to exercise their understanding, to give them a glimpse of another world, superior to the sensible, and, while they take pains to cherish and maintain the animal life, to teach them not to neglect the intellectual.

331. Prevailing studies are of no small consequence to a state, the religion, manners, and civil government of a country ever taking some bias from its philosophy, which affects not only the minds of its professors and students, but also the opinions of all the better sort, and the practice of the whole people, remotely and consequentially indeed, though not inconsiderably. Have not the polemic and scholastic philosophy been observed to produce controversies in law and religion? And have not Fatalism and Sadducism gained ground, during the general passion for the corpuscularian and mechanical philosophy, which hath prevailed for about a century? This, indeed, might usefully enough have employed some share of the leisure and curiosity of inquisitive persons. But when it entered the seminaries of learning as a necessary accomplishment, and most important part of education, by engrossing men’s thoughts, and fixing their minds so much on corporeal objects, and the laws of motion, it hath, however undesignedly, indirectly, and by accident, yet not a little indisposed them for spiritual, moral, and intellectual matters. Certainly had the philosophy of Socrates and Pythagoras prevailed in this age, among those who think themselves too wise to receive the dictates of the Gospel, we should not have seen interest take so general and fast hold on the minds of men, nor public spirit reputed to be γελοίαν ευηβειαν, a generous folly, among those who are reckoned to be the most knowing as well as the most getting part of mankind.

332. It might very well be thought serious trifling to tell my readers that the greatest men had ever a high esteem for Plato; whose writings are the touchstone of a hasty and shallow mind; whose philosophy has been the admiration of ages; which supplied patriots, magistrates, and lawgivers to the most flourishing states, as well as fathers to the Church, and doctors to the schools. Albeit in these days the depths of that old learning are rarely fathomed; and yet it were happy for these lands if our young nobility and gentry, instead of modern maxims, would imbibe the notions of the great men of antiquity. But, in these freethinking times, many an empty head is shook at Aristotle and Plato, as well as at the Holy Scriptures. And the writings of those celebrated ancients are by most men treated on a foot with the dry and barbarous lucubrations of the schoolmen. It may be modestly presumed there are not many among us, even of those who are called the better sort, who have more sense, virtue, and love of their country than Cicero, who in a Letter to Atticus could not forbear exclaiming, O Socrates et Socratici viri! manquant vobis grafiam referam. Would to God many of our countrymen had the same obligations to those Socratic writers! Certainly, where the people are well educated, the art of piloting a state is best learned from the writings of Plato. But among bad men, void of discipline and education, Plato, Pythagoras, and Aristotle themselves, were they living, could do but little good. Plato hath drawn a very humorous and instructive picture of such a state; which I shall not transcribe for certain reasons. But whoever has a mind may see it, in the seventy-eighth page of the second tome of Aldus his edition of Plato’s works.

333. Proclus, in the first book of his Commentary on the Theology of Plato, observes that, as in the mysteries, those who are initiated, at first meet with manifold and multiform gods, but being entered and thoroughly initiated they receive the Divine illumination and participate the very Deity; in like manner, if the soul looks abroad, she beholds the shadows and images of things: but returning into herself she unravels and beholds her own essence: at first she seemeth only to behold herself; but having penetrated farther she discovers the mind. And again, still farther advancing into the innermost sanctuary of the soul, she contemplates the θεών γένος. And this, he saith, is the most excellent of all human acts, in the silence and repose of the faculties of the soul to tend upwards to the very Divinity; to approach and be closely joined with that which is ineffable and superior to all beings. When come so high as the first principle, she ends her journey and rests. Such is the doctrine of Proclus.

334. But Socrates in the First Alcibiades teacheth, on the other hand, that the contemplation of God is the proper means to know or understand our own soul. As the eye, saith he, looking steadfastly at the visive part or pupil of another eye, beholds itself, even so the soul beholds and understands herself, while she contemplates the Deity, which is wisdom and virtue, or like thereunto. In the Phædon, Socrates speaks of God as being τ ’ αγαθόν and τό δέον, the good and the decent (sect. 260, 322); Plotinus represents God as order; Aristotle as law.

335. It may seem, perhaps, to those who have been taught to discourse about substratums, more reasonable and pious, to attribute to the Deity a more substantial being than the notional entities of wisdom, order, law, virtue, or goodness, which being only complex ideas, framed and put together by the understanding, are its own creatures, and have nothing substantial, real, or independent in them. But it must be considered that, in the Platonic system, order, virtue, law, goodness, and wisdom are not creatures of the soul of man, but innate and originally existent therein, not as an accident in a substance, but as light to enlighten, and as a guide to govern. In Plato’s style, the term idea doth not merely signify an inert inactive object of the understanding, but is used as synonymous with αίτιον and άρχη, cause and principle. According to that philosopher, goodness, beauty, virtue, and such like are not figments of the mind, nor mere mixed modes, nor yet abstract ideas in the modern sense, but the most real beings, intellectual and unchangeable: and therefore more real than the fleeting, transient objects of sense (sect. 306), which, wanting stability, cannot be subjects of science (sect. 264, 266, 297), much less of intellectual knowledge.

336. By Parmenides, Timæus, and Plato a distinction was made as hath been observed already, between genitum and ens.

The former sort is always generating or in fieri { sect. 304, 306), but never exists; because it never continues the same, being in a constant change, ever perishing and producing. By entia they understand things remote from sense, invisible and intellectual, which never changing are still the same, and may therefore be said truly to exist: ουσία, which is generally translated substance, but more properly essence, was not thought to belong to things sensible and corporeal, which have no stability; but rather to intellectual ideas, though discerned with more difficulty, and making less impression on a mind stupefied and immersed in animal life, than gross objects that continually beset and solicit our senses.

337. The most refined human intellect, exerted to its utmost reach, can only seize some imperfect glimpses of the Divine Ideas (sect. 313, 330), abstracted from all things corporeal, sensible, and imaginable. Therefore Pythagoras and Plato treated them in a mysterious manner, concealing rather than exposing them to vulgar eyes; so far were they from thinking that those abstract things, although the most real, were the fittest to influence common minds, or become principles of knowledge, not to say duty and virtue, to the generality of mankind.

338. Aristotle and his followers have made a monstrous representation of the Platonic ideas; and some of Plato’s own school have said very odd things concerning them. But if that philosopher himself was not read only, but studied also with care, and made his own interpreter, I believe the prejudice that now lies against him would soon wear off {sect. 309, 313), or be even converted into a high esteem for those exalted notions and fine hints that sparkle and shine throughout his writings; which seem to contain not only the most valuable learning of Athens and Greece, but also a treasure of the most remote traditions and early science of the East.

339. In the “Timæus” of Plato mention is made of ancient persons, authors of traditions, and the offspring of the gods. It is very remarkable that, in the account of the creation contained in the same piece, it is said that God was pleased with his work, and that the night is placed before the day. The more we think, the more difficult shall we find it to conceive, how mere man, grown up in the vulgar habits of life, and weighed down by sensuality, should ever be able to arrive at science, without some tradition (sect. 298, 301, 302) or teaching, which might either sow the seeds of knowledge, or call forth and excite those latent seeds that were originally sown in the soul.

340. Human souls in this low situation, bordering on mere animal life, bear the weight and see through the dusk of a gross atmosphere, gathered from wrong judgments daily passed, false opinions daily learned, and early habits of an older date than either judgment or opinion. Through such a medium the sharpest eye cannot see clearly (sect. 292, 293, 294). And if by some extraordinary effort the mind should surmount this dusky region, and snatch a glimpse of pure light, she is soon drawn backwards, and depressed by the heaviness of the animal nature to which she is chained. And if again she chanceth, amidst the agitation of wild fancies and strong affections, to spring upwards, a second relapse speedily succeeds into this region of darkness and dreams.

341. Nevertheless, as the mind gathers strength by repeated acts, we should not despond, but continue to exert the prime and flower of our faculties, still recovering, and reaching on, and struggling, into the upper region, whereby our natural weakness and blindness may be in some degree remedied, and a taste attained of truth and intellectual life. Beside the constant prevailing opinion of the greatest men of antiquity, that there is both an universal Spirit, author of life and motion, and an universal Mind, enlightening and ordering all things, it was a received tenet among them, that there is also το en or το αγαθόν (sect. 322), which they looked on as the Fons Deitatis , the first hypostasis in the Divinity.

342. THE ONE, or το ev, being immutable and indivisible, always the same and entire, was therefore thought to exist truly and originally, and other things only so far as they are one and the same, by participation of το ev. This gives unity, stability, and reality, to things (sect. 264, 306). Plato describes God, as Moses, from his being. According to both, God is He who truly is, ό όντως ων. Change and division were esteemed defects or bad. Evil scatters, divides,. destroys. Good, on the contrary, produceth concord and union, assembles, combines, perfects, and preserves entire. The several beings which compose the universe are parts of the same system; they combine to carry on one end, and perfect one whole. And this aptness and concurrence thereunto furnishes the partial particular idea of Good in the distinct creatures. Hence it might have come to pass that τ ’ αγαθόν and TO ev were regarded as one and the same.

343. Light and sight (saith Plato in the sixth book of his Republic) are not the sun: even so truth and knowledge are not the good itself, although they approach thereunto. And again, what the sun is in a visible place with respect to sight and things seen, that same is το αγαθόν or Good in an intelligible place, with respect to understanding and things understood. Therefore the Good or One is not the light that enlightens, but the source of that light.

344. Every moment produceth some change in the parts of this visible creation. Something is added, or diminished, or altered, in essence, quantity, quality, or habitude. Wherefore all generated beings were said by the ancients to be in a perpetual flux (sect. 304, 336). And that which, on a confused and general view, seems one single constant being, shall upon a nearer inspection appear a continued series of different beings. But God remains for ever one and the same. Therefore God alone exists. This was the doctrine of Heraclitus, Plato, and other ancients.

345. It is the opinion of Plato and his followers that in the soul of man, prior and superior to intellect, there is somewhat of a higher nature, by virtue of which we are one; and that by means of our one or unit, we are most closely joined to the Deity. And, as by our intellect we touch the Divine Intellect, even so by our TO εν or unit, the very flower of our essence, as Proclus expresseth it, we touch the first One.

346. According to the Platonic philosophy, ens and unum are the same. And consequently our minds participate so far of existence as they do of unity. But it should seem that personality is the indivisible centre of the soul or mind, which is a monad so far forth as she is a person. Therefore Person is really that which exists, inasmuch as it participates the Divine unity. In man the monad or indivisible is the αυτό τό αυτό, the self-same self, or very self; a thing in the opinion of Socrates, much and narrowly to be inquired into and discussed, to the end that, knowing ourselves, we may know what belongs to ourselves and to our happiness.

347. Upon mature reflection, the person or mind of all created beings seemeth alone indivisible, and to partake most of unity. But sensible things are rather considered as one than truly so, they being in a perpetual flux or succession, ever differing and various. Nevertheless, all things together may be considered as one universe (sect. 287, 288), one by the connection, relation, and order of its parts, which is the work of mind, whose unit is, by Platonics, supposed a participation of the first TO tv.

348. Socrates, in the “Theætetus” of Plato, speaketh of two parties of philosophers — the ρέοντες, and oi τον olov στασιώται — the flowing philosophers who held all things to be in a perpetual flux, always generating and never existing; and those others who maintained the universe to be fixed and immovable. The difference seems to have been this, that Heraclitus, Protagoras, Empedocles, and in general those of the former sect, considered things sensible and natural; whereas Parmenides and his party considered το πάν, not as the sensible but as the intelligible world (sect. 293, 294, 295), abstracted from all sensible things.

349. In effect, if we mean by things the sensible objects, these, it is evident, are always flowing; but if we mean things purely intelligible, then we may say on the other hand, with equal truth, that they are immovable and unchangeable. So that those who thought the Whole, or το παν, to be ev ίστώς, a fixed or permanent One, seem to have understood the Whole of real beings; which in their sense was only the intellectual world, not allowing reality of being to things not permanent.

350. The displeasure of some readers may perhaps be incurred, by surprising them into certain reflections and inquiries for which they have no curiosity. But perhaps some others may be pleased to find a dry subject varied by digressions, traced through remote inferences, and carried into ancient times, whose hoary maxims (sect. 298, 301), scattered in this Essay, are not proposed as principles, but barely as hints to awaken and exercise the inquisitive reader, on points not beneath the attention of the ablest men. Those great men, Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle, the most consummate in politics, who founded states, or instructed princes, or wrote most accurately on public government, were at the same time most acute at all abstracted and sublime speculations; the clearest light being ever necessary to guide the most important actions. And, whatever the world thinks, he who hath not much meditated upon God, the human mind, and the summum bonum , may possibly make a thriving earthworm, but will most indubitably make a sorry patriot and a sorry statesman.

351. According to the nice metaphysics of those ancient philosophers, TO tv, being considered as what was first and simplest in the Deity, was prescinded even from entity, to which it was thought prior and superior; and is therefore by the Platonics styled super-essential. And in the Parmenides it is said, TO tv doth not exist; which might seem to imply a negation of the Divine Being. The truth is Zeno, and Parmenides argued that a thing existing in time was older and younger than itself; therefore the constant immutable TO tv did not exist in time: and if not in time, then in none of the differences of time past, present, or to come; therefore we cannot say that it was, is, or will be. But, nevertheless, it is admitted, in the same Parmenides, that TO το nun is everywhere present to TO tv; that is, instead of a temporary succession of moments, there is one eternal now, or punctum stans, as it is termed by the schoolmen.

352. The simplicity of το εν (the Father in the Pythagoric and Platonic Trinity) is conceived such as to exclude intellect or mind, to which it is supposed prior; and that hath created a suspicion of Atheism in this opinion: for, saith the learned Doctor Cudworth, shall we say that the first Hypostasis or Person is άνονς and άλογος, senseless and irrational, and altogether devoid of mind and understanding? or would not this be to introduce a kind of mysterious Atheism? To which it may be answered, that whoever acknowledgeth the universe to be made and governed by an eternal mind cannot be justly deemed an Atheist (sect. 154, 276, 279, 287). And this was the tenet of those ancient philosophers. In the Platonic doctrine, the generation of the νους or λόγος was not contingent but necessary, not temporary but from everlasting. There never was a time supposed wherein TO tv subsisted without intellect; the priority having been understood only as a priority of order or conception, but not a priority of age. Therefore, the maintaining a distinction of priority between TO iv and νοϋς doth not infer that the one ever existed without the other. It follows, therefore, that the Father or TO iv may, in a certain sense, be said to be άνονς without Atheism, or without destroying the notion of a Deity; any more than it would destroy the notion of a human soul, if we should conceive a distinction between self and intellect, or intellect and life. To which we may farther add, that it is a doctrine of Platonics, and agrees with their master’s tenets, to say that τό iv or the first Hypostasis contains all Excellence and Perfection, whereof it is the original source, and is eminenter , as the schools speak, intellect and life, as well as goodness; while the second Hypostasis is essentially Intellect, and, by participation, goodness, and life; and the third, Life essentially, and, by participation, goodness, and intellect.

353 Therefore, the whole being considered, it will not seem just to fix the imputation of Atheism upon those philosophers who held the doctrine of TO ev (sect. 287, 288); whether it be taken in an abstracted or collective, a metaphysical or merely vulgar meaning (sect. 300): that is, whether we prescind Unity from essence and intellect, since metaphysical distinctions of the divine attributes do not in reality divide them; or whether we consider the universal system of beings as One, since the union, connexion, and order of its members do manifestly infer a mind or intellect to be cause thereof.

354. The One, or το tv, may be conceived either by composition or division. For as, on the one hand, we may say the world or universe is one whole, or one animal; so we may, on the other hand, consider TO iv by division or abstraction, as somewhat in the order of things prior to mind. In either sense there is no Atheism, so long as mind is admitted to preside and direct the animal; and so long as the Unum, or TO iv, is supposed not to exist without mind (sect. 287, 288). So that neither Heraclitus, nor Parmenides, nor Pythagoras, nor Plato; neither the Egyptians, nor Stoics, with their doctrine of a Divine Whole or Animal; nor Xenophanes with his εν και πάν, are justly to be accounted Atheists. Therefore, modern Atheism, be it of Hobbes, Spinoza, Collins, or whom you will, is not to be countenanced by the learning and great names of antiquity.

355. Plato teacheth that the doctrine concerning the One or Unit is a means to lead and raise the mind to the knowledge of him who truly is (sect. 294, 295). And it is a tenet both of Aristotle and Plato, that identity is a certain unity. The Pythagoreans also, as well as the Platonic philosophers, held unum and ens to be the same. Consistently with which, that only can be said to exist which is one and the same. In things sensible and imaginable, as such, there seems to be no unity, nothing that can be called one, prior to all act of the mind; since they, being in themselves aggregates, consisting of parts or compounded of elements, are in effect many. Accordingly, it is remarked by Themistius, the learned interpreter of Aristotle, that to collect many notions into one, and to consider them as one, is the work of intellect and not of sense or fancy.

356. Aristotle himself, in his third book of the Soul, saith it is the mind that maketh each thing to be one — το δε έν ττοιουν , τούτο ό νους έκαστον. How this is done, Themistius is more particular observing that, as being conferreth essence, the mind, by virtue of her simplicity, conferreth simplicity upon compounded beings. And, indeed, it seemeth that the mind, so far forth as person, is individual (sect. 345, 346, 347); therein resembling the divine One by participation, and imparting to other things what itself participates from above. This is agreeable to the doctrine of the ancients; however the contrary opinion of supposing number to be an original primary quality in things, independent of the mind, may obtain among the moderns.

357. The Peripatetics taught that in all divisible things there was somewhat indivisible, and in all compound things somewhat simple. This they derived from an act of the mind. And neither this simple indivisible unit, nor any sum of repeated units, consequently no number can be separated from the things themselves, and from the operation of the mind. Themistius goeth so far as to affirm that it cannot be separated from the words or signs; and, as it cannot be uttered without them, so, saith he, neither can it be conceived without them. Thus much upon the whole may be concluded, that, distinct from the mind and her operations, there is in created beings neither unit nor number.

358. Of inferior beings the human mind, self, or person, is the most simple and undivided essence (sect. 347). And the supreme Father is the most perfect One. Therefore the flight of the mind towards God is called by the Platonics φνγ μόνου προς μόνον. The supreme Being, saith Plotinus, as he excludes all diversity, is ever alike present. And we are then present to him, when, recollected and abstracted from the world and sensible objects, we are most free and disengaged from all variety (sect. 268). He adds that in the intuition of the Supreme Deity the soul finds her wished for end and repose; which that philosopher calls awaking out of his body into himself.

359. In the tenth book of the “Arcane,” or “Divine Wisdom of the Egyptians,” we are taught that the supreme Being is not the cause of any created thing; but that he produced or made the Word; and that all created beings were made by the Word, which is accordingly styled the Cause of all causes: and that this was also the doctrine of the Chaldeans. Plato, likewise, in his Letter to Hermias, Erastus, and Coriscus, speaks of God, the ruler and cause of all things, as having a Father: and, in his “Epinomis,” he expressly teacheth that the Word or λόγος made the world. Accordingly, Saint Augustine, in his Commentary on the beginning of Saint John’s Gospel, having declared that Christ is the wisdom of God by which all things were made, observes that this doctrine was also found in the writings of philosophers, who taught that God had an only begotten Son by whom are all things.

360. Now, though Plato had joined with an imagination the most splendid and magnificent, an intellect not less deep and clear; yet it is not to be supposed that either he or any other philosophers of Greece or the East had by the light of nature obtained an adequate notion of the holy Trinity; nor even that their imperfect notion, so far as it went, was exactly just; nor perhaps that those sublime hints, which dart forth like flashes of light in the midst of a profound darkness, were originally struck from the hard rock of human reason; but rather derived, at least in part, by a Divine tradition, from the author of all things (sect. 298, 301). It seems a remarkable confirmation of this, what Plotinus observed in his fifth Ennead, that this doctrine of a Trinity — Father, Mind, and Soul — was no late invention, but an ancient tenet.

361. Certain it is that the notion of a Trinity is to be found in the writings of many old heathen philosophers — that is to say, a notion of Three Divine Hypostases. Authority, Light, and Life did, to the eye of reason, plainly appear to support, pervade, and animate the mundane system or macrocosm. The same appeared in the microcosm, preserving soul and body, enlightening the mind, and moving the affections. And these were conceived to be necessary universal principles, co-existing and cooperating in such sort as never to exist asunder, but on the contrary to constitute one Sovereign of all things. And, indeed, how could power or authority avail or subsist without knowledge? or either without life and action?

362. In the administration of all things, there is Authority to establish, Law to direct, and Justice to execute. There is first the source of all perfection, or Fons Deitatis; secondly, the supreme reason, order, or λόγος; and lastly, the Spirit which quickens and inspires. We are sprung from the Father, irradiated or enlightened by the Son, and moved by the Spirit. Certainly, that there is Father, Son, and Spirit; that these bear analogy to the sun, light, and heat; and are otherwise expressed by the terms Principle, Mind, and Soul; by One or TO tv, Intellect, and Life; by Good, Word, and Love; and that generation was not attributed to the second Hypostasis, the νοϋς or λογος, in respect of time, (sect. 352), but only in respect of origin and order, as an eternal necessary emanation; — these are the express tenets of Platonists, Pythagoreans, Egyptians, and Chaldeans.

363. Though it may be well presumed there is nothing to be found on that sublime subject in human writings which doth not bear the sure signatures of humanity; yet it cannot be denied that several Fathers of the Church have thought fit to illustrate the Christian doctrine of the holy Trinity, by similitudes and expressions borrowed from the most eminent heathens, whom they conceived to have been no strangers to that mystery; as hath been plainly proved by Bessarion, Eugubinus, and Dr. Cudworth.

364. Therefore, how unphilosophical soever that doctrine may seem to many of the present age, yet it is certain that men of greatest fame and learning among the ancient philosophers held a Trinity in the Godhead. It must be owned, that upon this point some later Platonists of the Gentile world seem to have bewildered themselves (as many Christians have also done), while they pursued the hints derived from their predecessors with too much curiosity.

365. But Plato himself considered that doctrine as a venerable mystery, not to be lightly treated of, or rashly divulged. Wherefore in a Letter to Dionysius, he writes (as he himself professeth) enigmatically and briefly in the following terms, which he giveth for a summary of his notion concerning the supreme Being, and which, being capable of divers senses, I leave to be deciphered by the learned reader: Peri τον πάντων βασιλέα πάντ ’ εστί, καί εκείνου ενεκα πάντα, και εκείνο αίτιον απάντων των κιχλών, εεότερον νε , περί τα νεότερα, καί τρίτον περί τά τρίτα. Plato enjoins Dionysius, over and over, with great earnestness, not to suffer what he communicates concerning the mysteries of the Divine nature to fall into illiterate or vulgar hands, giving it withal as a reason for this caution, that nothing would seem more ridiculous or absurd to the common run of mankind. He adds that, in regard writings might miscarry, the prudent way was to write nothing at all on those matters, but to teach and learn them by word of mouth: for which reason, saith he, I have never wrote anything thereon; nor is there, nor shall there ever be, anything of Plato’s extant on the subject. He farther adds, as for what hath been now said, it belongs all to Socrates.

366. And, indeed, what this philosopher in his “Phædrus” speaketh of the super-celestial region, and the Divinity resident therein, is of a strain not to be relished or comprehended by vulgar minds; to wit, essence really existent, object of intellect alone, without colour, without figure, without any tangible quality. He might very justly conceive that such a description must seem ridiculous to sensual men.

367. As for the perfect intuition of divine things, that he supposeth to be the lot of pure souls, beholding by a pure light, initiated, happy, free and unstained from those bodies, wherein we are now imprisoned like oysters. But, in this mortal state, we must be satisfied to make the best of those glimpses within our reach (sect. 335, 337). It is Plato’s remark, in his “Theætetus,” that while we sit still we are never the wiser, but going into the river, and moving up and down, is the way to discover its depths and shallows. If we exercise and bestir ourselves, we may even here discover something.

368. The eye by long use comes to see even in the darkest cavern: and there is no subject so obscure but we may discern some glimpse of truth by long poring on it. Truth is the cry of all, but the game of a few. Certainly, where it is the chief passion, it doth not give way to vulgar cares and views; nor is it contented with a little ardour in the early time of life; active, perhaps, to pursue, but not so fit to weigh and revise. He that would make a real progress in knowledge must dedicate his age as well as youth, the later growth as well as first fruits, at the altar of Truth.

Cujusvis est errare; nullius nisi insipientis in errore perseverare.

CICERO.

 

NOTE. — Those curious about this linking together of ideas in a “chain” may be referred to a long contribution to “Notes and Queries,” second ser iii., pp. 63, 81, 104; second ser xii., pp. 161, 181. (I am indebted to Professor Fraser for these references.) The letter is primarily concerned with a book of Hermetic lore, “Aurea Catena Homeri,” mentioned by Goethe in the “Dichtung und Wahrheit;” but is further interesting as a short essay on this notion of chains in other writers. The work itself, the “Aurea Catena Ilomeri” (probably by Ant. Jos. Kirchweger), is described as a very rare work. The first German edition, 1723 (not known to the “Notes and Queries” contributor) is in the British Museum (1033. a. 27), together with a Latin translation (8905. aa. 26). A study of the book was published by Hermann Kopp (Brunswick, 1SS0). — ED.

 A Word to the Wise (1749) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

OR, AN EXHORTATION TO THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CLERGY OF IRELAND

BE not startled, Reverend Sirs, to find yourselves addressed to by one of a different Communion. We are indeed (to our Shame be it spoken) more inclined to hate for those Articles wherein we differ, than to love one another for those wherein we agree. But if we cannot extinguish, let us at least suspend our Animosities, and forgetting our religious Feuds, consider ourselves in the amiable Light of Countrymen and Neighbours. Let us for once turn our Eyes on those Things, in which we have one common Interest. Why should Disputes about Faith interrupt the Duties of civil Life? or the different Roads we take to Heaven prevent our taking the same Steps on Earth? Do we not inhabit the same Spot of Ground, breathe the same Air, and live under the same Government? why then should we not conspire in one and the same Design, to promote the common Good of our Country?

We are all agreed about the Usefulness of Meat, Drink, and Clothes, and without Doubt, we all sincerely wish our poor Neighbours were better supplied with them. Providence and Nature have done their Part: no Country is better qualified to furnish the Necessaries of Life, and yet no People are worse provided. In vain is the Earth fertile, and the Climate benign, if human Labour be wanting. Nature supplies the Materials, which Art and Industry improve to the Use of Man, and it is the Want of this Industry that occasions all our other Wants.

The Public hath endeavoured to excite and encourage this useful Virtue. Much hath been done; but whether it be from the Heaviness of the Climate, or from the Spanish, or Scythian Blood that runs in their Veins, or whatever else may be the Cause, there still remains in the Natives of this Island a remarkable Antipathy to Labour. You, Gentlemen, can alone conquer their innate hereditary Sloth. Do you then, as you love your Country, exert yourselves.

 You are known to have great Influence on the Minds of your People, be so good as to use this Influence for their Benefit. Since other Methods fail, try what you can do. Be instant in Season, out of Season, reprove, rebuke, exhort. Make them thoroughly sensible of the Sin and Folly of Sloth. Shew your Charity in clothing the naked and feeding the hungry, which you may do by the mere Breath of your Mouths. Give me leave to tell you, that no Set of Men upon Earth have it in their Power to do Good on easier Terms, with more Advantage to others, and less Pains or Loss to themselves. Your Flocks are of all others, most disposed to follow Directions, and of all others want them most; and indeed what do they not want?

 The House of an Irish Peasant is the Cave of Poverty; within, you see a Pot and a little Straw; without, a Heap of Children tumbling on the Dunghill. Their Fields and Gardens are a lively Counterpart of Solomon’s Description in the Proverbs; I went, saith that wise King, by the Field of the slothful, and by the Vineyard of the Man void of Understanding, and lo! it was all grown over with Thorns, and Nettles had covered the Face thereof, and the Stone Wall thereof was broken down. In every Road the ragged Ensigns of Poverty are displayed; you often meet Caravans of Poor, whole Families in a Drove, without Clothes to cover, or Bread to feed them, both which might be easily procured by moderate Labour. They are encouraged in this vagabond Life by the miserable Hospitality they meet with in every Cottage, whose Inhabitants expect the same kind Reception in their Turn, when they become Beggars themselves; Beggary being the last Refuge of these improvident Creatures.

If I seem to go out of my Province, or to prescribe to those who must be supposed to know their own Business, or to paint the lower Inhabitants of this Land in no very pleasing Colours, you will candidly forgive a well meant Zeal, which obligeth me to say Things, rather useful than agreeable, and to lay open the Sore in order to heal it.

But whatever is said must be so taken, as not to reflect on Persons of Rank and Education, who are no way inferior to their Neighbours; nor yet to include all even of the lowest Sort, though it may well extend to the Generality, of those especially in the Western and Southern Parts of the Kingdom, where the British Manners have less prevailed. We take our Notions from what we see, mine are a faithful Transcript from Originals about me.

 The Scythians were noted for Wandering, and the Spaniards for Sloth and Pride; our Irish are behind neither of these Nations from which they descend, in their respective Characteristics. Better is he that laboureth and aboundeth in all Things, than he that boasteth himself and wanteth Bread, saith the Son of Sirach, but so saith not the Irishman. In my own Family a Kitchen-wench refused to carry out Cinders, because she was descended from an old Irish Stock. Never was there a more monstrous Conjunction than that of Pride with Beggary; and yet this Prodigy is seen every Day in almost every Part of this Kingdom. At the same time these proud People are more destitute than Savages, and more abject than Negroes. The Negroes in our Plantations have a Saying, If Negro was not Negro, Irishman would be Negro. And it may be affirmed with truth, that the very Savages of America are better clad and better lodged than the Irish Cottagers throughout the fine fertile Counties of Limerick and Tipperary.

   Having long observed and bewailed this wretched State of my Countrymen, and the Insufficiency of several Methods set on foot to reclaim them, I have recourse to your Reverences, as the dernier Resort. Make them to understand that you have their Interest at heart, that you persuade them to work for their own Sakes, and that GOD hath ordered Matters so as that, they who will not work for themselves, must work for others. The Terrors of Debt, Slavery, and Famine should, one would think, drive the most slothful to Labour. Make them sensible of these Things, and that the Ends of Providence and Order of the World require Industry in human Creatures. Man goeth forth to his Work, and to his Labour until the Evening, saith the Psalmist, when he is describing the Beauty, Order and Perfection of the Works of GOD. But what saith the slothful Person? Yet a little Sleep, a little Slumber, a little folding of the Hands to sleep. But, what saith the Wiseman? so shall thy Poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy Want as an armed Man.

   All Nature will furnish you with Arguments and Examples against Sloth, Go to the Ant thou Sluggard, cries Solomon. The Ant, the Bee, the Beetle, and every Insect but the Drone, reads a Lesson of Industry to Man. But the shortest and most effectual Lesson is that of Saint Paul, If any Man will not work neither should he eat. This Command was injoined the Thessalonians, and equally respects all Christians, and indeed all Mankind; it being evident by the Light of Nature, that the whole Creation works together for Good, and that no Part was designed to be useless.; as therefore the Idle Man is of no use, it follows, that he hath no Right to a Subsistence. Let them work, saith the Apostle, and eat their own Bread; not Bread got by Begging, not Bread earn’d by the Sweat of other Men; but their own Bread, that which is got by their own Labour. Then shalt thou eat the Labour of thine Hands, saith the Psalmist, to which he adds, Happy shalt thou be and it shall be well with thee; intimating, that to work and enjoy the Fruits thereof is a great Blessing.

A slothful Man’s Imagination is apt to dress up Labour in a horrible Mask; but horrible as it is, Idleness is more to be dreaded, and a Life of Poverty (its necessary Consequence) is far more painful. It was the Advice of Pythagoras, To choose the best kind of Life, for that Use would render it agreeable, reconciling Men even to the roughest Exercise. By Practice, Pains become at first easy, and in the Progress pleasant; and this is so true, that whoever examines Things will find, there can be no such Thing as a happy Life without Labour, and that whoever doth not labour with his Hands, must in his own Defence labour with his Brains.

Certainly, planting and tilling the Earth is an Exercise not less pleasing than useful; it takes the Peasant from his smoky Cabin, into the fresh Air and the open Field, rendering his Lot far more desirable than that of the Sluggard, who lies in the Straw, or sits whole Days by the Fire.

Convince your People that not only Pleasure invites, but Necessity also drives them to labour. If you have any Compassion for these poor Creatures, put them in mind how many of them perished in a late memorable Distress, through want of that provident Care against a hard Season, observable not only in all other Men, but even in irrational Animals. Set before their Eyes in lively Colours, their own indigent and sordid Lives, compared with those of other People, whose Industry hath procured them hearty Food, warm Clothes, and decent Dwellings. Make them sensible what a Reproach it is, that a Nation which makes so great Pretensions to Antiquity, and is said to have flourished many Ages ago in Arts and Learning, should in these our Days turn out a lazy, destitute, and degenerate Race.

Raise your Voices, Reverend Sirs, exert your Influence, shew your Authority over the Multitude, by engaging them to the Practice of an honest Industry, a Duty necessary to all, and required in all, whether Protestants, or Roman Catholics, whether Christians, Jews, or Pagans. Be so good among other Points to find room for This, than which none is of more Concern to the Souls and Bodies of your Hearers, nor consequently deserves to be more amply, or frequently insisted on.

Many and obvious are the Motives that recommend this Duty. Upon a Subject so copious, you can never be at a loss for something to say. And while by these Means you rescue your Countrymen from Want and Misery, you will have the Satisfaction to behold your Country itself improved. What Pleasure must it give you to see these waste and wild Scenes, these naked Ditches, and miserable Hovels, exchanged for fine Plantations, rich Meadows, well-tilled Fields, and neat Dwellings; to see People well fed, and well clad, instead of famished, ragged Scarecrows; and those very Persons tilling the Fields that used to beg in the Streets.

Neither ought the Difficulty of the Enterprise to frighten you from attempting it. It must be confessed a Habit of Industry is not at once introduced; Neighbour, nevertheless, will emulate Neighbour, and the Contagion of good Example will spread as surely as of bad, though perhaps not so speedily. It may be hoped, there are many that would be allured by a plentiful and decent Manner of Life to take Pains, especially when they observe it to be attained by the Industry of their Neighbours, in no Sort better qualified than themselves.

If the same gentle Spirit of Sloth did not sooth our Squires as well as Peasants, one would imagine there should be no idle Hands among us. Alas! how many Incentives to Industry offer themselves in this Island, crying aloud to the Inhabitants for Work? Roads to be repaired, Rivers made navigable, Fisheries on the Coasts, Mines to be wrought, Plantations to be raised, Manufactures improved, and, above all, Lands to be tilled and sowed with all Sorts of Grain.

When so many Circumstances provoke and animate your People to Labour, when their private Wants, and the Necessities of the Public, when the Laws, the Magistrates, and the very Country calls upon them, you cannot think it becomes you alone to be silent, or hindmost in every Project for promoting the public Good. Why should you, whose Influence is greatest, be least active? why should you, whose Words are most likely to prevail, say least in the common Cause?

Perhaps it will be said the Discouragements attending those of your Communion are a Bar against all Endeavours for exciting them to a laudable Industry. Men are stirred up to labour by the Prospect of bettering their Fortunes, by getting Estates, or Employments; but those who are limited in the Purchase of Estates, and excluded from all civil Employments, are deprived of those Spurs to Industry.

To this it may be answered, that admitting these Considerations do, in some measure, damp Industry and Ambition in Persons of a certain Rank, yet they can be no Let to the Industry of poor People, or supply an Argument against endeavouring to procure Meat, Drink, and Clothes. It is not proposed, that you sould persuade the better Sort to acquire Estates, or qualify themselves for becoming Magistrates; but only that you should set the lowest of the People at Work, to provide themselves with Necessaries, and supply the Wants of Nature.

It will be alledged in Excuse of their Idleness, that the Country People want Encouragement to labour, as not having a Property in the Lands. There is small Encouragement, say you, for them to build, or plant upon another’s Land, wherein they have only a temporary Interest. To which I answer, that Life itself is but temporary; that all Tenures are not of the same Kind; that the Case of our English and the original Irish is equal in this Respect; and that the true Aborigines, or natural Irish are noted for Want of Industry in improving even on their own Lands, whereof they have both Possession and Property.

How many industrious Persons are there in all civilized Countries, without any Property in Lands, or any Prospect of Estates, or Employments? Industry never fails to reward her Votaries. There is no one but can earn a little, and little added to little makes a Heap. In this fertile and plentiful Island, none can perish for Want but the Idle and Improvident. None who have Industry, Frugality, and Foresight, but may get into tolerable, if not wealthy Circumstances. Are not all Trades and Manufactures open to those of your Communion? have you not the same free Use, and may you not make the same Advantage of Fairs and Markets as other Men? do you pay higher Duties, or are you liable to greater Impositions than your fellow Subjects? and are not the public Praemiums and Encouragements given indifferently to Artists of all Communions? have not, in Fact, those of your Communion a very great Share of the Commerce of this Kingdom in their Hands? and is not more to be got by this than by purchasing Estates, or possessing civil Employments, whose Incomes are often attended with large Expences?

A tight House, warm Apparel, and wholsom Food are sufficient Motives to labour. If all had them, we should be a flourishing Nation. And if those who take pains may have them, those who will not take pains are not to be pitied; they are to be looked on and treated as Drones, the Pest and Disgrace of Society.

It will be said, the Hardness of the Landlord cramps the Industry of the Tenant. But if Rent be high, and the Landlord rigorous, there is more need of Industry in the Tenant. It is well known that in Holland Taxes are much higher, and Rent both of Land and Houses far dearer than in Ireland. But this is no Objection or Impediment to the Industry of the People, who are rather animated and spurred on to earn a Livelihood by Labour, that is not to be got without it.

You will say, it is an easy Matter to make a plausible Discourle on Industry, and its Advantages; but what can be expected from poor Creatures, who are destitute of all Conveniencies for exerting their Industry, who have nothing to improve upon, nothing to begin the World with? I answer, they have their four Quarters, and five Senses. Is it nothing to possess the bodily Organs found and entire! That wonderful Machine the Hand, was it formed to be idle?

Was there but Will to work, there are not wanting in this Island either Opportunities or Encouragements. Spinning alone might employ all idle Hands (Children as well as Parents) being soon learned, easily performed, and never failing of a Market, requiring neither Wit nor Strength, but suited to all Ages and Capacities. The Public provides Utensils, and Persons for teaching the Use of them; but the Public cannot provide a Heart and Will to be industrious. These, I will not deny, may be found in several Persons in some other Parts of the Kingdom, and where-ever they are found, the comfortable Effects shew themselves. But seldom, very seldom are they found in these Southern Peeple, whose Indolence figureth a Lion in the Way, and is Proof against all Encouargement.

But you will insist, how can a poor Man, whose daily Labour goes for the Payment of his Rent, be able to provide present Necessaries for his Family, much less to lay up a Store for the future. It must be owned, a considerable Share of the poor Man’s Time and Labour goes towards paying his Rent. But how are his Wife and Children employed, or how doth he employ himself the rest of his Time? The same Work tires, but different Works relieve. Where there is a true Spirit of Industry, there will never be wanting something to do, without Doors, or within, by Candle-light, if not by Day-light. Labor ipse Voluptas, saith the Poet, and this is verified in Fact.

 In England, when the Labour of the Field is over, it is usual for Men to betake themselves to some other Labour of a different kind. In the Northern Parts of that industrious Land, the Inhabitants meet, a jolly Crew, at one another’s Houses, where they merrily and frugally pass the long and dark Winter Evenings; several Families by the same Light, and the same Fire, working at their different Manufactures of Wooll, Flax, or Hemp, Company mean while mutually cheering and provoking to labour. In certain other Parts you may see, on a Summer’s Evening, the common Labourers sitting along the Street of a Town or Village, each at his own Door, with a Cushion before him making Bone-lace, and earning more in an Evening’s Pastime than an Irish Family would in a whole Day. Those People instead of closing the Day with a Game on greasy Cards, or lying stretched before the Fire, pass their Time much more chearfully in some useful Employment, which Custom hath rendered light and agreeable.

But admitting, for the various Reasons above alledged, that it is impossible for our Cottagers to be rich, yet it is certain they may be clean. Now bring them to be cleanly, and your Work is half done. A little Washing, scrubbing, and rubbing, bestowed on their Persons and Houses, would introduce a sort of Industry, and Industry in any one kind is apt to beget it in another.

Indolence in Dirt is a terrible Symptom, which shews itself in our lower lrish more, perhaps, than in any People on this Side The Cape of Good Hope. I will venture to add, that look throughout the Kingdom, and you shall not find a clean House inhabited by clean People, and yet wanting Necessaries; the same Spirit of Industry that keeps Folk clean, being sufficient to keep them also in Food and Raiment.

But alas! our poor Irish are wedded to Dirt upon Principle. It is with some them a Maxim, that the Way to make Children thrive is to keep them dirty. And I do verily believe, that the Familiarity with Dirt, contracted and nourished from their Infancy, is one great Cause of that Sloth which attends them in every Stage of Life. Were Children but brought up in an Abhorrence of Dirt, and obliged to keep themselves clean, they would have something to do, whereas now they do nothing.

 It is past all doubt, that those who are educated in a supine Neglect of all Things, either profitable or decent, must needs contract a Sleepiness and Indolence, which doth necessarily lead to Poverty, and every other Distress that attends it. Love not Sleep, cries Solomon, lest thou come to Poverty; open thine Eyes and thou shalt be satisfied with Bread. It is therefore greatly to be wished, that you would persuade Parents, to inure their Children betimes to a Habit of Industry, as the surest Way to shun the Miseries that must otherwise befal them.

 An early Habit, whether of Sloth, or Diligence, will not fail to shew itself throughout the whole Course of a Man’s Life. Train up a Child, saith the Wiseman, in the Way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it. The first Tincture often leaves so deep a Stain as no Afterthought or Endeavour can wash out. Hence Sloth in some Minds is Proof against all Arguments and Examples whatsoever, all Motives of Interest and Duty, all Impressions even of Cold and Hunger. This Habit rooted in the Child, grows up and adheres to the Man, producing a general Listlessness, and Aversion from Labour. This I take to be our great Calamity.

For admitting, that some of our Squires and Landlords are Vultures with Iron Bowels, and that their Hardness and Severity is a great Discouragement to the Tenant, who will naturally prefer Want and Ease before Want and Toil; it must at the same time be admitted, that neither is the Landlord, generally speaking, so hard, nor the Climate so severe, nor the Soil so ungrateful, as not to answer the Husbandman’s Labour, where there is a Spirit of Industry; the Want of which is the true Cause of our national Distress. Of this there are many evident Proofs.

I have myself known a Man, from the lowest Condition of Life, without Friends or Education, not knowing so much as to write or read, bred to no Trade or Calling, by pure Dint of Day-labour, Frugality, and Foresight, to have grown wealthy, even in this Island, and under all the abovementioned Disadvantages. And what is done by one, is possible to another.

In Holland a Child five Years old is maintained by its own Labour; In Ireland many Children of twice that Age do nothing but steal, or incumber the Hearth and Dunghill. This shameful Neglect of Education shews itself through the whole Course of their Lives, in a matchless Sloth bred in the very Bone, and not to be accounted for by any outward Hardship or Discouragement whatever. It is the native Colour, if we may so speak, and Complexion of the People. Dutch, English, French, or Flemish cannot match them.

Mark an Irishman at Work in the Field; if a Coach, or Horseman go by, he is sure to suspend his Labour, and stand staring until they are out of Sight. A Neighbour of mine made it his Remark in a Journey from London to Bristol, that all the Labourers, of whom he enquired the Road, constantly answered without looking up, or interrupting their Work, except one who stood staring and leaning on his Spade, and him he found to be an Irishman.

It is a shameful Thing and peculiar to this Nation, to see lusty Vagabonds strolling about the Country, and begging without any Pretence to beg. Ask them why they do not labour to earn their own Livelihood, they will tell you. They want Employment; offer to employ them, and they shall refuse your Offer; or, if you get them to work one Day, you may be sure not to see them the next. I have known them tdecline even the lighrest Labour, that of Hay-making, having at the same time neither Clothes for their Backs, nor Food for their Bellies.

A sore Leg is an Estate to such a Fellow, and this may be easily got and continued with small Trouble. Such is their Laziness, that rather than work they will cherish a Distemper. This I know to be true, having seen more than one Instance, wherein the second Nature so far prevailed over the first, that Sloth was preferred to Health. To these Beggars who make much of their Sores, and prolong their Diseases, you cannot do a more thankless Office than cure them, except it be to shave their Beards, which conciliate a sort of Reverence to that Order of Men.

It is indeed a difficult Task to reclaim such Fellows from their slothful and brutal Manner of Life, to which they seem wedded with an Attachment that no temporal Motives can conquer; nor is there, humanly speaking, any Hopes they will mend, except their Respect for your Lessons, and Fear of something beyond the Grave be able to work a Change in them.

Certainly, if I may advise, you should in Return for the Lenity and Indulgence of the Government, endeavour to make yourselves useful to the Public; and this will best be performed by rousing your poor Countrymen from their beloved Sloth. I shall not now dispute the Truth, or Importance of other Points, but will venture to say, that you may still find Time to inculcate this Doctrine of an honest Industry, and that this would by no means be Time thrown away, if promoting your Country’s Interest, and rescuing so many unhappy Wretches of your Communion from Beggary, or the Gallows, be thought worth your Pains.

It should seem you cannot in your Sermons do better than inveigh against Idleness, that extensive Parent of many Miseries and many Sins; Idleness the Mother of Hunger and Sister of Theft; Idleness which, the Son of Sirach assures us, teacheth many Vices.

The same Doctrine is often preached from the Gallows. And indeed the Poverty, Nakedness, and Famine which Idleness entaileth on her Votaries, do make Men so wretched, that they may well think it better to die than to live such Lives. Hence a Courage for all villanous Undertakings, which bringing Men to a shameful Death, do then open their Eyes when they are going to be closed for ever.

If you have any Regard (as it is not to be doubted) either for the Souls, or Bodies of your People, or even for your own Interest and Credit, you cannot fail to inveigh against this crying Sin of your Country. Seeing you are obnoxious to the Laws, should you not in Prudence try to reconcile yourselves to the Favour of the Public; and can you do this more effectually, than by co-operating with the public Spirit of the Legislature, and Men in Power?

  Were this but done heartily, would you but be instant in Season, and out of Season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, such is the Ascendent you have gained over the People, that we might soon expect to see the good Effects thereof. We might hope that our Garners would be soon full, affording all manner of Store, that our Sheep would bring forth thousands, that our Oxen would be strong to labour, that there would be no breaking in, nor going out, (no Robbery, nor Migration nor Bread) and that there would be no Complaining in our Streets.

It stands you upon to act with Vigour in this Cause, and shake off the Shackles of Sloth from your Countrymen, the rather, because there be some who surmise, that yourselves have put them on. Right, or wrong, Men will be apt to judge of your Doctrines by their Fruits. It will reflect small Honour on their Teachers, if instead of Honesty and Industry those of your Communion are peculiarly distinguished by the contrary Qualities, or if the Nation converted by the great and glorious Saint Patrick, should, above ail other Nations, be stigmatised and marked out as good for nothing.

I can never suppose you so much your own Enemies, as to be Friends to this odious Sloth. But were this once abolished, and a laudable Industry introduced in its Stead, it may perhaps be asked, who are to be Gainers? I answer, your Reverences are like to be great Gainers; for every Peny you now gain, you will gain a Shilling: you would gain also in your Credit: and your Lives would be more comfortable.

You need not be told, how hard it is to take from Rags and Penury a tolerable Subsistence; or how offensive to perform the Duties of your Function, amidst Stench and Nastiness; or how much Things would change for the better, in Proportion to the Industry and Wealth of your Flocks. Duty as well as Interest calls upon you to clothe the Naked, and feed the Hungry, by persuading them to eat (in the Apostle’s Phrase) their own Bread, or, as the Psalmist expresseth it, the Labour of their own Hands. By inspiring your Flocks with a Love of Industry, you will at once strike at the Root of many Vices, and dispose them to practise many Virtues. This therefore is the readiest Way to improve them.

 Consult your Superiors. They shall tell you the Doctrine here delivered is a sound Catholic Doctrine, not limited to Protestants, but extending to all, and admitted by all, whether Protestants or Roman Catholics, Christians or Mahometans, Jews or Gentiles. And as it is of the greatest Extent, so it is also of the highest Importance. Saint Paul expresly saith, That if any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his own House, he hath denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel.

In vain then do you endeavour to make Men Orthodox in Points of Faith, if at the same time in the Eyes of Christ and his Apostles, you suffer them to be worse than Infidels, than those who have no Faith at all. There is something it seems worse than even Infidelity; and to incite and stimulate you to put away that cursed Thing from among you, is the Design and Aim of this Address. The Doctrine we recommend is an evident Branch of the Law of Nature; it was taught by Prophets, inculcated by Apostles, encouraged and inforced by Philosophers, Legislators, and all wise States, in all Ages, and in all Parts of the World. Let me therefore intreat you to exert yourselves, To be Instant in Season, and out of Season, rebuke, reprove, exhort. Take all Opportunities to drive the Lion out of the Way; raise your Voices, omit no Occasion, public or private, of awakening your wretched Countrymen from their sweet Dream of Sloth.

Many suspect your Religion to be the Cause of that notorious Idleness, which prevails so generally among the Natives of this Island, as if the Roman Catholic Faith was inconsistent with an honest Diligence in a Man’s Calling. But whoever considers the great Spirit of Industry that reigns in Flanders and France, and even beyond the Alps, must acknowledge this to be a groundless Suspicion. In Piedmont and Genoa, in the Milanese and the Venetian State, and indeed throughout all Lombardy, how well is the Soil cultivated, and what Manufactures of Silk, Velvet, Paper, and other Commodities flourish? The King of Sardinia will suffer no idle Hands in his Territories, no Beggar to live by the Sweat of another’s Brow; it has even been made penal at Turin, to relieve a strolling Beggar. To which I might add, that the Person whose Authority will be of the greatest Weight with you, even the Pope himself, is at this Day endeavouring to put new Life into the Trade and Manufactures of his Country.

Though I am in no Secret of the Court of Rome, yet I will venture to affirm, that neither Pope, nor Cardinals, will be pleased to hear, that those of their Communion are distinguished above all others, by Sloth, Dirt, and Beggary; or be displeased at your endeavouring to rescue them from the Reproach of such an infamous Distinction.

The Case is as clear as the Sun; what we urge is inforced by every Motive that can work on a reasonable Mind. The Good of your Country, your own private Interest, the Duty of your Function, the Cries and Distresses of the Poor do with one Voice call for your Assistance. And if it is on all hands allowed to be right and just, if agreeable both to Reason and Religion, if coincident with the Views both of your temporal and spiritual Superiors, it is to be hoped, this Address may find a favourable Reception, and that a Zeal for disputed Points will not hinder your concurring to propagate so plain and useful a Doctrine, wherein we are all agreed.

When a Leak is to be stopped, or a Fire extinguished, do not all Hands co-operate without Distinction of Sect or Party? Or if I am fallen into a Ditch, shall I not suffer a Man to help me out, until I have first examined his Creed? Or when I am sick, shall I refuse the Physic, because my Physician doth, or doth not believe the Pope’s Supremacy?

Fas est et ab Hoste doceri. But in truth, I am no Enemy to your Persons, whatever I may think of your Tenets. On the contrary, I am your sincere Well-wisher. I consider you as my Countrymen, as Fellow-Subjects, as professing Belief in the same Christ. And I do most sincerely wish, there was no other Contest between us but Who shall most compleatly practise the Precepts of Him by whose Name we are called, and whose Disciples we all profess to be.

 Farther Thoughts on Tar-Water (1752) [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

FIRST EDITION TEXT

 CONTENTSTO THE AUTHOR OF SIRIS. AN ODE.

FARTHER THOUGHTS ON TAR-WATER.

 

  [image "img129.jpg" file=Image00128.jpg] 

George Berkeley by John Brooks, after James Latham, c. 1745

TO THE AUTHOR OF SIRIS. AN ODE.By the R. R. T. L. B. O. N.

 [image "img130.jpg" file=Image00129.jpg] 

O! Qui caducae sollicitus times
 Vitae, benignis usque laboribus
 Fugare praesens imminentes
 Corporibusque animisque pestes;
 Musis amicus, leniter audias
 Vocem camoenae, quae sibi reddita
 Jam ludit exultim, lyramque
 Suscitat, impatiens quietis.
 Non fabulosis pros•iiens jugis,
 Et docta labi murmure garrulo,
 Nunc unda me multùm loquaces
 Provocat ad numeros volentem;
 Sed lympha morbos eluere efficax,
 Sed parta dulcis, Te medico, •alus,
 Sed muneris solantis aegrum
 Conscia mens, modulatur ultrò

Carmen. Veternum triste fugit retro,
 Fervet renati spiritus ingenî,
 Et sol inassuetùm renidens
 Luce diem meliore vestit.
 Sed unde fulget largior aetheris
 Prospectus? Ut vidisse juvat sacras
 Sedes piorum, quot repertis
 Artibus excoluere vitam!
 NEWTONUS illic plurima cogitans,
 Viroque charus BOYLIUS it comes,
 Et SYDENHAMO juncta magni
 HIPPOCRATIS spatiatur umbra
 Hos tu sequutus, sorte pari doces,
 Quae flamma magno corpore misceat
 Se rerum, et illabens per artus
 Totam agitet foveatque molem
 Hinc suavis halat gratia floribus,
 Plantasque radix prodiga parturit;
 Ususque in humanos, per omnem
 Nata viret medicina campum.
 Sed quanta constat laus, Abies, tibi,
 Ligno salubri! Te positum die
 Natura fausto destinavit
 Stare decus Borealis orae.
 Dilecta silvae filia, turgidis
 Seu laeta velis, montis et ardui
 Nivale contemnens cacumen
 Fluctibus imperiosa surgis;

Trunco cadenti seu pretium arrogas,
 Et praeparato membra dari rogo
 Urenda nil moerens, ab ipsis
 Ducis opes medicata flammis.
 Liquente torrens en! pice turbidus
 Erumpit; undam rivus agit niger,
 Secumque cursu concitato
 Fert gravidas oleo favillas.
 Mox arboris Tu proditor intimae,
 Attemperatâ ritè sagax aquâ,
 Ostendis interpres, liquorum
 Quid valeat sociatus amnis;
 Queis lympha praegnans particulis micet,
 Quae caerulo vis insita poculo,
 Imbuta fumis, sedet ignes
 Ignea praetereunte succo.
 Notam medelam da, puer, ocius
 Hoc fonte manans certa fluit salus:
 Beatus hinc, uvas nitentes,
 Galle, tibi minùs invidebo.
 Jam, jam aestuantes frigus amabile
 Venas pererrat flammaque mox calet
 Mollis vicissim, spirituque
 Aethereo recreat Medullas.
 Formas medendi, mille vafer modis,
 Tentet latentes Chêmicus artifex:
 Sin arte Naturae, Tuâque
 Porrigitur Medicina simplex.

Cohors recedit torrida febrium;
 Recline sensim se caput erigit,
 Languore pulso; defluitque
 Articulis inimicus humor.
 Durare nimbos sic ratis impotens,
 Quassata vento, et saucia vermibus,
 Secura si, portu occupato,
 Induerit piceos amictus;
 Relapsa in aequor fert latus arduum,
 Fiditque costis nauta tenacibus;
 Impune; nec circum furentes
 Uncta Ratis metuit Procellas.

 FARTHER THOUGHTS ON TAR-WATER. [image "img130.jpg" file=Image00129.jpg] 

A S THE MANY Experiments that are daily made of the Virtues of Tar-Water, furnish new Discoveries and Reflexions, some of these I have thrown together, and offer to the Public in hopes they may prove useful.

It is a frequent Complaint, that Tar-Water is made of bad Tar, being of a reddish Colour, sweetish or disagreeably insipid. But though the Dregs of Tar are often foul, and make foul Tar-Water, and though Tar already used is often made use of by unfair Dealers a second, if not a third Time, which produceth a vile Potion, void of the genuine Flavour and Virtue of Tar-Water. Yet I apprehend these Defects may sometimes be ascribed, rather to the Vessel wherein the Tar-Water is made, than to the Tar itself.

Tar-Water being made in an earthen Vessel unglazed, or that hath lost Part of its Glazing, may extract (as it is a strong Menstruum) from the Clay, a fade Sweetishness, offensive to the Palate. It should seem therefore that the best Way of making Tar-Water is in a Stone Jug, or earthen Vessel throughout well glazed, and, as it will not fail to extract a Tincture from any metallic Vessel, it should be warmed in a well glazed Pipkin, rather than a Sauce-pan.

By increasing the Proportion of Tar to the Water, and by stirring it longer, Tar-Water may be made strong enough for a Spoonful to impregnate a large Glass, a Thing very useful on a Road.

Those who in chronical Disorders, or as a Preservative, have for a long time drunk Tar-Water, must in acute Cases drink the more.

Tar-Water must be drunk warm in Agues, Small-pox, Measles and Fevers, in Colics and Disorders of the Bowels, in Gout also, and Rheumatism, in most other Ailments cold or warm, at the Choice of the Patient.

In Fevers the Patient cannot begin too soon, or drink too much. By undoubted Experience it is found to cool the hot, and warm the cold, and to be a most successful Medicine in Fevers, notwithstanding its great Virtue in Palsies and Dropsies.

When not long since an Inflammation attacked the Throat, Breast, and Lungs of Children, and became general in my Neighbourhood, Numbers were recovered by the Use of Tar-Water, nor did I hear that any miscarried who used it, though many perished who did not.

Nor is it a Medicine less proper and efficacious in old Age. At the same time that this inflammatory Distemper raged among the Children, a Woman in her sixty-eighth Year, from violent Cold was seized at once with Ague, Colic, and Jaundice, of all which Maladies she was cured in a Fortnight, by drinking three Pints of warm Tar-water every Day. Numberless such Instances daily occur, which shew it to be a safe and efficacious Medicine both for old and young.

Evacuations by Sweat, which usually render Patients very weak and dispirited, have not the same bad Effects when produced by Tar-Water, which I have frequently known to give high Spirits in all the Stages of a Fever, and under the lowest Regimen, therefore old People and weak Persons, who cannot well bear common Evacuations, are best cured by Tar-Water, which in some Sort seemeth to renew those who are worn out with Age and Infirmities.

Tar-Water is of singular Use in strengthening the Stomach and Bowels, and agrees particularly well with Infants, taken either by themselves or by the Nurse, and best by both. Though as it throws the ill Humours out into the Surface of the Skin, it may render them for a Time, perhaps, unseemly with Eruptions, but withal healthy and lively. And I will venture to say, that it lays in them the Principles of a good Constitution for the rest of their Lives.

Nor is it only useful to the Bodies of Infants, it hath also a good Effect on their Minds, as those who drink it are observed to be remarkably forward and sprightly. Even the most heavy, lumpish, and unpromising Infants, appear to be much improved by it. A Child there is in my Neighbourhood, of fine Parts, who at first seemed stupid and an Idiot, but, by constant Use of Tar-Water, grew lively and observing, and is now noted for Understanding beyond others of the same Age.

Infants are easily brought to take it by Spoon, and even grow to a Liking of it, and as their Disorders arise chiefly from Indigestion, they receive the greatest Benefit from a Medicine so well calculated to strengthen the Intestines, and preserve them from Fits. In a word, if it were the common Practice to accustom Infants from the Beginning to take Tar-Water, this would greatly conduce to the Health both of their Minds and Bodies. There is, I am verily persuaded, no one Thing in the power of Art or Nature, that would so generally and effectually contribute to repair the Constitutions of our Gentry and Nobility, by strengthning the Children, and casting off in their Infancy those Impurities and Taints, which they often bring into the World.

An Infant may take one Quarter of a Pint in the Day, warm, by Spoonfuls; less may do good, and there is no fear of Excess. When I consider the private Woe of Families, as well as the public Loss occasioned by the Death of such an incredible Number of Infants, under two Years of Age, I cannot but insist on recommending Tar-Water, both as a Remedy and Preservative in that tender Age, which cannot bear the common Treatment and Methods of Physic, or with safety take those Drugs which are fitter for grown Persons.

Another Reason which recommends Tar-Water, particularly to Infants and Children, is the great Security it brings against the Small-pox, to those that drink it, who are observed, either never to take that Distemper, or to have it in the gentlest Manner.

There is no Distemper more contagious and destructive than the Small-pox, or more generally dreaded, attended with worse Symptoms, or that leaves behind it worse Effects; I observe at the same time, that Tar-Water is in no other Case a more safe and sure Remedy than in this; of which Captain Drape’s Certificate, sworn to before the Mayor of Liverpool, in the presence of several principal Persons of that Town, is a most evident Proof.

That one hundred and seventy Persons, seized at once with the Small-pox, deprived of all Conveniencies, and in the worst Circumstances of a narrow Ship and hot Climate, should all recover by the single Medicine of Tar-Water, except one who would not drink it, is a matter of Fact, so plain and convincing, and so well attested, as to leave no Doubt in Minds free from Prepossession, about the Usefulness and Efficacy of Tar-Water in the Small-pox; a Point I had been before sufficiently convinced of, by many Instances in my own Neighbourhood.

It hath been surmised by some celebrated Physicians, that one Day a Specific may be discovered for the peculiar Venom of the Small-pox. There seems to be some Reason for thinking that Tar-Water is such a Specific. I say this on good Grounds, having by many Experiments observed its Virtue in curing, as well as in preventing, that cruel Distemper; during the whole Course of which, it is to be drank warm; a moderate Glass (about Half a Pint) every Hour, in common Cases, may suffice, in bad Cases more may be given; there is no Fear of Excess.

Those who endeavour to discredit this cooling Cordial, and salutary Medicine, as an Inflamer of the Blood, do very consistently decry its Use in the Small-pox; but there can be nothing more clear, full, and satisfactory than Captain Drape’s Affidavit, to convince reasonable People of the great and surprising Efficacy of Tar-Water, in the Cure of the Small-pox; and consequently of the groundlesness of that Report, which ascribes a heating or inflaming Quality to it. And yet that groundless Report hath hindred many from reaping the Benefit they might otherwise have done, from the Use of this Water, which is of excellent Virtue in all kinds of inflammatory Disorders, Fevers, Quinsies, Pleurisies, and such like of the hot and inflamed Kind, whereof the Public as well as myself have known a Multitude of Examples.

I ask whether the Fact sworn before the Magistrates of Liverpool, be not a sufficient Answer to all that is objected, from an inflaming Quality, to Tar-Water. Can any Instance be produced in the whole Materia Medica, or History of Physic, of the Virtue of a Medicine tried on greater Numbers, or under greater Disadvantages, or with greater Success, or more credibly attested. I wish for the common Good of Mankind, that the same Experiment was tried in our Hospitals. Probably the World would soon be relieved from that great and general Terror of the Small-pox.

When I hear of the Devastations made by this Distemper, in great Cities and populous Towns, how many Lives are lost, or (as may be said) thrown away, which might have been in all likelihood easily preserved, by the Use of a Medicine, so cheap and obvious, and in eyery one’s power, it seems Matter of great Concern and Astonishment, and leaves one at a loss to guess at the Motives, that govern human Actions in Affairs of the greatest moment. The Experiment may be easily made, if an equal Number of poor Patients in the Small-pox, were put into two Hospitals at the same Time of the Year, and provided with the same Necessaries of Diet and Lodging, and, for further Care, let the one have a Tub of Tar-Water and an old Woman; the other Hospital, what Attendance and Drugs you please.

In all obstinate Sores and Ulcers, I very much recommend the drinking of Tar-Water, and washing them with a strong Lotion of it, will hasten the Cure.

One of the most painful and dangerous Cases is that of a Woman’s fore Breast. How many poor Creatures after long languishing in Misery, are obliged to suffer the most severe chirurgical Operations, often the cutting off the entire Breast? The Use of Tar-Water in those Cases hath been attended with such Success, that I do earnestly recommend the drinking thereof, both as a Cure and Preservative, as a most effectual Medicine to remove the shooting Pains that precede a Cancer, and also to cure the Cancer itself, without Amputation. Cancerous and sore Breasts are such cruel Cases, occasioned by so many internal Causes, as well as outward Accidents, that it is a necessary Piece of Humanity, to contribute all we can to the Prevention and Cure thereof.

In the King’s Evil, Leprosy, and foulest Cases, Tar-Water cannot be too much recommended. The poor Vagabonds of Ireland, are many of them infected and eaten up with the foul Disease, which with them passeth for a Canker, as they call it. Several Instances of extraordinary Cures have been performed on such Persons, by drinking Tar-Water copiously, for some Weeks or Months together, without Confinement or other Restraint, than that of a regular cool Diet. It is indeed a Specific, both for this and all other Taints and Impurities of the Blood.

An Extract of Siris was made, and Accounts of the Effects of Tar-Water were reprinted in America, in which Continent, as well as in the Islands, much Use hath been made thereof, particularly by those who possess great Numbers of Slaves: Of this I have been informed by Letters, and by Word of Mouth, from Persons belonging to those Parts, who have assured me of the extensive and successful Use of this Medicine in many Cases, and more especially in the most inveterate Kinds of the soul Disease.

I need not say how dearly they purchase Health who obtain it by Salivation, and yet long and severe as that Course is, it is often unsuccessful. There are Instances of such as having passed through it with much Misery and Patience, have been afterwards cured by the simple Use of Tar-Water.

The King’s Evil, so lothsom in its Symptoms and Effects, and withal so difficult, if at all possible, to cure by any other Method, is most surely and easily cured by the Tar-Water, even when the Patient is far gone, even when he derives it from his Ancestors. A Quart per diem for a few Months, I have known to cure the most deplorable and abandoned Cases.

How many wealthy Families, otherwise at their Ease, are corrupted with this Taint in their Blood? How many want Heirs and Husbands, through this odious Malady? A Specific for this Disease alone, would be justly esteemed a most valuable Secret, and the plenty and cheapness of the Medicine ought not in Reason to make it less esteemed.

Salivating, Bleeding, and Purging, are attended with great Hardships and Inconveniencies (even where the Patient recovers) reducing the Strength and Spirits of those who use them, whereas Tar-Water greatly adds to both.

In Fractures and Wounds, a Quart or two drank daily, while the Patient is under Cure, doth very much assuage the Pain and promote his Recovery, both as by its balsamic Nature it disposeth the Parts to heal, and also as it lessens if not totally prevents the Fever.

A poor Boy in Cloyne, having fallen from a Tree, broke both Arm and Wrist. This Accident was concealed or neglected for two or three Weeks; he was then put under the Care of a skilful Bonesetter, who finding the Bones knit and grown crooked, and that it would be necessary to break them again, in order to set them right, and withal considering the hot Season of the Year (in July) he apprehended his Patient’s being thrown into a Fever that might prove fatal. But the Boy being made to drink copiously of Tar-Water, this prevented or lessened the Fever in such sort, that the Bones were broke and set again, and the Cure proceded as easily and speedily as Could be wished.

I have known several Instances of Bruises and Wounds cured by Tar-Water. A Person in my Neighbourhood ran over by a Horse was much bruised, and cured only by drinking Tar-Water. Another knocked down with a Mallet, thereupon thrown into a violent Fever, and given for dead; another wounded with an Axe, so that his Life was thought in danger, were both recovered by the Use of Tar-Water; which, as it is sovereign against Gangrenes and Fevers, hath great Success in all Sorts of Wounds, Contusions, and Fractures, being taken throughout the whole chirurgical Process, along with whatsoever other Methods or Remedies are applied.

Tar-Water operates variously. In Dropsies and Bruises it hath been known to work by purging. The stronger Kind being used as a Wash, is good against ulcerous Eruptions. But in all Cases where the Lotion is used, I believe the drinking of Tar-Water might alone suffice, albeit the Sores may be longer withering and drying away.

There is a certain Age or Time of Life, when the female Sex runs no small Risk from the ceasing of their natural Evacuations. In this Case Tar-Water is a good Preservative, purifying the Blood, and clearing it from that cancerous Tendency, which it is sometimes subject to, about that time. I take it to be a Specific in all cancerous Cases, even the bleeding Cancer, esteemed incurable by Physicians, hath been cured by Tar-Water.

In Diseases peculiar to Women it is of no small Use. Several who had suffered much by Accidents in Child-bearing, have found themselves relieved by Tar-Water. In all Sorts of Tumours, Wens, and praeternatural Excrescences, it hath been found an excellent Remedy.

Many dangerous Symptoms, and even sudden Death are often owing to a Polypus, in some or other of the Vessels, through which the Blood circulates, than which it seems there is no inward Cause of Death or Disease more to be dreaded and guarded against; how many drop down dead in our Streets, or at Table, or in the midst of Business or Diversions? how many are found dead in their Beds?

Tremors, Palpitations of the Heart, irregular Pulses, Apoplexies, sudden Deaths, often proceed from a slow, stagnating, interrupted Motion, or stoppage of the Blood, in its Circulation through the Body; and there seemeth to be no Cause so certainly productive of obstructed Circulation, as the Polypus, a Case, perhaps, much more frequent than is commonly imagined. Morgagni, the celebrated Professor at Padua, and most eminent Anatomist, who was supposed to have dissected more human Bodies than any Man living, assured me, above thirty Years ago, that in the far greater Part of such Bodies, he found Polypuses, if not in the Ventricles of the Heart or larger Vessels, yet in some other Vessel or Cavity; to which he attributes many Disorders, and which he supposed to be formed by the obstructed Motion of the Blood. To prevent this, he dissuaded from all tight Ligatures, especially in Sleep, unbuttoning the Neck and Wrist-bands of his Shirt every Night, a Practice he had learned (as he said) from his Master, the famous Malpighi.

When the Circulation is once quite stopped, nothing can restore it, which would be the same thing as restoring a dead Man to Life, and in Proportion, as the Circulation of the Blood is obstructed, the Body is disordered. Total Obstruction is Death; partial Obstruction is Disease. The Polypus therefore is always hurtful, if not mortal. It is, indeed, matter of serious Reflexion, that we may probably carry about with us a Principle of Death, always at work within, and of a Nature so violent and sudden in its Effects, so hard to come at, and so difficult to subdue.

It may well be thought at first View, a vain Undertaking, to attempt to dissolve a fleshy or membranous Substance, so latent and inaccessible, by common Means or Medicines. But, as Tar-Water hath been undoubtedly known to dissolve and disperse Wens, and other fleshy or membranous Tumours, in the outward Parts of the Body, having been drank and circulated with the Blood, it should seem by a Parity of Reason, that it may also dissolve and put an End to those Concretions that are formed in the Ventricles of the Heart or Blood Vessels, and so remove one great Cause of Apoplexies and sudden Death; and what cures may prevent. I have been the longer on this Subject, for the sake of many who lead sickly Lives, as well as several who are snatched away by untimely Death.

Universally, in all Cases where other Methods fail, I could wish this of Tar-Water was tried. It hath been sometimes known, that the most inveterate Head-aches, and other nervous Disorders, that would yield to no other Medicine, have been cured by a Course of Tar-Water, regularly and constantly pursued.

Wheresoever pure Blood or Plenty of Spirits are wanting, it may be concluded from manifold Experience, that Tar-Water is of singular Benefit. Several Persons have acknowledged themselves to be much fitter to go through Business or Study from the Use of it.

Nor is it only medicinal to human Kind: it is also of no small use in the Curing of brute Animals. It hath been tried on several Kinds, particularly with great Success in the late epidemical Distemper of our Horses. And I have been credibly informed, that being drank in plenty, it hath recovered even a glandered Horse, that was thought incurable.

And as it is of such extensive use, both to Man and Beast, it should seem, that a Tub of Tar-Water constantly supplied in a Market-Town, would serve, in some sort, for an Hospital. Many other Drugs are not easily got, this is every where plenty and cheap; many are of a doubtful Nature, this of known Innocence; others soon perish, this lasts for Years, and is not the worse for keeping. This, in short, is a Medicine for the common People, being a safe and cheap Remedy; for such as cannot afford to be long sick, or to make use of costly Medicines.

A Patient who drinks Tar-Water, must not be alarmed at Pustules or Eruptions in the Skin; these are good Symptoms, and shew the Impurities of the Blood to be cast out. It is also not amiss to observe, that, as Tar-Water by its active Qualities, doth stir the Humours, entering the minutest Capillaries, and dislodging Obstructions, it may happen that this working shall sometimes be felt in the Limbs, or discharge itself in a Fit of the Gout, which, however disagreeable, proves salutary.

I am credibly informed of several strange Conveyances, which Tar-Water hath found out, whereby to discharge Impurities from the human Constitution. A Person who had been in a bad state of Health above twenty Years, upon a Course of Tar-Water was thrown into a most extraordinary Fit of an Ague, and from that time recovered a good State of Health. An old Gentleman in the County of Cork, who for a long time had been a Valetudinarian, afflicted with many Infirmities, being advised to drink Tar-Water, found himself relieved, but it produced and soon cured a Pthiriasis or lousy Distemper, in which the putrid Humours having discharged themselves, left him quite sound and healthy.

In a Course of Tar-Water, if any Disorder happens from some other Cause, as from Cold, from the use of strong Liquors, from a Surfeit, or such like Accident, it would not be fair to impute it to Tar-Water; and yet this hath been sometimes done.

The Effects of Vomiting occasioned by Tar-Water are not to be apprehended. Some are discouraged from drinking because their Stomachs cannot bear it. But when it takes a turn towards working upwards, Nature, by that very way, hath been often known to carry on the Cure. A worthy Gentleman, Member of Parliament, came into my Neighbourhood, in the Autumn of the Year 1750; he was cachectic and extremely reduced, so that his Friends thought him near his End. Upon his entering into a Course of Tar-Water, it produced a prodigious Vomiting, which weakened him much for the present; but persisting to continue the Use thereof for about two Months, he was restored to his Health, Strength and Spirits.

Tar-Water is very diuretic, thereby preventing Stone and Gravel, and carrying off by Urine, those Salts that might otherwise occasion Fevers, Rheumatisms, Dropsies, Head-aches, and many other Disorders, if retained in the Blood. Hence, some have apprehended a Diabetes, from the continued Use thereof, but it is so far from causing a Diabetes, that it hath been known to cure that Disorder.

The Constitution of a Patient sometimes requireth during a Course of Tar-Water, that he take Water and Honey, also rosted Apples, stewed Prunes and other Diet of an opening Kind. A Hint of this is sufficient. If the Reader now and then meets with some Remarks, contained in my former Writings on this Subject, he may be pleased to consider, I had rather repeat than forget what I think useful to be known.

Some, endeavouring to discourage the Use of Tar-Water in England, have given out that it may indeed be serviceable in Ireland, where People live on such low Diet as sour Milk and Potatoes, but it cannot be of the same Service in England, where Men are accustomed to a more liberal and hearty Food; and indeed it must be owned, that the Peasants in this Island, live but poorly, but no People in Europe live better (in the Sense of Eating and Drinking) than our Gentry and Citizens; and from these the Instances of Cures by Tar-Water have been chiefly taken. Those who would confine its Use to the moist Air and poor Diet of Ireland, may be assured that all over Europe, in France, and Germany, Italy, Portugal, and Holland, Tar-Water works the same Effect. In both North and South, in West and East-Indies, it hath been used and continues to be used with great Success. It hath reached all our Colonies both on the Continent and the Islands, and many Barrels of Tar-Water have been sent from Amsterdam to Batavia; of all which I have had authentic Accounts. But its Use is no where more conspicuous than at Sea, in curing that Plague of sea-faring Persons, the Scurvy, as was found in the late Attempt to discover a north-west Passage; and (as I doubt not) will be found as oft as it is tried. Every Ship in his Majesty’s Navy should always have a Vessel of Tar-Water upon Deck, for the Use of the Sailors, both in the Scurvy and other Maladies.

It is indeed a Medicine equally calculated for all Climates, for Sea and Land, for rich and poor, high and low Livers; being, as hath been elsewhere mentioned, a Cordial which doth not heat; a peculiar Privilege this, and of excellent Use. That it is a Cordial, is manifest from its cheering and enlivening Quality, and that it is not heating, is as manifest, from its singular Use in all Cases where the Blood is inflamed. As this Medicine imparts a genial friendly Warmth, suited to the human Constitution, those who pass through a Course of Tar-Water, would do well not to increase such friendly Warmth to an inflaming Heat, by a wrong Regimen of high-seasoned Food and strong Liquors, which are not wanted by the Drinkers of Tar-Water. There is a certain Degree of Heat necessary to the Well-being and Life of Man. More than this will be uneasy, and this Uneasiness indicates a proper Choice of Diet.

I have myself drank above a Gallon of Tar-Water in a few Hours, and been cooled and recovered from a Fever by it. So many Instances of the same Nature I have known, as would make it evident to any unprejudiced Person, that Tar-Water is a cooling Medicine; of which Truth I am as thoroughly convinced, as it is possible to be of any Theorem in Physic or natural Science.

The Unsuccessfulness of other Methods, should rather be an Encouragement than a Bar to the Trial of Tar-Water. A young Lady, Daughter to a worthy Gentleman near Cork, had been long afflicted with a grievous Pain in her Side, and having had the best Advice that could be got, was not relieved until she drank Tar-Water, which quite removed her Pain. Some time after she was again seized with the same Disorder, but returning to the Use of Tar-Water, she grew well and still continues so.

A Woman turned out of the Infirmary at Cork, as incurable, because she would not submit to the cutting off her Leg, came to, Cloyne, where she continued half a Year drinking Tar-Water, and living upon Bread and Milk, by which Course she recovered, and went to Service.

There is at present, while I am writing, a most remarkable Case here at Cloyne, of a poor Soldier in a Dropsy, whose Belly was swoln to a most immoderate Size. He said he had been five Months in an Hospital at Dublin, and having tried other Methods in vain, left it to avoid being tapped. It is a Fortnight since he came to Cloyne, during which Time he hath drunk two Quarts of Tar-Water every Day. His Belly is now quite reduced: his Appetite and Sleep which were gone are restored: he gathers Strength every Moment: and he who was despaired of, seems to be quite out of Danger, both to himself, and to all who see him. It is remarkable, that upon drinking the Tar-Water, he voided several Worms of a very extraordinary Size. This Medicine, which is observed to make some Persons costive, is to hydropic Patients a strong Purge. The present is but one of several Instances, wherein the Dropsy hath been cured by Tar-Water; which I never knew to fail in any Species of that Malady.

I am very credibly informed, that an aged Clergyman of Maidstone in Kent, being reduced to the last Extremity by the Gout in his Stomach, after having tried strong Liquors, and the Methods usual in that Case without Success, betook himself to drink a vast Quantity of warm Tar-Water, still replenishing and letting it take its Course; by which it pleased God to deliver him from the Jaws of Death.

A Gentleman in the County of Clare, near Ennis, had a Fever and Pleurisy, and Inflammation of the Lungs, being at the last Extremity, and given over by two Physicians, he was advised to drink Tar-Water, which he did, eight Quarts. Next Morning one of the Doctors asking at what Hour his Patient died? to his great Surprise found he was recovered. This I had from a Parliament-Man his Neighbour.

When the yellow Fever (as it was called) raged in the West-Indies, the Negroes, with a Tub of Tar-Water in their Quarters, did well: but some of the better Sort miscarried, among whom the Physician himself lay at the Point of Death; but his Brother recovered him by pouring down his Throat in Spoonfuls, some of the same Liquor that recovered the Negroes. The Fact was related to me by a Gentleman who was then in the Island of St. Christopher’s, and knew it to be true.

A Physician himself, not long since assured me, he had cured an Ulcer in the Bladder, by ordering his Patient to drink Tar-Water, when he had tried all other Methods in vain, and thought the Case incurable

But it would be endless to relate the Effects of Tar-Water, in desperate Cases. The Recovery of Mrs. Wilson, Daughter to the late Bishop of London, from a lingering hopeless Disorder, was a noted Case, and attested to by his Lordship. I have even been informed upon good Authority, of two or three Instances, wherein Persons have been recovered by Tar-Water, after they had Rattles in the Throat.

In certain Cases, a smaller Quantity of Tar-Water hath proved ineffectual, when a larger hath perfected the Cure. A Woman of Cloyne got cold after Child-bearing, which occasioned a great Pain in her Thigh, Swelling also and Redness; she continued in great Torment above three Weeks. She then began to drink Tar-Water, but not drinking much she did not perceive much good; and when there was not any Hopes of her Life, she was persuaded to try what a Gallon a Day might do; upon this she grew better, the Swelling broke and ran; no Dressing was used but Tar, and no Washing but Tar-Water, until she was quite recovered.

In Ailments of an odd and untried Nature, it may be worth while to try Tar-Water. In Proof of this many Instances might be given. A Gentleman with a wither’d Arm had it restored by drinking Tar-Water. Another who, by running his Head against a Post, had a Concussion of the Brain attended with very bad Symptoms, recovered by drinking Tar-Water after other Medicines had failed. In my own Neighbourhood, one had lost the use of his Limbs by Poison, another had been bitten by a mad Ass; these Persons drank Tar-Water, and their Cure was attributed to it.

When Tar-Water is copiously drank in Fevers, the great Danger to be guarded against, is an excessive Flow of Spirits, which excites the Patient to talk and divert himself with Company, which may produce a Relapse; of this I have known fatal Effects.

If in a Course of Tar Water the Patient should find himself heated, let him abstain from or lessen his Dose of spirituous and fermented Liquors; for Tar-Water alone never heats.

In chronical Disorders it is not adviseable, to break off a Course of Tar-Water at once, but rather to diminish the Quantity by Degrees.

The Acid alone hath not the medicinal Virtues of Tar-Water. This is agreeable to Reason and Experience, as well as the Opinion of the ablest Judges. Doctor Linden justly observes,

“that when the empyreumatic Oil is entirely separated from the Acid, it is not in any Shape superior to any other distilled Acids or Vinegars whatsoever.”

Treatise on Selter Water, .

That extraordinary Virtues should be contained in Tar-Water, will not seem strange, if we consider that Pitch is nothing else but hardened Tar, or Tar drained of its Moisture; and that an extraordinary Quantity of Light is retained in the Substance of Pitch, as appears from certain Electrical Experiments, which, having been made since, seem not a little to confirm what had before been suggested in Siris.

 Miscellaneous Works [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

 CONTENTSA Letter to the Roman Catholics of the Diocese of Cloyne (1745)

Verses by the Author, on the Prospect of Planting Arts and Learning in America (1750)

Maxims Concerning Patriotism (1750)

 

 A Letter to the Roman Catholics of the Diocese of Cloyne (1745) [image "img130.jpg" file=Image00129.jpg] 

M Y C OUNTRYMEN AND Fellow Subjects,

NOTWITHSTANDING the Differences of our religious Opinions, I should be sorry to be wanting in any Instance of Humanity, or good Neighbourhood to any of you. For which Reason I find myself strongly inclined, at this critical Juncture, to put you in mind, that you have been treated with a truly Christian Lenity under the present Government, that your Persons have been protected, and your Properties secured by equal Laws, and that it would be highly imprudent as well as ungrateful to forfeit these Advantages, by making yourselves Tools to the Ambition of foreign Princes, who fancy it expedient to raise Disturbances among us at present, but as soon as their own Ends are served, will not fail to abandon you, as they have always done.

Is it not evident that your true Interest consists in lying still, and waiting the Event, since Ireland must necessarily follow the Fate of England; and that therefore Prudence and Policy prescribe Quiet to the Roman Catholics of this Kingdom, who, in case a Change of Hands should not succeed, after your attempting to bring it about, must then expect to be on a worse Foot than ever?

But we will suppose it succeeds to your Wish. What then? Would not this undermine even your own Interests and Fortune, which are often interwoven with those of your Neighbours? Would not all those, who have Debts or Money, or other Effects in the Hands of Protestants, be fellow Sufferers with them? Would not all those who hold under the Acts of Settlement, be as liable as Protestants themselves to be dispossessed by the old Proprietors? Or, can even those who are stiled Proprietors, flatter themselves with Hopes of possessing the Estates which they claim, which, in all likelihood, would be given to Favourites, (perhaps to Foreigners) who are near the Person, or who fought the Battles, of their Master.

Under Protestant Governments, those of your Communion, have formerly enjoyed a greater Share of the Lands of this Kingdom, and more ample Privileges. You bore your Part in the Magistracy and the Legislature, and could complain of no Hardships on the Score of your Religion. If these Advantages have been since impaired or lost, was it not by the wrong Measures yourselves took to enlarge them, in several successive Attempts, each of which left you weaker and in a worse Condition than you were before. And this, notwithstanding the vaunted Succours of France and Spain, whose vain Efforts in Conjunction with yours constantly recoiled on your own Heads, even when your Numbers and Circumstances were far more considerable than they now are.

You all know these Things to be true. I appeal to your own Breasts. Dear bought Experience hath taught you, and past Times instruct the present. But perhaps you follow Conscience rather than Interest. Will any Men amongst you pretend to plead Conscience against being quiet, or against paying Allegiance and peaceable Submission to a Protestant Prince, which the first Christians paid even to Heathen, and which those of your Communion, at this Day, pay to Mahometan and to Idolatrous Princes in Turky and China, and which you yourselves have so often professed to pay to our present gracious Sovereign? Conscience is quite out of the Case. And what Man in his Senses would engage in a dangerous Course, to which neither Interest doth invite, nor Conscience oblige him?

I heartily wish, that this Advice may be as well taken, as it is meant, and that you may maturely consider your true Interest, rather than rashly repeat the same Errors which you have so often repented of. So recommending you to the merciful Guidance of Almighty God, I subscribe myself,

Your real Well-wisher, GEORGE CLOYNE.

 Verses by the Author, on the Prospect of Planting Arts and Learning in America (1750) [image "img130.jpg" file=Image00129.jpg] 

THE Muse, disgusted at an Age and Clime,
 Barren of every glorious Theme,
 In distant Lands now waits a better Time,
 Producing Subjects worthy Fame:
 In happy Climes, where from the genial Sun
 And virgin Earth such Scenes ensue,
 The Force of Art by Nature seems outdone,
 And fancied Beauties by the true:
 In happy Climes the Seat of Innocence,
 Where Nature guides and Virtue rules,
 Where Men shall not impose for Truth and Sense
 The Pedantry of Courts and Schools:
 There shall be sung another golden Age,
 The rise of Empire and of Arts,
 The Good and Great inspiring epic Rage,
 The wisest Heads and noblest Hearts.

Not such as Europe breeds in her decay;
 Such as she bred when fresh and young,
 When heav’nly Flame did animate her Clay,
 By future Poets shall be sung.
 Westward the Course of Empire takes its Way;
 The four first Acts already past,
 A fifth shall close the Drama with the Day;
 Time’s noblest Offspring is the last.

 Maxims Concerning Patriotism (1750) [image "img130.jpg" file=Image00129.jpg] 

1. EVERY M AN , by consulting his own Heart, may easily know whether he is or is not a Patriot. But it is not so easy for the Bystanders.

2. Being loud and vehement either against a Court, or for a Court, is no Proof of Patriotism.

3. A Man whose Passion for Money runs high, bids fair for being no Patriot. And he likewise whose Appetite is keen for Power.

4. A Native than a Foreigner, a married Man than a Bachelor, a Believer than an Infidel, have a better Chance for being Patriots.

5. It is impossible an Epicure should be a Patriot.

6. It is impossible a Man who cheats at Cards, or cogs the Dice, should be a Patriot.

7. It is impossible a Man who is false to his Friends and Neighbours should be true to the Public.

8. Every Knave is a thorough Knave. And a thorough Knave is a Knave throughout.

9. A Man who hath no Sense of God or Conscience: would you make such a one Guardian to your Child? if not, why Guardian to the State?

10. A Sot, a Beast, benummed and stupified by Excess, is good for nothing, much less to make a Patriot of.

11. A Fop or Man of Pleasure makes but a scurvy Patriot.

12. A sullen, churlish Man, who loves no Body, will hardly love his Country.

13. The Love of Praise and Esteem may do something: but to make a true Patriot there must be an inward Sense of Duty and Conscience.

14. Honesty (like other Things) grows from its proper Seed, good Principles early laid in the Mind.

15. To be a real Patriot, a Man must consider his Countrymen as God’s Creatures, and himself as accountable for his acting towards them.

16. If pro Aris et Focis be the Life of Patriotism, he who hath no Religion or no Home makes a suspected Patriot.

17. No Man perjures himself for the sake of Conscience.

18. There is an easy Way of reconciling Male-contents. — Sunt verba & voces quibus hunc lenire dolorem, &c.

19. A good Groom will rather stroke than strike.

20. He who saith there is no such Thing as an honest Man, you may be sure is himself a Knave.

21. I have no Opinion of your bumper Patriots. Some eat, some drink, some quarrel for their Country. MODERN PATRIOTISM!

22. Ibycus is a carking, griping, close-fisted Fellow. It is odds that Ibycus is not a Patriot.

23. We are not to think every clamorous Haranguer, or every splenetic Repiner against a Court, is therefore a Patriot.

24. A Patriot is one who heartily wisheth the public Prosperity, and doth not only wish, but also study and endeavour to promote it.

25. Gamesters, Fops, Rakes, Bullies, Stock-jobbers: alas! what Patriots?

26. Some Writers have thought it impossible that Men should be brought to laugh at public Spirit. Yet this hath been done in the present Age.

27. The Patriot aims at his private Good in the Public. The Knave makes the Public subservient to his private Interest. The former considers himself as Part of a Whole, the latter considers himself as the Whole.

28. There is and ever will be a natural Strife between Court and Country. The one will get as much, and the other give as little as it can. How must the Patriot behave himself?

29. He gives the necessary. If he gives more, it is with a View of gaining more to his Country.

30. A Patriot will never barter the public Money for his private Gain.

31. Moral Evil is never to be committed, physical Evil may be incurred, either to avoid a greater Evil, or to procure a good.

32. Where the Heart is right, there is true Patriotism.

33. In your Man of Business, it is easier to meet with a good Head than a good Heart.

34. A Patriot will admit there may be honest Men, and that honest Men may differ.

35. He that always blames or always praises is no Patriot.

36. Were all sweet and sneaking Courtiers, or were all four Malecontents; in either Case the Public would thrive but ill.

37. A Patriot would hardly wish there was no Contrast in the State.

38. Ferments of the worst Kind succeed to perfect Inaction.

39. A Man rages, rails and raves; I suspect his Patriotism.

40. The fawning Courtier and the surly ‘Squire often mean the same Thing, each his own Interest.

41. A Patriot will esteem no Man for being of his Party.

42. The factious Man is apt to mistake himself for a Patriot.

 The Criticism [image "img131.png" file=Image00130.jpg] 

Berkeley attended Trinity College Dublin, where he was elected a Scholar in 1702, earning a bachelor’s degree in 1704 and completing a master’s degree in 1707. He remained at Trinity College after completion of his degree as a tutor and Greek lecturer.

 [image "img132.jpg" file=Image00131.jpg] 

 The Old Library, housing the Book of Kells and other ancient manuscripts

 Extract from ‘A Treatise of Human Nature’ by David Hume [image "img133.jpg" file=Image00132.jpg] 

SECT. VII. OF ABSTRACT IDEAS.

A very material question has been started concerning ABSTRACT or GENERAL ideas, WHETHER THEY BE GENERAL OR PARTICULAR IN THE MIND’S CONCEPTION OF THEM. A great philosopher [Dr. Berkeley.] has disputed the received opinion in this particular, and has asserted, that all general ideas are nothing but particular ones, annexed to a certain term, which gives them a more extensive signification, and makes them recall upon occasion other individuals, which are similar to them. As I look upon this to be one of the greatest and most valuable discoveries that has been made of late years in the republic of letters, I shall here endeavour to confirm it by some arguments, which I hope will put it beyond all doubt and controversy.

It is evident, that in forming most of our general ideas, if not all of them, we abstract from every particular degree of quantity and quality, and that an object ceases not to be of any particular species on account of every small alteration in its extension, duration and other properties. It may therefore be thought, that here is a plain dilemma, that decides concerning the nature of those abstract ideas, which have afforded so much speculation to philosophers. The abstract idea of a man represents men of all sizes and all qualities; which it is concluded it cannot do, but either by representing at once all possible sizes and all possible qualities, or by, representing no particular one at all. Now it having been esteemed absurd to defend the former proposition, as implying an infinite capacity in the mind, it has been commonly inferred in favour of the latter: and our abstract ideas have been supposed to represent no particular degree either of quantity or quality. But that this inference is erroneous, I shall endeavour to make appear, first, by proving, that it is utterly impossible to conceive any quantity or quality, without forming a precise notion of its degrees: And secondly by showing, that though the capacity of the mind be not infinite, yet we can at once form a notion of all possible degrees of quantity and quality, in such a manner at least, as, however imperfect, may serve all the purposes of reflection and conversation.

To begin with the first proposition, THAT THE MIND CANNOT FORM ANY NOTION OF QUANTITY OR QUALITY WITHOUT FORMING A PRECISE NOTION OF DEGREES OF EACH; we may prove this by the three following arguments. First, We have observed, that whatever objects are different are distinguishable, and that whatever objects are distinguishable are separable by the thought and imagination. And we may here add, that these propositions are equally true in the inverse, and that whatever objects are separable are also distinguishable, and that whatever objects are distinguishable, are also different. For how is it possible we can separate what is not distinguishable, or distinguish what is not different? In order therefore to know, whether abstraction implies a separation, we need only consider it in this view, and examine, whether all the circumstances, which we abstract from in our general ideas, be such as are distinguishable and different from those, which we retain as essential parts of them. But it is evident at first sight, that the precise length of a line is not different nor distinguishable from the line itself nor the precise degree of any quality from the quality. These ideas, therefore, admit no more of separation than they do of distinction and difference. They are consequently conjoined with each other in the conception; and the general idea of a line, notwithstanding all our abstractions and refinements, has in its appearance in the mind a precise degree of quantity and quality; however it may be made to represent others, which have different degrees of both.

Secondly, it is contest, that no object can appear to the senses; or in other words, that no impression can become present to the mind, without being determined in its degrees both of quantity and quality. The confusion, in which impressions are sometimes involved, proceeds only from their faintness and unsteadiness, not from any capacity in the mind to receive any impression, which in its real existence has no particular degree nor proportion. That is a contradiction in terms; and even implies the flattest of all contradictions, viz. that it is possible for the same thing both to be and not to be.

Now since all ideas are derived from impressions, and are nothing but copies and representations of them, whatever is true of the one must be acknowledged concerning the other. Impressions and ideas differ only in their strength and vivacity. The foregoing conclusion is not founded on any particular degree of vivacity. It cannot therefore be affected by any variation in that particular. An idea is a weaker impression; and as a strong impression must necessarily have a determinate quantity and quality, the case must be the same with its copy or representative.

Thirdly, it is a principle generally received in philosophy that everything in nature is individual, and that it is utterly absurd to suppose a triangle really existent, which has no precise proportion of sides and angles. If this therefore be absurd in fact and reality, it must also be absurd in idea; since nothing of which we can form a clear and distinct idea is absurd and impossible. But to form the idea of an object, and to form an idea simply, is the same thing; the reference of the idea to an object being an extraneous denomination, of which in itself it bears no mark or character. Now as it is impossible to form an idea of an object, that is possest of quantity and quality, and yet is possest of no precise degree of either; it follows that there is an equal impossibility of forming an idea, that is not limited and confined in both these particulars. Abstract ideas are therefore in themselves individual, however they may become general in their representation. The image in the mind is only that of a particular object, though the application of it in our reasoning be the same, as if it were universal.

This application of ideas beyond their nature proceeds from our collecting all their possible degrees of quantity and quality in such an imperfect manner as may serve the purposes of life, which is the second proposition I proposed to explain. When we have found a resemblance [FN 2.] among several objects, that often occur to us, we apply the same name to all of them, whatever differences we may observe in the degrees of their quantity and quality, and whatever other differences may appear among them. After we have acquired a custom of this kind, the hearing of that name revives the idea of one of these objects, and makes the imagination conceive it with all its particular circumstances and proportions. But as the same word is supposed to have been frequently applied to other individuals, that are different in many respects from that idea, which is immediately present to the mind; the word not being able to revive the idea of all these individuals, but only touches the soul, if I may be allowed so to speak, and revives that custom, which we have acquired by surveying them. They are not really and in fact present to the mind, but only in power; nor do we draw them all out distinctly in the imagination, but keep ourselves in a readiness to survey any of them, as we may be prompted by a present design or necessity. The word raises up an individual idea, along with a certain custom; and that custom produces any other individual one, for which we may have occasion. But as the production of all the ideas, to which the name may be applied, is in most eases impossible, we abridge that work by a more partial consideration, and find but few inconveniences to arise in our reasoning from that abridgment.

For this is one of the most extraordinary circumstances in the present affair, that after the mind has produced an individual idea, upon which we reason, the attendant custom, revived by the general or abstract term, readily suggests any other individual, if by chance we form any reasoning, that agrees not with it. Thus should we mention the word triangle, and form the idea of a particular equilateral one to correspond to it, and should we afterwards assert, that the three angles of a triangle are equal to each other, the other individuals of a scalenum and isosceles, which we overlooked at first, immediately crowd in upon us, and make us perceive the falshood of this proposition, though it be true with relation to that idea, which we had formed. If the mind suggests not always these ideas upon occasion, it proceeds from some imperfection in its faculties; and such a one as is often the source of false reasoning and sophistry. But this is principally the case with those ideas which are abstruse and compounded. On other occasions the custom is more entire, and it is seldom we run into such errors.

Nay so entire is the custom, that the very same idea may be annext to several different words, and may be employed in different reasonings, without any danger of mistake. Thus the idea of an equilateral triangle of an inch perpendicular may serve us in talking of a figure, of a rectilinear figure, of a regular figure, of a triangle, and of an equilateral triangle. All these terms, therefore, are in this case attended with the same idea; but as they are wont to be applied in a greater or lesser compass, they excite their particular habits, and thereby keep the mind in a readiness to observe, that no conclusion be formed contrary to any ideas, which are usually comprized under them.

Before those habits have become entirely perfect, perhaps the mind may not be content with forming the idea of only one individual, but may run over several, in order to make itself comprehend its own meaning, and the compass of that collection, which it intends to express by the general term. That we may fix the meaning of the word, figure, we may revolve in our mind the ideas of circles, squares, parallelograms, triangles of different sizes and proportions, and may not rest on one image or idea. However this may be, it is certain that we form the idea of individuals, whenever we use any general term; that we seldom or never can exhaust these individuals; and that those, which remain, are only represented by means of that habit, by which we recall them, whenever any present occasion requires it. This then is the nature of our abstract ideas and general terms; and it is after this manner we account for the foregoing paradox, THAT SOME IDEAS ARE PARTICULAR IN THEIR NATURE, BUT GENERAL IN THEIR REPRESENTATION. A particular idea becomes general by being annexed to a general term; that is, to a term, which from a customary conjunction has a relation to many other particular ideas, and readily recalls them in the imagination.

The only difficulty, that can remain on this subject, must be with regard to that custom, which so readily recalls every particular idea, for which we may have occasion, and is excited by any word or sound, to which we commonly annex it. The most proper method, in my opinion, of giving a satisfactory explication of this act of the mind, is by producing other instances, which are analogous to it, and other principles, which facilitate its operation. To explain the ultimate causes of our mental actions is impossible. It is sufficient, if we can give any satisfactory account of them from experience and analogy.

First then I observe, that when we mention any great number, such as a thousand, the mind has generally no adequate idea of it, but only a power of producing such an idea, by its adequate idea of the decimals, under which the number is comprehended. This imperfection, however, in our ideas, is never felt in our reasonings; which seems to be an instance parallel to the present one of universal ideas.

Secondly, we have several instances of habits, which may be revived by one single word; as when a person, who has by rote any periods of a discourse, or any number of verses, will be put in remembrance of the whole, which he is at a loss to recollect, by that single word or expression, with which they begin.

Thirdly, I believe every one, who examines the situation of his mind in reasoning will agree with me, that we do not annex distinct and compleat ideas to every term we make use of, and that in talking of government, church, negotiation, conquest, we seldom spread out in our minds all the simple ideas, of which these complex ones are composed. It is however observable, that notwithstanding this imperfection we may avoid talking nonsense on these subjects, and may perceive any repugnance among the ideas, as well as if we had a fall comprehension of them. Thus if instead of saying, that in war the weaker have always recourse to negotiation, we should say, that they have always recourse to conquest, the custom, which we have acquired of attributing certain relations to ideas, still follows the words, and makes us immediately perceive the absurdity of that proposition; in the same manner as one particular idea may serve us in reasoning concerning other ideas, however different from it in several circumstances.

Fourthly, As the individuals are collected together, said placed under a general term with a view to that resemblance, which they bear to each other, this relation must facilitate their entrance in the imagination, and make them be suggested more readily upon occasion. And indeed if we consider the common progress of the thought, either in reflection or conversation, we shall find great reason to be satisfyed in this particular. Nothing is more admirable, than the readiness, with which the imagination suggests its ideas, and presents them at the very instant, in which they become necessary or useful. The fancy runs from one end of the universe to the other in collecting those ideas, which belong to any subject. One would think the whole intellectual world of ideas was at once subjected to our view, and that we did nothing but pick out such as were most proper for our purpose. There may not, however, be any present, beside those very ideas, that are thus collected by a kind of magical faculty in the soul, which, though it be always most perfect in the greatest geniuses, and is properly what we call a genius, is however inexplicable by the utmost efforts of human understanding.

Perhaps these four reflections may help to remove an difficulties to the hypothesis I have proposed concerning abstract ideas, so contrary to that, which has hitherto prevailed in philosophy, But, to tell the truth I place my chief confidence in what I have already proved concerning the impossibility of general ideas, according to the common method of explaining them. We must certainly seek some new system on this head, and there plainly is none beside what I have proposed. If ideas be particular in their nature, and at the same time finite in their number, it is only by custom they can become general in their representation, and contain an infinite number of other ideas under them.

Before I leave this subject I shall employ the same principles to explain that distinction of reason, which is so much talked of, and is so little understood, in the schools. Of this kind is the distinction betwixt figure and the body figured; motion and the body moved. The difficulty of explaining this distinction arises from the principle above explained, that all ideas, which are different, are separable. For it follows from thence, that if the figure be different from the body, their ideas must be separable as well as distinguishable: if they be not different, their ideas can neither be separable nor distinguishable. What then is meant by a distinction of reason, since it implies neither a difference nor separation.

To remove this difficulty we must have recourse to the foregoing explication of abstract ideas. It is certain that the mind would never have dreamed of distinguishing a figure from the body figured, as being in reality neither distinguishable, nor different, nor separable; did it not observe, that even in this simplicity there might be contained many different resemblances and relations. Thus when a globe of white marble is presented, we receive only the impression of a white colour disposed in a certain form, nor are we able to separate and distinguish the colour from the form. But observing afterwards a globe of black marble and a cube of white, and comparing them with our former object, we find two separate resemblances, in what formerly seemed, and really is, perfectly inseparable. After a little more practice of this kind, we begin to distinguish the figure from the colour by a distinction of reason; that is, we consider the figure and colour together, since they are in effect the same and undistinguishable; but still view them in different aspects, according to the resemblances, of which they are susceptible. When we would consider only the figure of the globe of white marble, we form in reality an idea both of the figure and colour, but tacitly carry our eye to its resemblance with the globe of black marble: And in the same manner, when we would consider its colour only, we turn our view to its resemblance with the cube of white marble. By this means we accompany our ideas with a kind of reflection, of which custom renders us, in a great measure, insensible. A person, who desires us to consider the figure of a globe of white marble without thinking on its colour, desires an impossibility but his meaning is, that we should consider the figure and colour together, but still keep in our eye the resemblance to the globe of black marble, or that to any other globe of whatever colour or substance.

 Berkeley by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel [image "img133.jpg" file=Image00132.jpg] 

From ‘Lectures on the History of Philosophy’

Translated by Elizabeth Sanderson Haldane

This idealism, in which all external reality disappears, has before it the standpoint of Locke, and it proceeds directly from him. For we saw that to Locke the source of truth is experience, or Being as perceived. Now since this sensuous Being, as Being, has in it the quality of being for consciousness, we saw that it necessarily came to pass that in Locke’s case some qualities, at least, were so determined that they were not in themselves, but only for another; and that colour, figure, &c., had their ground only in the subject, in his particular organization. This Being-for-another, however, was not by him accepted as the Notion, but as falling within self-consciousness — i.e. self-consciousness not looked on as universal, — not within mind, but within what is opposed to the implicit.

 George Berkeley was born in 1684 at Kilcrin, near Thomastown, in the county of Kilkenny, Ireland: in 1754 he died as an English Bishop. He wrote the “Theory of Vision,” 1709; “A Treatise concerning the principles of human knowledge,” 1710; “Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous,” 1713. In 1784 his collected works were published in London in two quarto volumes.

Berkeley advocated an idealism which came very near to that of Malebranche. As against the metaphysic of the understanding, we have the point of view that all existence and its determinations arise from feeling, and are constituted by self-consciousness. Berkeley’s first and fundamental thought is consequently this: “The Being of whatever is called by us a thing consists alone in its being perceived,” i.e. our determinations are the objects of our knowledge. “All objects of human knowledge are ideas” (so called by Berkeley as by Locke), “which arise either from the impressions of the outward senses, or from perceptions of the inward states and activities of the mind, or finally, they are such as are constituted by means of memory and imagination through their separation and rearrangement. A union of different sensuous feelings appears to us to be a particular thing, e.g.  the feeling of colour, taste, smell, figure, &c.; for by colours, smells, sounds, something of which we have a sensation is always understood.” This is the matter and the object of knowledge; the knower is the percipient “I,” which reveals itself in relation to those feelings in various activities, such as imagination, remembrance, and will.

Berkeley thus indeed acknowledges the distinction between Being-for-self and Other-Being, which in his case, however, itself falls within the “I.” Of the matter on which activity is directed, it is no doubt in regard to one portion allowed that it does not exist outside of mind — that is to say, so far as our thoughts, inward feelings and states, or the operations of our imaginary powers are concerned. But in like manner the manifold sensuous conceptions and feelings can only exist in a mind. Locke certainly distinguished extension and movement, for example, as fundamental qualities, i.e.   as qualities which pertain to the objects in themselves. But Berkeley very pertinently points out inconsistency here from the point of view that great and small, quick and slow, hold good as something relative; thus were extension and movement to be inherent or implicit, they could not be either large or small, quick or slow; that is, they could not be, for these determinations rest in the conception of such qualities. In Berkeley the relation of things to consciousness is alone dealt with, and beyond this relationship they do not in his view come. From this it follows that it is only self-consciousness that possesses them; for a perception which is not in a conceiving mind is nothing: it is a direct contradiction. There can be no substance, he says, which neither conceives nor perceives, and which is yet the substratum of perceptions and conceptions. If it is represented that there is something outside of consciousness which is similar to the conceptions, this is likewise contradictory; a conception can alone be similar to a conception, the idea to the idea alone.

   Thus, while Locke’s ultimate point is abstract substance, Being generally with the real determination of a substratum of accidents, Berkeley declares this substance to be the most incomprehensible assumption of all; but the incomprehensibility does not make this Being into an absolute nullity, nor does it make it in itself incomprehensible. For Berkeley brings forward against the present existence of external objects only the inconceivability of the relation of a Being to mind. This inconceivability, however, is destroyed in the Notion, for the Notion is the negative of things; and this moved Berkeley and Leibnitz to shut up the two sides in themselves. There nevertheless remains a relationship of what is “other” to us; these feelings do not develop from us as Leibnitz represents, but are determined through somewhat else. When Leibnitz speaks of development within the monads, it is nothing but empty talk; for the monads as they follow in succession have no inward connection. Each individual is thus determined through another, and not through us; and it does not matter what this external is, since it remains a contingent. Now in relation to the two sides of Leibnitz which are indifferent to one another, Berkeley says that such an “other” is quite superfluous. Berkeley calls the other the objects; but these, he says, cannot be what we call matter, for spirit and matter cannot come together. But the necessity of conceptions directly contradicts this Being-within-self of the conceiver; for the Being-within-self is the freedom of the conceiver; the latter does not, however, produce the conceptions with freedom; they have for him the form and determinateness of an independent “other.” Berkeley likewise does not accept idealism in the subjective sense, but only in respect that there are spirits which impart themselves (in the other case the subject forms his own conceptions), and consequently that it is God alone who brings to pass such conceptions; thus the imaginations or conceptions which are produced by us with our individual activity remain separate from these others, i.e. from the implicit.

 This conception gives an instance of the difficulties which appear in regard to these questions, and which Berkeley wished to escape from in a quite original way. The inconsistency in this system God has again to make good; He has to bear it all away; to Him the solution of the contradiction is left. In this idealism, in short, the common sensuous view of the universe and the separation of actuality, as also the system of thought, of judgments devoid of Notion, remain exactly as before; plainly nothing in the content is altered but the abstract form that all things are perceptions only. Such idealism deals with the opposition between consciousness and its object merely, and leaves the extension of the conceptions and the antagonisms of the empirical and manifold content quite untouched; and if we ask what then is the truth of these perceptions and conceptions, as we asked formerly of things, no answer is forthcoming. It is pretty much a matter of indifference whether we believe in things or in perceptions, if self-consciousness remains possessed entirely by finalities; it receives the content in the ordinary way, and that content is of the ordinary kind. In its individuality it stumbles about amid the conceptions of an entirely empirical existence, without knowing and understanding anything else about the content: that is to say in this formal idealism reason has no content of its own.

As to what Berkeley further states in respect of the empirical content, where the object of his investigation becomes entirely psychological, it relates in the main to finding out the difference between the sensations of sight and feeling, and to discovering which kind of sensations belong to the one and which to the other. This kind of investigation keeps entirely to the phenomenal, and only therein distinguishes the various sorts of phenomena; or comprehension only reaches as far as to distinctions. The only point of interest is that these investigations have in their course chiefly lighted on space, and a dispute is carried on as to whether we obtain the conception of distance and so on, in short all the conceptions relating to space, through sight or feeling. Space is just this sensuous universal, the universal in individuality itself, which in the empirical consideration of empirical multiplicity invites and leads us on to thought (for it itself is thought), and by it this very sensuous perception and reasoning respecting perception is in its action confused. And since here perception finds an objective thought, it really would be led on to thought or to the possession of a thought, but at the same time it cannot arrive at thought in its completion, since thought or the Notion are not in question, and it clearly cannot come to the consciousness of true reality. Nothing is thought in the form of thought, but only as an external, as something foreign to thought.

   Extract from ‘The World as Will and Idea’ by Arthur Schopenhauer [image "img133.jpg" file=Image00132.jpg] 

Translated by R. B. Haldane and J. Kemp

Chapter I. The Standpoint of Idealism.

In boundless space countless shining spheres, about each of which, and illuminated by its light, there revolve a dozen or so of smaller ones, hot at the core and covered with a hard, cold crust, upon whose surface there have been generated from a mouldy film beings which live and know — this is what presents itself to us in experience as the truth, the real, the world. Yet for a thinking being it is a precarious position to stand upon one of those numberless spheres moving freely in boundless space without knowing whence or whither, and to be only one of innumerable similar beings who throng and press and toil, ceaselessly and quickly arising and passing away in time, which has no beginning and no end; moreover, nothing permanent but matter alone and the recurrence of the same varied organised forms, by means of certain ways and channels which are there once for all. All that empirical science can teach is only the more exact nature and law of these events. But now at last modern philosophy especially through Berkeley and Kant, has called  to mind that all this is first of all merely a phenomenon of the brain , and is affected with such great, so many, and such different subjective conditions that its supposed absolute reality vanishes away, and leaves room for an entirely different scheme of the world, which consists of what lies at the foundation of that phenomenon, i.e. , what is related to it as the thing in itself is related to its mere manifestation.

“The world is my idea” is, like the axioms of Euclid, a proposition which every one must recognise as true as soon as he understands it; although it is not a proposition which every one understands as soon as he hears it. To have brought this proposition to clear consciousness, and in it the problem of the relation of the ideal and the real, i.e. , of the world in the head to the world outside the head, together with the problem of moral freedom, is the distinctive feature of modern philosophy. For it was only after men had spent their labour for thousands of years upon a mere philosophy of the object that they discovered that among the many things that make the world so obscure and doubtful the first and chiefest is this, that however immeasurable and massive it may be, its existence yet hangs by a single thread; and this is the actual consciousness in which it exists. This condition, to which the existence of the world is irrevocably subject, marks it, in spite of all empirical reality, with the stamp of ideality , and therefore of mere phenomenal appearance . Thus on one side at least the world must be recognised as akin to dreams, and indeed to be classified along with them. For the same function of the brain which, during sleep, conjures up before us a completely objective, perceptible, and even palpable world must have just as large a share in the presentation of the objective world of waking life. Both worlds, although different as regards their matter, are yet clearly moulded in the one form. This form is the intellect, the function of the brain. Descartes was probably the first who attained to the  degree of reflection which this fundamental truth demands, and consequently he made it the starting-point of his philosophy, though provisionally only in the form of a sceptical doubt. When he took his cogito ergo sum as alone certain, and provisionally regarded the existence of the world as problematical, he really discovered the essential and only right starting-point of all philosophy, and at the same time its true foundation. This foundation is essentially and inevitably the subjective , the individual consciousness . For this alone is and remains immediate; everything else, whatever it may be, is mediated and conditioned through it, and is therefore dependent upon it. Therefore modern philosophy is rightly regarded as starting with Descartes, who was the father of it. Not long afterwards Berkeley followed the same path further, and attained to idealism proper, i.e. , to the knowledge that the world which is extended in space, thus the objective, material world in general, exists as such simply and solely in our idea , and that it is false, and indeed absurd, to attribute to it, as such , an existence apart from all idea and independent of the knowing subject, thus to assume matter as something absolute and possessed of real being in itself. But his correct and profound insight into this truth really constitutes Berkeley’s whole philosophy; in it he had exhausted himself.

Thus true philosophy must always be idealistic; indeed, it must be so in order to be merely honest. For nothing is more certain than that no man ever came out of himself in order to identify himself directly with things which are different from him; but everything of which he has certain, and therefore immediate, knowledge lies within his own consciousness. Beyond this consciousness, therefore, there can be no immediate certainty; but the first principles of a science must have such certainty. For the empirical standpoint of the other sciences it is quite right to assume the objective world as something absolutely given; but not so for the standpoint of philosophy,  which has to go back to what is first and original. Only consciousness is immediately given; therefore the basis of philosophy is limited to facts of consciousness, i.e. , it is essentially idealistic . Realism which commends itself to the crude understanding, by the appearance which it assumes of being matter-of-fact, really starts from an arbitrary assumption, and is therefore an empty castle in the air, for it ignores or denies the first of all facts, that all that we know lies within consciousness. For that the objective existence of things is conditioned through a subject whose ideas they are, and consequently that the objective world exists only as idea , is no hypothesis, and still less a dogma, or even a paradox set up for the sake of discussion; but it is the most certain and the simplest truth; and the knowledge of it is only made difficult by the fact that it is indeed so simple, and that it is not every one who has sufficient power of reflection to go back to the first elements of his consciousness of things. There can never be an absolute and independent objective existence; indeed such an existence is quite unintelligible. For the objective, as such, always and essentially has its existence in the consciousness of a subject, is thus the idea of this subject, and consequently is conditioned by it, and also by its forms, the forms of the idea, which depend upon the subject and not on the object.

That the objective world would exist even if there existed no conscious being certainly seems at the first blush to be unquestionable, because it can be thought in the abstract, without bringing to light the contradiction which it carries within it. But if we desire to realise this abstract thought, that is, to reduce it to ideas of perception, from which alone (like everything abstract) it can have content and truth, and if accordingly we try to imagine an objective world without a knowing subject , we become aware that what we then imagine is in truth the opposite of what we intended, is in fact nothing else than the process in the intellect of a knowing subject who perceives an  objective world, is thus exactly what we desired to exclude. For this perceptible and real world is clearly a phenomenon of the brain; therefore there lies a contradiction in the assumption that as such it ought also to exist independently of all brains.

The principal objection to the inevitable and essential ideality of all objects , the objection which, distinctly or indistinctly, arises in every one, is certainly this: My own person also is an object for some one else, is thus his idea, and yet I know certainly that I would continue to exist even if he no longer perceived me. But all other objects also stand in the same relation to his intellect as I do; consequently they also would continue to exist without being perceived by him. The answer to this is: That other being as whose object I now regard my person is not absolutely the subject , but primarily is a knowing individual. Therefore, if he no longer existed, nay, even if there existed no other conscious being except myself, yet the subject, in whose idea alone all objects exist, would by no means be on that account abolished. For I myself indeed am this subject, as every conscious being is. Consequently, in the case assumed, my person would certainly continue to exist, but still as idea, in my own knowledge. For even by me myself it is always known only indirectly, never immediately; because all existence as idea is indirect. As object , i.e. , as extended, occupying space and acting, I know my body only in the perception of my brain. This takes place by means of the senses, upon data supplied by which the percipient understanding performs its function of passing from effect to cause, and thereby, in that the eye sees the body or the hands touch it, it constructs that extended figure which presents itself in space as my body. By no means, however, is there directly given me, either in some general feeling of bodily existence or in inner self-consciousness, any extension, form, or activity, which would then coincide with my nature itself, which accordingly, in order so to exist, would require no  other being in whose knowledge it might exhibit itself. On the contrary, that general feeling of bodily existence, and also self-consciousness, exists directly only in relation to the will , that is, as agreeable or disagreeable, and as active in the acts of will, which for external perception exhibit themselves as actions of the body. From this it follows that the existence of my person or body as something extended and acting always presupposes a knowing being distinct from it; because it is essentially an existence in apprehension, in the idea, thus an existence for another . In fact, it is a phenomenon of brain, just as much whether the brain in which it exhibits itself is my own or belongs to another person. In the first case one’s own person divides itself into the knowing and the known, into object and subject, which here as everywhere stand opposed to each other, inseparable and irreconcilable. If, then, my own person, in order to exist as such, always requires a knowing subject, this will at least as much hold good of the other objects for which it was the aim of the above objection to vindicate an existence independent of knowledge and its subject.

However, it is evident that the existence which is conditioned through a knowing subject is only the existence in space, and therefore that of an extended and active being. This alone is always something known, and consequently an existence for another . On the other hand, every being that exists in this way may yet have an existence for itself , for which it requires no subject. Yet this existence for itself cannot be extension and activity (together space-occupation), but is necessarily a being of another kind, that of a thing in itself, which, as such, can never be an object . This, then, would be the answer to the leading objection set forth above, which accordingly does not overthrow the fundamental truth that the objectively given world can only exist in the idea, thus only for a subject.

We have further to remark here that Kant also, so long at least as he remained consistent, can have thought no  objects among his things in themselves. For this follows from the fact that he proves that space, and also time, are mere forms of our perception, which consequently do not belong to things in themselves. What is neither in space nor in time can be no object ; thus the being of things in themselves cannot be objective, but of quite a different kind, a metaphysical being. Consequently that Kantian principle already involves this principle also, that the objective world exists only as idea .

In spite of all that one may say, nothing is so persistently and ever anew misunderstood as Idealism , because it is interpreted as meaning that one denies the empirical reality of the external world. Upon this rests the perpetual return to the appeal to common sense, which appears in many forms and guises; for example, as an “irresistible conviction” in the Scotch school, or as Jacobi’s faith in the reality of the external world. The external world by no means presents itself, as Jacobi declares, upon credit, and is accepted by us upon trust and faith. It presents itself as that which it is, and performs directly what it promises. It must be remembered that Jacobi, who set up such a credit or faith theory of the world, and had the fortune to impose it upon a few professors of philosophy, who for thirty years have philosophised upon the same lines lengthily and at their ease, is the same man who once denounced Lessing as a Spinozist, and afterwards denounced Schelling as an atheist, and who received from the latter the well-known and well-deserved castigation. In keeping with such zeal, when he reduced the external world to a mere matter of faith he only wished to open the door to faith in general, and to prepare belief for that which was afterwards really to be made a matter of belief; as if, in order to introduce a paper currency, one should seek to appeal to the fact that the value of the ringing coin also depends merely on the stamp which the State has set upon it. Jacobi, in his doctrine that the reality of the external world is assumed  upon faith, is just exactly “the transcendental realist who plays the empirical idealist” censured by Kant in the “Critique of Pure Reason,” first edition, .

The true idealism, on the contrary, is not the empirical but the transcendental. This leaves the empirical reality of the world untouched, but holds fast to the fact that every object , thus the empirically real in general, is conditioned in a twofold manner by the subject; in the first place materially or as object generally, because an objective existence is only conceivable as opposed to a subject, and as its idea; in the second place formally , because the mode of existence of an object, i.e. , its being perceived (space, time, causality), proceeds from the subject, is pre-arranged in the subject. Therefore with the simple or Berkeleian idealism, which concerns the object in general, there stands in immediate connection the Kantian idealism, which concerns the specially given mode or manner of objective existence. This proves that the whole material world, with its bodies, which are extended in space and, by means of time, have causal relations to each other, and everything that depends upon this — that all this is not something which is there independently of our head, but essentially presupposes the functions of our brain by means of which and in which alone such an objective arrangement of things is possible. For time, space, and causality, upon which all those real and objective events rest, are themselves nothing more than functions of the brain; so that thus the unchangeable order of things which affords the criterion and clue to their empirical reality itself proceeds only from the brain, and has its credentials from this alone. All this Kant has expounded fully and thoroughly; only he does not speak of the brain, but calls it “the faculty of knowledge.” Indeed he has attempted to prove that when that objective order in time, space, causality, matter, &c., upon which all the events of the real world ultimately rest, is properly considered, it cannot even be conceived as a self-existing order, i.e. , an order of the thing in itself,  or as something absolutely objective and unconditionally given, for if one tries to think this out it leads to contradictions. To accomplish this was the object of the antinomies, but in the appendix to my work I have proved the failure of the attempt. On the other hand, the Kantian doctrine, even without the antinomies, leads to the insight that things and the whole mode of their existence are inseparably bound up with our consciousness of them. Therefore whoever has distinctly grasped this soon attains to the conviction that the assumption that things also exist as such, apart from and independently of our consciousness, is really absurd. That we are so deeply involved in time, space, causality, and the whole regular process of experience which rests upon them, that we (and indeed the brutes) are so perfectly at home, and know how to find our way from the first — this would not be possible if our intellect were one thing and things another, but can only be explained from the fact that both constitute one whole, the intellect itself creates that order, and exists only for things, while they, on the other hand, exist only for it.

But even apart from the deep insight, which only the Kantian philosophy gives, the inadmissibility of the assumption of absolute realism which is so obstinately clung to may be directly shown, or at least made capable of being felt, by the simple exhibition of its meaning in the light of such considerations as the following. According to realism, the world is supposed to exist, as we know it, independently of this knowledge. Let us once, then, remove all percipient beings from it, and leave only unorganised and vegetable nature. Rock, tree, and brook are there, and the blue heaven; sun, moon, and stars light this world, as before; yet certainly in vain, for there is no eye to see it. Let us now in addition place in it a percipient being. Now that world presents itself again in his brain, and repeats itself within it precisely as it was formerly without it. Thus to the first world a second has been added, which, although  completely separated from it, resembles it to a nicety. And now the subjective world of this perception is precisely so constituted in subjective , known space as the objective world in objective , infinite space. But the subjective world has this advantage over the objective, the knowledge that that space, outside there, is infinite; indeed it can also give beforehand most minutely and accurately the whole constitution or necessary properties of all relations which are possible, though not yet actual, in that space, and does not require to examine them. It can tell just as much with regard to the course of time, and also with regard to the relation of cause and effect which governs the changes in that external world. I think all this, when closely considered, turns out absurd enough, and hence leads to the conviction that that absolute objective world outside the head, independent of it and prior to all knowledge, which at first we imagined ourselves to conceive, is really no other than the second, the world which is known subjectively , the world of idea, as which alone we are actually able to conceive it. Thus of its own accord the assumption forces itself upon us, that the world, as we know it, exists also only for our knowledge, therefore in the idea alone, and not a second time outside of it. In accordance, then, with this assumption, the thing in itself, i.e. , that which exists independently of our knowledge and of every knowledge, is to be regarded as something completely different from the idea and all its attributes, thus from objectivity in general. What this is will be the subject of our second book.

On the other hand, the controversy concerning the reality of the external world considered in § 5 of the first  volume rests upon the assumption, which has just been criticised, of an objective and a subjective world both in space , and upon the impossibility which arises in connection with this presupposition of a transition from one to the other, a bridge between the two. Upon this controversy I have still to add the following remarks.

The subjective and the objective do not constitute a continuous whole. That of which we are immediately conscious is bounded by the skin, or rather by the extreme ends of the nerves which proceed from the cerebral system. Beyond this lies a world of which we have no knowledge except through pictures in our head. Now the question is, whether and how far there is a world independent of us which corresponds to these pictures. The relation between the two could only be brought about by means of the law of causality; for this law alone leads from what is given to something quite different from it. But this law itself has first of all to prove its validity. Now it must either be of objective or of subjective origin; but in either case it lies upon one or the other side, and therefore cannot supply the bridge between them. If, as Locke and Hume assume, it is a posteriori , thus drawn from experience, it is of objective origin, and belongs then itself to the external world which is in question. Therefore it cannot attest the reality of this world, for then, according to Locke’s method, causality would be proved from experience, and the reality of experience from causality. If, on the contrary, it is given a priori , as Kant has more correctly taught us, then it is of subjective origin, and in that case it is clear that with it we remain always in the subjective sphere. For all that is actually given empirically in perception is the occurrence of a sensation in the organ of sense; and the assumption that this, even in general, must have a cause rests upon a law which is rooted in the form of our knowledge, i.e. , in the functions of our brain. The origin of this law is therefore just as subjective as that of the sensation itself. The cause of the  given sensation, which is assumed in consequence of this law, presents itself at once in perception as an object , which has space and time for the form of its manifestation. But these forms themselves again are entirely of subjective origin; for they are the mode or method of our faculty of perception. That transition from the sensation to its cause which, as I have repeatedly pointed out, lies at the foundation of all sense-perception is certainly sufficient to give us the empirical presence in space and time of an empirical object, and is therefore quite enough for the practical purposes of life; but it is by no means sufficient to afford us any conclusion as to the existence and real nature, or rather as to the intelligible substratum, of the phenomena which in this way arise for us. Thus that on the occasion of certain sensations occurring in my organs of sense there arises in my head a perception of things which are extended in space, permanent in time, and causally efficient by no means justifies the assumption that they also exist in themselves, i.e. , that such things with these properties belonging absolutely to themselves exist independently and outside of my head. This is the true outcome of the Kantian philosophy. It coincides with an earlier result of Locke’s, which is just as true, but far more easily understood. For although, as Locke’s doctrine permits, external things are absolutely assumed as the causes of sensations, yet there can be no resemblance between the sensation in which the effect consists and the objective nature of the cause which occasions it. For the sensation, as organic function, is primarily determined by the highly artificial and complicated nature of our organs of sense. It is therefore merely excited by the external cause, but is then perfected entirely in accordance with its own laws, and thus is completely subjective. Locke’s philosophy was the criticism of the functions of sense; Kant has given us the criticism of the functions of the brain. But to all this we have yet to add the Berkeleian result, which has been revised by me,  that every object, whatever its origin may be, is as object already conditioned by the subject, is in fact merely its idea . The aim of realism is indeed the object without subject; but it is impossible even to conceive such an object distinctly.

From this whole inquiry it follows with certainty and distinctness that it is absolutely impossible to attain to the comprehension of the inner nature of things upon the path of mere knowledge and perception . For knowledge always comes to things from without, and therefore must for ever remain outside them. This end would only be reached if we could find ourselves in the inside of things, so that their inner nature would be known to us directly. Now, how far this is actually the case is considered in my second book. But so long as we are concerned, as in this first book, with objective comprehension, that is, with knowledge , the world is, and remains for us, a mere idea , for here there is no possible path by which we can cross over to it.

But, besides this, a firm grasp of the point of view of idealism is a necessary counterpoise to that of materialism . The controversy concerning the real and the ideal may also be regarded as a controversy concerning the existence of matter . For it is the reality or ideality of this that is ultimately in question. Does matter, as such, exist only in our idea , or does it also exist independently of it? In the latter case it would be the thing in itself; and whoever assumes a self-existent matter must also, consistently, be a materialist, i.e. , he must make matter the principle of explanation of all things. Whoever, on the contrary, denies its existence as a thing in itself is eo ipso an idealist. Among the moderns only Locke has definitely and without ambiguity asserted the reality of matter; and therefore his teaching led, in the hands of Condillac, to the sensualism and materialism of the French. Only Berkeley directly and without modifications denies matter. The complete antithesis is thus that of idealism and materialism, represented in its extremes by Berkeley and the  French materialists (Hollbach). Fichte is not to be mentioned here: he deserves no place among true philosophers; among those elect of mankind who, with deep earnestness, seek not their own things but the truth , and therefore must not be confused with those who, under this pretence, have only their personal advancement in view. Fichte is the father of the sham philosophy , of the disingenuous method which, through ambiguity in the use of words, incomprehensible language, and sophistry, seeks to deceive, and tries, moreover, to make a deep impression by assuming an air of importance — in a word, the philosophy which seeks to bamboozle and humbug those who desire to learn. After this method had been applied by Schelling, it reached its height, as every one knows, in Hegel, in whose hands it developed into pure charlatanism. But whoever even names this Fichte seriously along with Kant shows that he has not even a dim notion of what Kant is. On the other hand, materialism also has its warrant. It is just as true that the knower is a product of matter as that matter is merely the idea of the knower; but it is also just as one-sided. For materialism is the philosophy of the subject that forgets to take account of itself. And, accordingly, as against the assertion that I am a mere modification of matter, this must be insisted upon, that all matter exists merely in my idea; and it is no less right. A knowledge, as yet obscure, of these relations seems to have been the origin of the saying of Plato, “ὑλη αληθινον ψευδος” (materia mendacium verax ).

Realism necessarily leads, as we have said, to materialism . For if empirical perception gives us things in themselves, as they exist independently of our knowledge, experience also gives us the order of things in themselves, i.e. , the true and sole order of the world. But this path leads to the assumption that there is only one thing in itself, matter; of which all other things are modifications; for the course of nature is here the absolute and only order of the world. To escape from these consequences, while  realism remained in undisputed acceptance, spiritualism was set up, that is, the assumption of a second substance outside of and along with matter, an immaterial substance . This dualism and spiritualism, equally unsupported by experience and destitute of proof and comprehensibility, was denied by Spinoza, and was proved to be false by Kant, who dared to do so because at the same time he established idealism in its rights. For with realism materialism, as the counterpoise of which spiritualism had been devised, falls to the ground of its own accord, because then matter and the course of nature become mere phenomena, which are conditioned by the intellect, as they have their existence only in its idea . Accordingly spiritualism is the delusive and false safeguard against materialism, while the real and true safeguard is idealism, which, by making the objective world dependent upon us, gives the needed counterpoise to the position of dependence upon the objective world, in which we are placed by the course of nature. The world from which I part at death is, in another aspect, only my idea. The centre of gravity of existence falls back into the subject . What is proved is not, as in spiritualism, that the knower is independent of matter, but that all matter is dependent on him. Certainly this is not so easy to comprehend or so convenient to handle as spiritualism, with its two substances; but χαλεπα τα καλα.

In opposition to the subjective starting-point, “the world is my idea,” there certainly stands provisionally with equal justification the objective starting-point, “the world is matter,” or “matter alone is absolute” (since it alone is not subject to becoming and passing away), or “all that exists is matter.” This is the starting-point of Democritus, Leucippus, and Epicurus. But, more closely considered, the departure from the subject retains a real advantage; it has the start by one perfectly justified step. For consciousness alone is the immediate : but we pass over this if we go at once to matter and make it our starting-point.  On the other hand, it would certainly be possible to construct the world from matter and its properties if these were correctly, completely, and exhaustively known to us (which is far from being the case as yet). For all that has come to be has become actual through causes , which could operate and come together only by virtue of the fundamental forces of matter . But these must be perfectly capable of demonstration at least objectively, even if subjectively we never attain to a knowledge of them. But such an explanation and construction of the world would not only have at its foundation the assumption of an existence in itself of matter (while in truth it is conditioned by the subject), but it would also be obliged to allow all the original qualities in this matter to pass current and remain absolutely inexplicable, thus as qualitates occultæ . (Cf. § 26, 27 of the first volume.) For matter is only the vehicle of these forces, just as the law of causality is only the arranger of their manifestations. Therefore such an explanation of the world would always remain merely relative and conditioned, properly the work of a physical science , which at every step longed for a metaphysic . On the other hand, there is also something inadequate about the subjective starting-point and first principle, “the world is my idea,” partly because it is one-sided, since the world is far more than that (the thing in itself, will), and indeed its existence as idea is to a certain extent only accidental to it; but partly also because it merely expresses the fact that the object is conditioned by the subject, without at the same time saying that the subject, as such, is also conditioned by the object. For the assertion, “the subject would still remain a knowing being if it had no object, i.e. , if it had absolutely no idea,” is just as false as the assertion of the crude understanding, “the world, the object, would still exist, even if there were no subject.” A consciousness without an object is no consciousness. A thinking subject has conceptions for its object; a subject of sense perception has objects with the qualities corresponding  to its organisation. If we rob the subject of all special characteristics and forms of its knowledge, all the properties of the object vanish also, and nothing remains but matter without form and quality , which can just as little occur in experience as a subject without the forms of its knowledge, but which remains opposed to the naked subject as such, as its reflex, which can only disappear along with it. Although materialism pretends to postulate nothing more than this matter — for instance, atoms — yet it unconsciously adds to it not only the subject, but also space, time, and causality, which depend upon special properties of the subject.

The world as idea, the objective world, has thus, as it were, two poles; the simple knowing subject without the forms of its knowledge, and crude matter without form and quality. Both are completely unknowable; the subject because it is that which knows, matter because without form and quality it cannot be perceived. Yet both are fundamental conditions of all empirical perception. Thus the knowing subject, merely as such, which is a presupposition of all experience, stands opposed as its pure counterpart to the crude, formless, and utterly dead (i.e. , will-less) matter, which is given in no experience, but which all experience presupposes. This subject is not in time, for time is only the more definite form of all its ideas. The matter which stands over against it is, like it, eternal and imperishable, endures through all time, but is, properly speaking, not extended, for extension gives form, thus it has no spatial properties. Everything else is involved in a constant process of coming into being and passing away, while these two represent the unmoved poles of the world as idea. The permanence of matter may therefore be regarded as the reflex of the timelessness of the pure subject, which is simply assumed as the condition of all objects. Both belong to phenomena, not to the thing in itself, but they are the framework of the phenomenon. Both are arrived  at only by abstraction, and are not given immediately, pure and for themselves.

The fundamental error of all systems is the failure to understand this truth. Intelligence and matter are correlates , i.e. , the one exists only for the other, both stand and fall together, the one is only the reflex of the other. Indeed they are really one and the same thing regarded from two opposite points of view; and this one thing, I am here anticipating, is the manifestation of the will, or the thing in itself. Consequently both are secondary, and therefore the origin of the world is not to be sought in either of the two. But because of their failure to understand this, all systems (with the exception perhaps of that of Spinoza) sought the origin of all things in one of these two. Some of them, on the one hand, suppose an intelligence, νους, as the absolutely First and δημιουργος, and accordingly in this allow an idea of things and of the world to precede their actual existence; consequently they distinguish the real world from the world of idea; which is false. Therefore matter now appears as that through which the two are distinguished, as the thing in itself. Hence arises the difficulty of procuring this matter, the ὑλη, so that when added to the mere idea of the world it may impart reality to it. That original intelligence must now either find it ready to hand, in which case it is just as much an absolute First as that intelligence itself, and we have then two absolute Firsts, the δημιουργος and the ὑλη; or the absolute intelligence must create this matter out of nothing, an assumption which our understanding refuses to make, for it is only capable of comprehending changes in matter, and not that matter itself should come into being or pass away. This rests ultimately upon the fact that matter is essential, the correlate of the understanding. On the other hand, the systems opposed to these, which make the other of the two correlates, that is, matter, the absolute First, suppose a matter which would exist without being perceived; and it has been made sufficiently clear by all that  has been said above that this is a direct contradiction, for by the existence of matter we always mean simply its being perceived. But here they encounter the difficulty of bringing to this matter, which alone is their absolute First, the intelligence which is finally to experience it. I have shown this weak side of materialism in § 7 of the first volume. For me, on the contrary, matter and intelligence are inseparable correlates, which exist only for each other, and therefore merely relatively. Matter is the idea of the intelligence; the intelligence is that in whose idea alone matter exists. The two together constitute the world as idea , which is just Kant’s phenomenon , and consequently something secondary. What is primary is that which manifests itself, the thing in itself , which we shall afterwards discover is the will. This is in itself neither the perceiver nor the perceived, but is entirely different from the mode of its manifestation.

As a forcible conclusion of this important and difficult discussion I shall now personify these two abstractions, and present them in a dialogue after the fashion of Prabodha Tschandro Daya. It may also be compared with a similar dialogue between matter and form in the “Duodecim Principia Philosophiæ ” of Raymund Lully, c. 1 and 2.

The Subject.

I am, and besides me there is nothing. For the world is my idea.

Matter.

Presumptuous delusion! I, I am, and besides me there is nothing, for the world is my fleeting form. Thou art a mere result of a part of this form and altogether accidental.

The Subject.

What insane arrogance! Neither thou nor thy form would exist without me; ye are conditioned by me. Whosoever thinks me away, and believes he can still think  ye there, is involved in gross delusion, for your existence apart from my idea is a direct contradiction, a meaningless form of words. Ye are simply means ye are perceived by me. My idea is the sphere of your existence; therefore I am its first condition.

Matter.

Fortunately the audacity of your assertion will soon be put to silence in reality and not by mere words. Yet a few moments and thou actually art no more. With all thy boasting thou hast sunk into nothing, vanished like a shadow, and shared the fate of all my transitory forms. But I, I remain, unscathed and undiminished, from age to age, through infinite time, and behold unshaken the play of my changing form.

The Subject.

This infinite time through which thou boastest that thou livest, like the infinite space which thou fillest, exists only in my idea. Indeed it is merely the form of my idea which I bear complete in myself, and in which thou exhibitest thyself, which receives thee, and through which thou first of all existest. But the annihilation with which thou threatenest me touches me not; were it so, then wouldst thou also be annihilated. It merely affects the individual, which for a short time is my vehicle, and which, like everything else, is my idea.

Matter.

And if I concede this, and go so far as to regard thy existence, which is yet inseparably linked to that of these fleeting individuals, as something absolute, it yet remains dependent upon mine. For thou art subject only so far as thou hast an object; and this object I am. I am its kernel and content, that which is permanent in it, that which holds it together, and without which it would be as disconnected, as wavering, and unsubstantial as the dreams  and fancies of thy individuals, which have yet borrowed from me even the illusive content they possess.

The Subject.

Thou dost well to refrain from contesting my existence on the ground that it is linked to individuals; for, as inseparably as I am joined to them, thou art joined to thy sister, Form, and hast never appeared without her. No eye hath yet seen either thee or me naked and isolated; for we are both mere abstractions. It is in reality one being that perceives itself and is perceived by itself, but whose real being cannot consist either in perceiving or in being perceived, since these are divided between us two.

Both.

We are, then, inseparably joined together as necessary parts of one whole, which includes us both and exists through us. Only a misunderstanding can oppose us two hostilely to each other, and hence draw the false conclusion that the one contests the existence of the other, with which its own existence stands or falls.

 

This whole, which comprehends both, is the world as idea, or the world of phenomena. When this is taken away there remains only what is purely metaphysical, the thing in itself, which in the second book we shall recognise as the will.

 Extract from ‘The Principles of Psychology’ by William James [image "img133.jpg" file=Image00132.jpg] 

‘Abstract’ Ideas.

We have now to pass to a less excusable mistake. There are philosophers who deny that associated things can be broken asunder at all, even provisionally, by the conceiving mind. The opinion known as Nominalism says that we really never frame any conception of the partial elements of an experience, but are compelled, whenever we think it, to think it in its totality, just as it came.

I will be silent of mediæval Nominalism, and begin with Berkeley, who is supposed to have rediscovered the doctrine for himself. His asseverations against ‘abstract ideas’ are among the oftenest quoted passages in philosophic literature.

“It is agreed,” he says, “on all hands that the qualities or modes of things do never really exist each of them apart by itself, and separated from all others, but are mixed, as it were, and blended together, several in the same object. But, we are told, the mind being able to consider each quality singly, or abstracted from those other qualities with which it is united, does by that means frame to itself abstract ideas. . . . After this manner, it is said, we come by the abstract idea of man, or, if you please, humanity, or human nature; wherein it is true there is included color, because there is no man but has some color, but then it can be neither white, nor black, nor any particular color, because there is no one particular color wherein all men partake. So likewise there is included stature, but then it is neither tall stature nor low stature, nor yet middle stature, but something abstracted from all these. And so of the rest. . . . .Whether others have this wonderful faculty of abstracting their ideas, they best can tell: for myself, I find indeed I have a faculty of imagining or representing to myself the ideas of those particular things I have perceived and of variously compounding and dividing them. . . . I can consider the hand, the eye, the nose, each by itself abstracted or separated from the rest of the body. But then, whatever hand or eye I imagine, it must have some particular shape and color. Likewise the idea of man that I frame to myself must be either of a white, or a black, or a tawny, a straight, or a crooked, a tall, or a low, or a middle-sized man. I cannot by any effort of thought conceive the abstract idea above described. And it is equally impossible for me to form the abstract idea of motion distinct from the body moving, and which is neither swift nor slow, curvilinear nor rectilinear; and the like may be said of all other abstract general ideas whatsoever. . . . And there is ground to think most men will acknowledge themselves to be in my case. The generality of men which are simple and illiterate never pretend to abstract notions. It is said they are difficult, and not to be attained without pains and study. . . . Now I would fain know at what time it is men are employed in surmounting that difficulty, and furnishing themselves with those necessary helps for discourse. It cannot be when they are grown up, for then it seems they are not conscious of any such painstaking; it remains therefore to be the business of their childhood. And surely the great and multiplied labor of framing abstract notions will be found a hard task for that tender age. Is it not a hard thing to imagine that a couple of children cannot prate together of their sugar-plums and rattles and the rest of their little trinkets, till they have first tacked together numberless inconsistencies, and so framed in their minds abstract general ideas, and annexed them to every common name they make use of?”

The note, so bravely struck by Berkeley, could not, however, be well sustained in face of the fact patent to every human being that we can mean color without meaning any particular color, and stature without meaning any particular height. James Mill, to be sure, chimes in heroically in the chapter on Classification of his ‘Analysis’; but in his son John the nominalistic voice has grown so weak that, although ‘abstract ideas’ are repudiated as a matter of traditional form, the opinions uttered are really nothing but a conceptualism ashamed to call itself by its own legitimate name. Conceptualism says the mind can conceive any quality or relation it pleases, and mean nothing but it, in isolation from everything else in the world. This is, of course, the doctrine which we have professed. John Mill says:

“The formation of a Concept does not consist in separating the attributes which are said to compose it from all other attributes of the same object, and enabling us to conceive those attributes, disjoined from any others. We neither conceive them, nor think them, nor cognize them in any way, as a thing apart, but solely as forming, in combination with numerous other attributes, the idea of an individual object. But, though meaning them only as part of a larger agglomeration, we have the power of fixing out attention on them, to the neglect of the other attributes with which we think them combined. While the concentration of attention lasts, if it is sufficiently intense, we may be temporarily unconscious of any of the other attributes, and may really, for a brief interval, have nothing present to our mind but the attributes constituent of the concept . . . . General concepts, therefore, we have, properly speaking, none; we have only complex ideas of objects in the concrete: but we are able to attend exclusively to certain parts of the concrete idea: and by that exclusive attention we enable those parts to determine exclusively the course of our thoughts as subsequently called up by association; and are in a condition to carry on a train of meditation or reasoning relating to those parts only, exactly as if we were able to conceive them separately from the rest.”

This is a lovely example of Mill’s way of holding piously to his general statements, but conceding in detail all that their adversaries ask. If there be a better description extant, of a mind in possession of an ‘abstract idea,’ than is contained in the words I have italicized, I am unacquainted with it. The Berkeleyan nominalism thus breaks down.

It is easy to lay bare the false assumption which underlies the whole discussion of the question as hitherto carried on. That assumption is that ideas, in order to know, must be cast in the exact likeness of whatever things they know, and that the only things that can be known are those which ideas can resemble. The error has not been confined to nominalists. Omnis cognito fit per assimilationem cognoscentis et cogniti has been the maxim, more or less explicitly assumed, of writers of every school. Practically it amounts to saying that an idea must be a duplicate edition of what it knows — in other words, that it can only know itself — or, more shortly still, that knowledge in any strict sense of the word, as a self-transcendent function, is impossible.

Now our own blunt statements about the ultimateness of the cognitive relation, and the difference between the ‘object’ of the thought and its mere ‘topic’ or ‘subject of discourse’ (cf. p ff.), are all at variance with any such theory; and we shall find more and more occasion, as we advance in this book, to deny its general truth. All that a state of mind need do, in order to take cognizance of a reality, intend it, or be ‘about’ it, is to lead to a remoter state of mind which either acts upon the reality or resembles it. The only class of thoughts which can with any show of plausibility be said to resemble their objects are sensations. The stuff of which all our other thoughts are composed is symbolic, and a thought attests its pertinency to a topic by simply terminating , sooner or later, in a sensation which resembles the latter.

But Mill and the rest believe that a thought must be what it means, and mean what it is , and that if it be a picture of an entire individual, it cannot mean any part of him to the exclusion of the rest. I say nothing here of the preposterously false descriptive psychology involved in the statement that the only things we can mentally picture are individuals completely determinate in all regards. Chapter XVIII will have something to say on that point, and we can ignore it here. For even if it were true that our images were always of concrete individuals, it would not in the least follow that our meanings were of the same.

The sense of our meaning is an entirely peculiar element of the thought . It is one of those evanescent and ‘transitive’ facts of mind which introspection cannot turn round upon, and isolate and hold up for examination, as an entomologist passes round an insect on a pin. In the (somewhat clumsy) terminology I have used, it pertains to the ‘fringe’ of the subjective state, and is a ‘feeling of tendency,’ whose neural counterpart is undoubtedly a lot of dawning and dying processes too faint and complex to be traced. The geometer, with his one definite figure before him, knows perfectly that his thoughts apply to countless other figures as well, and that although he sees lines of a certain special bigness, direction, color, etc., he means not one of these details. When I use the word man in two different sentences, I may have both times exactly the same sound upon my lips and the same picture in my mental eye, but I may mean, and at the very moment of uttering the word and imagining the picture, know that I mean, two entirely different things. Thus when I say: “What a wonderful man Jones is!” I am perfectly aware that I mean by man to exclude Napoleon Bonaparte or Smith. But when I say: “What a wonderful thing Man is!” I am equally well aware that I mean to in clude not only Jones, but Napoleon and Smith as well. This added consciousness is an absolutely positive sort of feeling, transforming what would otherwise be mere noise or vision into something understood ; and determining the sequel of my thinking, the later words and images, in a perfectly definite way. We saw in Chapter IX that the image per se , the nucleus, is functionally the least important part of the thought. Our doctrine, therefore, of the ‘fringe ’ leads to a perfectly satisfactory decision of the nominalistic and conceptualistic controversy, so far as it touches psychology. We must decide in favor of the conceptualists , and affirm that the power to think things, qualities, relations, or whatever other elements there may be, isolated and abstracted from the total experience in which they appear, is the most indisputable function of our thought.

 The Biographies [image "img134.jpg" file=Image00133.jpg] 

Holywell Street, Oxford — on his retirement in August 1752, Berkeley and his family left Cloyne for Oxford, where he was to spend the last six months of his life. He lived in a house on Holywell Street, believed to be no. 28, now part of a row of buildings owned by Harris Manchester College.

 [image "img135.png" file=Image00134.jpg] 

Portrait of George Berkeley by John Smybert, 1727

 George Berkeley by A. Campbell Fraser [image "img136.jpg" file=Image00135.jpg] 

 CONTENTSI. Early Life (1685-1721).

II. Middle Life (1722-34).

 III. Later Years (1734-53).

 

 I. Early Life (1685-1721). [image "img137.jpg" file=Image00136.jpg] 

T OWARDS THE END of the reign of Charles the Second a certain William Berkeley, according to credible tradition, occupied a cottage attached to the ancient Castle of Dysert, in that part of the county of Kilkenny which is watered by the Nore. Little is known about this William Berkeley except that he was Irish by birth and English by descent. It is said that his father went over to Ireland soon after the Restoration, in the suite of his reputed kinsman, Lord Berkeley of Stratton, when he was Lord Lieutenant. William Berkeley’s wife seems to have been of Irish blood, and in some remote way related to the family of Wolfe, the hero of Quebec. It was in the modest abode in the valley of the Nore that George, the eldest of their six sons, was born, on March 12, 1685.

 There is nothing in the recorded family history of these Dysert Berkeleys that helps to explain the singular personality and career of the eldest son. The parents have left no mark, and make no appearance in any extant records of the family. They probably made their way to the valley of the Nore among families of English connexion who, in the quarter of a century preceding the birth of George Berkeley, were finding settlements in Ireland. The family, as it appears, was not wealthy, but was recognised as of gentle blood. Robert, the fifth son,  became rector of Middleton and vicar-general of Cloyne; and another son, William, held a commission in the army. According to the Register of Trinity College, one of the sons was born “near Thurles,” in 1699, and Thomas, the youngest, was born in Tipperary, in 1703, so that the family may have removed from Dysert after the birth of George. In what can be gleaned of the younger sons, one finds little appearance of sympathy with the religious and philosophical genius of the eldest.

Regarding this famous eldest son in those early days, we have this significant autobiographical fragment in his Commonplace Book : “I was distrustful at eight years old, and consequently by nature disposed for the new doctrines.” In his twelfth year we find the boy in Kilkenny School. The register records his entrance there in the summer of 1696, when he was placed at once in the second class, which seems to imply precocity, for it is almost a solitary instance. He spent the four following years in Kilkenny. The School was in high repute for learned masters and famous pupils; among former pupils were the poet Congreve and Swift, nearly twenty years earlier than George Berkeley; among his school-fellows was Thomas Prior, his life-long friend and correspondent. In the days of Berkeley and Prior the head master was Dr. Hinton, and the School was still suffering from the consequences of “the warre in Ireland” which followed the Revolution.

 Berkeley in Kilkenny School is hardly visible, and we have no means of estimating his mental state when he left it. Tradition says that in his school-days he was wont to feed his imagination with airy visions and romance, a tradition which perhaps originated long after in popular misconceptions of his idealism. Dimly discernible at Kilkenny, only a few years later he was a conspicuous figure in an island that was then beginning to share in the intellectual movement of the modern world, taking  his place as a classic in English literature, and as the most subtle and ardent of contemporary English-speaking thinkers.

In March, 1700, at the age of fifteen, George Berkeley entered Trinity College, Dublin. This was his home for more than twenty years. He was at first a mystery to the ordinary undergraduate. Some, we are told, pronounced him the greatest dunce, others the greatest genius in the College. To hasty judges he seemed an idle dreamer; the thoughtful admired his subtle intelligence and the beauty of his character. In his undergraduate years, a mild and ingenuous youth, inexperienced in the ways of men, vivacious, humorous, satirical, in unexpected ways inquisitive, often paradoxical, through misunderstandings he persisted in his own way, full of simplicity and enthusiasm. In 1704 (the year in which Locke died) he passed Bachelor of Arts, and became Master in 1707, when he was admitted to a Fellowship, “the only reward of learning which that kingdom had to bestow.”

In Trinity College the youth found himself on the tide of modern thought, for the “new philosophy” of Newton and Locke was then invading the University. Locke’s Essay , published in 1690, was already in vogue. This early recognition of Locke in Dublin was chiefly due to William Molyneux, Locke’s devoted friend, a lawyer and member of the Irish Parliament, much given to the experimental methods. Descartes, too, with his sceptical criticism of human beliefs, yet disposed to spiritualise powers commonly attributed to matter, was another accepted authority in Trinity College; and Malebranche was not unknown. Hobbes was the familiar representative of a finally materialistic conception of existence, reproducing in modern forms the atomism of Democritus and the ethics of Epicurus. Above all, Newton was acknowledged master in physics, whose Principia  , issued three  years sooner than Locke’s Essay , was transforming the conceptions of educated men regarding their surroundings, like the still more comprehensive law of physical evolution in the nineteenth century.

John Toland, an Irishman, one of the earliest and ablest of the new sect of Free-thinkers, made his appearance at Dublin in 1696, as the author of Christianity not Mysterious . The book was condemned by College dignitaries and dignified clergy with even more than Irish fervour. It was the opening of a controversy that lasted over half of the eighteenth century in England, in which Berkeley soon became prominent; and it was resumed later on, with greater intellectual force and in finer literary form, by David Hume and Voltaire. The collision with Toland about the time of Berkeley’s matriculation may have awakened his interest. Toland was supposed to teach that matter is eternal, and that motion is its essential property, into which all changes presented in the outer and inner experience of man may at last be resolved. Berkeley’s life was a continual protest against these dogmas. The Provost of Trinity College in 1700 was Dr. Peter Browne, who had already entered the lists against Toland; long after, when Bishop of Cork, he was in controversy with Berkeley about the nature of man’s knowledge of God. The Archbishop of Dublin in the early years of the eighteenth century was William King, still remembered as a philosophical theologian, whose book on the Origin of Evil , published in 1702, was criticised by Boyle and Leibniz.

 Dublin in those years was thus a place in which a studious youth, who had been “distrustful at eight years old,” might be disposed to entertain grave questions about the ultimate meaning of his visible environment, and of the self-conscious life to which he was becoming awake. Is the universe of existence confined to the visible world, and is matter the really active power in existence? Is God  the root and centre of all that is real, and if so, what is meant by God? Can God be good if the world is a mixture of good and evil? Questions like these were ready to meet the inquisitive Kilkenny youth in his first years at Dublin.

One of his earliest interests at College was mathematical. His first appearance in print was as the anonymous author of two Latin tracts, Arithmetica and Miscellanea Mathematica , published in 1707. They are interesting as an index of his intellectual inclination when he was hardly twenty; for he says they were prepared three years before they were given to the world. His disposition to curious questions in geometry and algebra is further shewn in his College Commonplace Book .

This lately discovered Commonplace Book throws a flood of light upon Berkeley’s state of mind between his twentieth and twenty-fourth year. It is a wonderful revelation; a record under his own hand of his thoughts and feelings when he first came under the inspiration of a new conception of the nature and office of the material world. It was then struggling to find adequate expression, and in it the sanguine youth seemed to find a spiritual panacea for the errors and confusions of philosophy. It was able to make short work, he believed, with atheistic materialism, and could dispense with arguments against sceptics in vindication of the reality of experience. The mind-dependent existence of the material world, and its true function in the universe of concrete reality, were to be disclosed under the light of a new transforming self-evident Principle. “I wonder not at my sagacity in discovering the obvious and amazing truth. I rather wonder at my stupid inadvertency in not finding it out before— ’tis no witchcraft to see.” The pages of the Commonplace Book  give vent to rapidly forming thoughts about the things of sense and the “ambient space” of a youth entering into reflective life, in company with Descartes  and Malebranche, Bacon and Hobbes, above all, Locke and Newton; who was trying to translate into reasonableness his faith in the reality of the material world and God. Under the influence of this new conception, he sees the world like one awakening from a confused dream. The revolution which he wanted to inaugurate he foresaw would be resisted. Men like to think and speak about things as they have been accustomed to do: they are offended when they are asked to exchange this for what appears to them absurdity, or at least when the change seems useless. But in spite of the ridicule and dislike of a world long accustomed to put empty words in place of living thoughts, he resolves to deliver himself of his burden, with the politic conciliation of a skilful advocate however; for he characteristically reminds himself that one who “desires to bring another over to his own opinions must seem to harmonize with him at first, and humour him in his own way of talking.”

In 1709, when he was twenty-four years old, Berkeley presented himself to the world of empty verbal reasoners as the author of what he calls modestly An Essay towards a New Theory of Vision . It was dedicated to Sir John Percival, his correspondent afterwards for more than twenty years; but I have not discovered the origin of their friendship. The Essay  was a pioneer, meant to open the way for the disclosure of the Secret with which he was burdened, lest the world might be shocked by an abrupt disclosure. In this prelude he tries to make the reader recognise that in ordinary seeing we are always interpreting visual signs; so that we have daily presented to our eyes what is virtually an intelligible natural language; so that in all our intercourse with the visible world we are in intercourse with all-pervading active Intelligence. We are reading absent data of touch and of the other senses in the language of their visual signs. And the  visual signs themselves, which are the immediate objects of sight, are necessarily dependent on sentient and percipient mind; whatever may be the case with the tangible realities which the visual data signify, a fact evident by our experience when we make use of a looking-glass. The material world, so far at least as it presents itself visibly, is real only in being realised by living and seeing beings. The mind-dependent visual signs of which we are conscious are continually speaking to us of an invisible and distant world of tangible realities; and through the natural connexion of the visual signs with their tactual meanings, we are able in seeing practically to perceive, not only what is distant in space, but also to anticipate the future. The Book of Vision is in literal truth a Book of Prophecy. The chief lesson of the tentative Essay on Vision is thus summed up: —

 “Upon the whole, I think we may fairly conclude that the proper objects of Vision constitute the Universal Language of Nature; whereby we are instructed how to regulate our actions in order to attain those things that are necessary to the preservation and well-being of our bodies, as also to avoid whatever may be hurtful and destructive of them. And the manner wherein they signify and mark out unto us the objects which are at a distance is the same with that of languages and signs of human appointment; which do not suggest the things signified by any likeness or identity of nature, but only by an habitual connexion that experience has made us to observe between them. Suppose one who had always continued blind be told by his guide that after he has advanced so many steps he shall come to the brink of a precipice, or be stopped by a wall; must not this to him seem very admirable and surprising? He cannot conceive how it is possible for mortals to frame such predictions as these, which to him would seem as strange and unaccountable as prophecy does to others. Even  they who are blessed with the visive faculty may (though familiarity make it less observed) find therein sufficient cause of admiration. The wonderful art and contrivance wherewith it is adjusted to those ends and purposes for which it was apparently designed; the vast extent, number, and variety of objects that are at once, with so much ease and quickness and pleasure, suggested by it — all these afford subject for much and pleasing speculation, and may, if anything, give us some glimmering analogous prænotion of things that are placed beyond the certain discovery and comprehension of our present state.”

Berkeley took orders in the year in which his Essay on Vision was published. On February 1, 1709, he was ordained as deacon, in the chapel of Trinity College, by Dr. George Ashe, Bishop of Clogher. Origen and Augustine, Anselm and Aquinas, Malebranche, Fenelon, and Pascal, Cudworth, Butler, Jonathan Edwards, and Schleiermacher, along with Berkeley, are among those who are illustrious at once in the history of philosophy and of the Christian Church. The Church, it has been said, has been for nearly two thousand years the great Ethical Society of the world, and if under its restrictions it has been less conspicuous on the field of philosophical criticism and free inquiry, these names remind us of the immense service it has rendered to meditative thought.

The light of the Percival correspondence first falls on Berkeley’s life in 1709. The earliest extant letters from Berkeley to Sir John Percival are in September, October, and December of that year, dated at Trinity College. In one of them he pronounces Socrates “the best and most admirable man that the heathen world has produced.” Another letter, in March, 1710, accompanies a copy of the second edition of the Essay on Vision  . “I have made some alterations and additions in the body of the treatise,” he says, “and in the appendix have endeavoured to meet the  objections of the Archbishop of Dublin;” whose sermon he proceeds to deprecate, for “denying that goodness and understanding are more to be affirmed of God than feet or hands,” although all these may, in a metaphorical sense. How far, or whether at all, God is knowable by man, was, as we shall see, matter of discussion and controversy with Berkeley in later life; but this shews that the subject was already in his thoughts. Returning to the Essay on Vision , he tells Sir John that “there remains one objection, that with regard to the uselessness of that book of mine; but in a little time I hope to make what is there laid down appear subservient to the ends of morality and religion, in a Treatise I have in the press, the design of which is to demonstrate the existence and attributes of God, the immortality of the soul, the reconciliation of God’s foreknowledge and the freedom of man; and by shewing the emptiness and falsehood of several parts of the speculative sciences, to induce men to the study of religion and things useful. How far my endeavours will prove successful, and whether I have been all this time in a dream or no, time will shew. I do not see how it is possible to demonstrate the being of a God on the principles of the Archbishop — that strictly goodness and understanding can no more be assumed of God than that He has feet or hands; there being no argument that I know for God’s existence which does not prove Him at the same time to be an understanding and benevolent being, in the strict, literal, and proper meaning of these words.” He adds, “I have written to Mr. Clarke to give me his thoughts on the subject of God’s existence, but have got no answer.”

The work foreshadowed in this letter appeared in the summer of 1710, as the “First part” of a Treatise concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge, wherein the chief causes of error and difficulty in the Sciences, with the grounds of Scepticism, Atheism, and Irreligion, are inquired into  . In this fragment of a larger work, never finished, Berkeley’s  spiritual conception of matter and cosmos is unfolded, defended, and applied. According to the Essay on Vision , the world, as far as it is visible, is dependent on living mind. According to this book of Principles the whole material world, as far as it can have any practical concern with the knowings and doings of men, is real only by being realised in like manner in the percipient experience of some living mind. The concrete world, with which alone we have to do, could not exist in its concrete reality if there were no living percipient being in existence to actualise it. To suppose that it could would be to submit to the illusion of a metaphysical abstraction. Matter unrealised in its necessary subordination to some one’s percipient experience is the chief among the illusions which philosophers have been too ready to encourage, and which the mass of mankind, who accept words without reflecting on their legitimate meanings, are ready to accept blindly. But we have only to reflect in order to see the absurdity of a material world such as we have experience of existing without ever being realised or made concrete in any sentient life. Try to conceive an eternally dead universe, empty for ever of God and all finite spirits, and you find you cannot. Reality can be real only in a living form. Percipient life underlies or constitutes all that is real. The esse of the concrete material world is percipi . This was the “New Principle” with which the young Dublin Fellow was burdened — the Secret of the universe which he had been longing to discharge upon mankind for their benefit, yet without sign of desire to gain fame for himself as the discoverer. It is thus that he unfolds it: —

 “Some truths there are so near and obvious to the mind that a man need only open his eyes to see them. Such I take this important one to be, viz. that all the choir of heaven and furniture of the earth, in a word, all those bodies which compose the mighty frame of the world, have not  any subsistence without a Mind; that their being is to be perceived or known; that consequently so long as they are not actually perceived by me, or do not exist in my mind, or that of any other created spirit, they must either have no existence at all, or else subsist in the mind of some Eternal Spirit: it being perfectly unintelligible, and involving all the absurdity of abstraction, to attribute to any single part of them an existence independent of a Spirit.”

This does not mean denial of the existence of the world that is daily presented to our senses and which includes our own bodies. On the contrary, it affirms, as intuitively true, the existence of the only real matter which our senses present to us. The only material world of which we have any experience consists of the appearances (misleadingly called ideas of sense by Berkeley) which are continually rising as real objects in a passive procession of interpretable signs, through means of which each finite person realises his own individual personality; also the existence of other finite persons; and the sense-symbolism that is more or less interpreted in the natural sciences; all significant of God. So the material world of concrete experience is presented to us as mind-dependent and in itself powerless: the deepest and truest reality must always be spiritual. Yet this mind-dependent material world is the occasion of innumerable pleasures and pains to human percipients, in so far as they conform to or contradict its customary laws, commonly called the laws of nature. So the sense-symbolism in which we live is found to play an important part in the experience of percipient beings. But it makes us sceptics and atheists when, in its name, we put a supposed dead abstract matter in room of the Divine Active Reason of which all natural order is the continuous providential expression.

 Accordingly, God must exist, because the material world, in order to be a real world, needs to be continually  realised and regulated by living Providence; and we have all the certainty of sense and sanity that there is a (mind-dependent) material world, a boundless and endlessly evolving sense-symbolism.

In the two years after the disclosure of his New Principle we see Berkeley chiefly through his correspondence with Percival. He was eager to hear the voice of criticism; but the critics were slow to speak, and when they did speak they misconceived the question, and of course his answer to it. “If when you receive my book,” he writes from Dublin, in July, 1710, to Sir John, who was then in London, “you can procure me the opinion of some of your acquaintances who are thinking men, addicted to the study of natural philosophy and mathematics, I shall be extremely obliged to you.” He also asks Percival to present the book of Principles to Lord Pembroke, to whom he had ventured to dedicate it, as Locke had done his Essay . The reply was discouraging.

“I did but name the subject-matter of your book of Principles to some ingenuous friends of mine,” Percival says, “and they immediately treated it with ridicule, at the same time refusing to read it; which I have not yet got one to do. A physician of my acquaintance undertook to describe your person, and argued you must needs be mad, and that you ought to take remedies. A bishop pitied you, that a desire and vanity of starting something new should put you upon such an undertaking; and when I justified you in that part of your character, and added other deserving qualities you have, he could not tell what to think of you. Another told me an ingenious man ought not to be discouraged from exerting his wit, and said Erasmus was not worse thought of for writing in praise of folly; but that you are not gone as far as a gentleman in town, who asserts not only that there is no such thing as Matter, but that we ourselves have no being at all.”

It is not surprising that a book which was supposed to deny the existence of all that we see and touch should be ridiculed, and its author called a madman. What vexed the author was, “that men who had never considered my book should confound me with the sceptics, who doubt the existence of sensible things, and are not positive of any one thing, not even of their own being. But whoever reads my book with attention will see that I question not the existence of anything we perceive by our senses. Fine spun metaphysics are what on all occasions I declaim against, and if any one shall shew anything of that sort in my Treatise I will willingly correct it.” A material world that was real enough to yield physical science, to make known to us the existence of other persons and of God, and which signified in very practical ways happiness or misery to sentient beings, seemed to him sufficiently real for human science and all other purposes. Nevertheless, in the ardour of youth Berkeley had hardly fathomed the depths into which his New Principle led, and which he hoped to escape by avoiding the abstractions of “fine-spun metaphysics.”

 In December Percival writes from London that he has “given the book to Lord Pembroke,” who “thought the author an ingenious man, and to be encouraged”; but for himself he “cannot believe in the non-existence of Matter”; and he had tried in vain to induce Samuel Clarke, the great English metaphysician, either to refute or to accept the New Principle. In February Berkeley sends an explanatory letter for Lord Pembroke to Percival’s care. In a letter in June he turns to social questions, and suggests that if “some Irish gentlemen of good fortune and generous inclinations would constantly reside in England, there to watch for the interests of Ireland, they might bring far greater advantage than they could by spending their incomes at home.” And so 1711 passes, with responses of ignorant critics; vain endeavours to draw  worthy criticism from Samuel Clarke; the author all the while doing work as a Tutor in Trinity College on a modest income; now and then on holidays in Meath or elsewhere in Ireland. Three discourses on Passive Obedience in the College Chapel in 1712, misinterpreted, brought on him the reproach of Jacobitism. Yet they were designed to shew that society rests on a deeper foundation than force and calculations of utility, and is at last rooted in principles of an immutable morality. Locke’s favourite opinion, that morality is a demonstrable, seems to weigh with him in these Discourses .

But Berkeley was not yet done with the exposition and vindication of his new thought, for it seemed to him charged with supreme practical issues for mankind. In the two years which followed the publication of the Principles he was preparing to reproduce his spiritual conception of the universe, in the dramatic form of dialogue, convenient for dealing popularly with plausible objections. The issue was the Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous , in which Philonous argues for the absurdity of an abstract matter that is unrealised in the experience of living beings, as against Hylas, who is put forward to justify belief in this abstract reality. The design of the Dialogues is to present in a familiar form “such principles as, by an easy solution of the perplexities of philosophers, together with their own native evidence, may at once recommend themselves as genuine to the mind, and rescue philosophy from the endless pursuits it is engaged in; which, with a plain demonstration of the Immediate Providence of an all-seeing God, should seem the readiest preparation, as well as the strongest motive to the study and practice of virtue.”

When the Dialogues  were completed, at the end of 1712, Berkeley resolved to visit London, as he told Percival, “in order to print my new book of Dialogues,  and to make acquaintance with men of merit.” He got leave of absence from his College “for the recovery of his health,” which had suffered from study, and perhaps too he remembered that Bacon commends travel as “to the younger sort a part of education.”

Berkeley made his appearance in London in January, 1713. On the 26th of that month he writes to Percival that he “had crossed the Channel from Dublin a few days before,” describes adventures on the road, and enlarges on the beauty of rural England, which he liked more than anything he had seen in London. “Mr. Clarke” had already introduced him to Lord Pembroke. He had also called on his countryman Richard Steele, “who desired to be acquainted with him. Somebody had given him my Treatise on the Principles of Human Knowledge , and that was the ground of his inclination to my acquaintance.” He anticipates “much satisfaction in the conversation of Steele and his friends,” adding that “there is lately published a bold and pernicious book, a Discourse on Free-thinking .” In February he “dines often with Steele in his house in Bloomsbury Square,” and tells in March “that you will soon hear of Mr. Steele under the character of the Guardian ; he designs his paper shall come out every day as the Spectator .” The night before “a very ingenious new poem upon ‘Windsor Forest’ had been given to him by the author, Mr. Pope. The gentleman is a Papist, but a man of excellent wit and learning, one of those Mr. Steele mentions in his last paper as having writ some of the Spectator  .” A few days later he has met “Mr. Addison, who has the same talents as Steele in a high degree, and is likewise a great philosopher, having applied himself to the speculative studies more than any of the wits I know. I breakfasted with him at Dr. Swift’s lodgings. His coming in while I was there, and the good  temper he showed, was construed by me as a sign of the approaching coalition of parties. A play of Mr. Steele’s, which was expected, he has now put off till next winter. But Cato , a most noble play of Mr. Addison, is to be acted in Easter week.” Accordingly, on April 18, he writes that “on Tuesday last Cato was acted for the first time. I was present with Mr. Addison and two or three more friends in a side box, where we had a talk and two or three flasks of Burgundy and Champagne, which the author (who is a very sober man) thought necessary to support his spirits, and indeed it was a pleasant refreshment to us all between the Acts. Some parts of the prologue, written by Mr. Pope, a Tory and even a Papist, were hissed, being thought to savour of Whiggism; but the clap got much the better of the hiss. Lord Harley, who sat in the next box to us, was observed to clap as loud as any in the house all the time of the play.” Swift and Pope have described this famous first night of Cato ; now for the first time we have Berkeley’s report. He adds, “This day I dined at Dr. Arbuthnot’s lodging in the Queen’s Palace.”

 His countryman, Swift, was among the first to welcome him to London, where Swift had himself been for four years, “lodging in Bury Street,” and sending the daily journal to Stella, which records so many incidents of that memorable London life. Mrs. Vanhomrigh and her daughter, the unhappy Vanessa, were living in rooms in the same street as Swift, and there he “loitered, hot and lazy, after his morning’s work,” and “often dined out of mere listlessness.” Berkeley was a frequent visitor at Swift’s house, and this Vanhomrigh connexion with Swift had an influence on Berkeley’s fortune long afterwards. On a Sunday in April we find him at Kensington, at the Court of Queen Anne, in the company of Swift. “I went to Court to-day,” Swift’s journal records, “on purpose to present Mr. Berkeley, one of the Fellows of  Trinity. College, to Lord Berkeley of Stratton. That Mr. Berkeley is a very ingenious man, and a great philosopher, and I have mentioned him to all the ministers, and have given them some of his writings, and I will favour him as much as I can.” In this, Swift was as good as his word. “Dr. Swift,” he adds, “is admired both by Steele and Addison, and I think Addison one of the best natured and most agreeable men in the world.”

One day about this time, at the instance of Addison, it seems that a meeting was arranged between Berkeley and Samuel Clarke, the metaphysical rector of St. James’s in Piccadilly, whose opinion he had in vain tried to draw forth two years before through Sir John Percival. Berkeley’s personal charm was felt wherever he went, and even “the fastidious and turbulent Atterbury,” after intercourse with him, is reported to have said: “So much understanding, so much knowledge, so much innocence, and such humility, I did not think had been the portion of any but angels till I saw this gentleman.” Much was expected from the meeting with Clarke, but Berkeley had again to complain that although Clarke had neither refuted his arguments nor disproved his premisses, he had not the candour to accept his conclusion.

It was thus that Berkeley became known to “men of merit” in that brilliant society. He was also brought among persons on whom he would hardly have conferred this title. He tells Percival that he had attended several free-thinking clubs, in the pretended character of a learner, and that he there heard Anthony Collins, author of “the bold and pernicious book on free-thinking,” boast “that he was able to demonstrate that the existence of God is an impossible supposition.” The promised “demonstration” seems to have been Collins’ Inquiry Concerning Human Liberty  , which appeared two years later, according to which all that happens in mind and matter is the issue of natural necessity. Steele invited Berkeley to contribute  to the Guardian during its short-lived existence between March and September, 1713. He took the Discourse of Collins for the subject of his first essay. Three other essays are concerned with man’s hope of a future life, and are among the few passages in his writings in which his philosophy is a meditation upon Death.

In May, Percival writes to him from Dublin that he hears the “new book of Dialogues is printed, though not yet published, and that your opinion has gained ground among the learned; that Mr. Addison has come over to your view; and that what at first seemed shocking is become so familiar that others envy you the discovery, and make it their own.” In his reply in June, Berkeley mentions that “a clergyman in Wiltshire has lately published a treatise wherein he advances something published three years ago in my Principles of Human Knowledge .” The clergyman was Arthur Collier, author of the Clavis Universalis , or demonstration of the impossibility of an external world.

Berkeley’s Three Dialogues were published in June. In the middle of that same month he was in Oxford, “a most delightful place,” where he spent two months, “witnessed the Act and grand performances at the theatre, and a great concourse from London and the country, amongst whom were several foreigners.” The Drury Lane Company had gone down to Oxford, and Cato  was on the stage for several nights. The Percival correspondence now first discloses this prolonged visit to Oxford in the summer of 1713, that ideal home from whence, forty years after, he departed on a more mysterious journey than any on this planet. In a letter from thence to Percival, he had claimed Arbuthnot as one of the converts to the “new Principle.” Percival replied that Swift demurred to this, on which Berkeley rejoins: “As to what you say of Dr. Arbuthnot not being of my opinion, it is true there  has been some difference between us concerning some notions relating to the necessity of the laws of nature; but this does not touch the main points of the non-existence of what philosophers call material substance; against which he acknowledges he can assert nothing.” One would gladly have got more than this from Berkeley, about what touched his favourite conception of the “arbitrariness” of law in nature, as distinguished from the “necessity” which some modern physicists are ready vaguely to take for granted.

 The scene now changes. On October 15 Berkeley suddenly writes from London: “I am on the eve of going to Sicily, as chaplain to Lord Peterborough, who is Ambassador Extraordinary on the coronation of the new king.” He had been recommended by Swift to the Ambassador, one of the most extraordinary characters then in Europe, who a few years before had astonished the world in the war of the Succession in Spain, and afterwards by his genius as a diplomatist: in Holland, nearly a quarter of a century before, he had formed an intimate friendship with John Locke. Ten months in France and Italy in the suite of Lord Peterborough brought the young Irish metaphysician, who had lately been introduced to the wits of London and the dons of Oxford, into a new world. It was to him the beginning of a career of wandering and social activity, which lasted, with little interruption, for nearly twenty years, during which metaphysics and authorship were in the background. On November 25 we find him in Paris, writing letters to Percival and Prior. “From London to Calais”, he tells Prior, “I came in company of a Flamand, a Spaniard, a Frenchman, and three English servants of my Lord. The three gentlemen, being of three different nations, obliged me to speak the French language (which is now familiar), and gave me the opportunity of seeing much of the world in little  compass.... On November 1 (O.S.) I embarked in the stage-coach, with a company that were all perfect strangers to me. There were two Scotch, and one English gentleman. One of the former happened to be the author of the Voyage to St. Kilda and the Account of the Western Isles . We were good company on the road; and that day se’ennight came to Paris. I have since been taken up in viewing churches, convents, palaces, colleges, &c., which are very numerous and magnificent in this town. The splendour and riches of these things surpasses belief; but it were endless to descend to particulars. I was present at a disputation in the Sorbonne, which indeed had much of the French fire in it. I saw the Irish and the English Colleges. In the latter I saw, enclosed in a coffin, the body of the late King James.... To-morrow I intend to visit Father Malebranche, and discourse him on certain points.”

 The Abbé D’Aubigné, as he informs Percival, was to introduce him to Malebranche, then the chief philosopher of France, whose Vision of the world in God had some affinity with Berkeley’s own thought. Unfortunately we have no record of the intended interview with the French idealist, who fourteen years before had been visited by Addison, also on his way to Italy, when Malebranche expressed great regard for the English nation, and admiration for Newton; but he shook his head when Hobbes was mentioned, whom he ventured to disparage as a “poor silly creature.” Malebranche died nearly two years after Berkeley’s proposed interview; and according to a story countenanced by Dugald Stewart, Berkeley was the “occasional cause” of his death. He found the venerable Father, we are told, in a cell, cooking, in a pipkin, a medicine for a disorder with which he was troubled. The conversation naturally turned on Berkeley’s system, of which  Malebranche had received some knowledge from a translation. The issue of the debate proved tragical to poor Malebranche. In the heat of disputation he raised his voice so high, and gave way so freely to the natural impetuosity of a man of genius and a Frenchman, that he brought on a violent increase of his disorder, which carried him off a few days after. This romantic tale is, I suspect, mythical. The Percival correspondence shews that Berkeley was living in London in October, 1715, the month in which Malebranche died, and I find no trace of a short sudden visit to Paris at that time.

After a month spent in Paris, another fortnight carried Berkeley and two travelling companions to Italy through Savoy. They crossed Mont Cenis on New Year’s Day in 1714— “one of the most difficult and formidable parts of the Alps which is ever passed over by mortal man,” as he tells Prior in a letter from Turin. “We were carried in open chairs by men used to scale these rocks and precipices, which at this season are more slippery and dangerous than at other times, and at the best are high, craggy, and steep enough to cause the heart of the most valiant man to melt within him.” At the end of other six weeks we find him at Leghorn, where he spent three months, “while my lord was in Sicily.” He “prefers England or Ireland to Italy: the only advantage is in point of air.” From Leghorn he writes in May a complimentary letter to Pope, on the occasion of the Rape of the Lock  : “Style, painting, judgment, spirit, I had already admired in your other writings; but in this I am charmed with the magic of your invention, with all those images, allusions, and inexplicable beauties which you raise so surprisingly, and at the same time so naturally, out of a trifle.... I remember to have heard you mention some  half-formed design of coming to Italy. What might we not expect from a muse that sings so well in the bleak climate of England, if she felt the same warm sun and breathed the same air with Virgil and Horace.” In July we find Berkeley in Paris on his way back to England. He had “parted from Lord Peterborough at Genoa, where my lord took post for Turin, and thence designed passing over the Alps, and so through Savoy, on his way to England.” In August they are in London, where the aspect of English politics was changed by the death of the Queen in that month. He seems to have had a fever soon after his return. In October, Arbuthnot, in one of his chatty letters to Swift, writes thus: “Poor philosopher Berkeley has now the idea of health, which was very hard to produce in him, for he had an idea of a strange fever upon him, so strange that it was very hard to destroy it by introducing a contrary one.”

Our record of the two following years is a long blank, first broken by a letter to Percival in July, 1715, dated at London. Whether he spent any time at Fulham with Lord Peterborough after their return from Italy does not appear, nor whether he visited Ireland in those years, which is not likely. We have no glimpses of brilliant London society as in the preceding year. Steele was now in Parliament. Swift had returned to Dublin, and Addison was the Irish chief secretary. But Pope was still at Binfield, among the glades of Windsor, and Berkeley congratulated him after receiving the first volume of his Homer . Of his own literary pursuits we hear nothing. Perhaps the Second Part of the Principles  , which was lost afterwards in his travels, engaged him. In the end of July he wrote to Lord Percival from Flaxley on the Severn; and in August, September, October, and November he wrote from London, chiefly interested in  reports about “the rebels in Scotland,” and “the forces under Lord Mar, which no doubt will languish and disperse in a little time. The Bishop of Bristol assured me the other day that the Court expect that the Duke of Orleans would, in case of need, supply them with forces against the Pretender.” Our next glimpse of him is in May, 1716, when he writes to Lord Percival that he is “like soon to go to Ireland, the Prince of Wales having recommended him to the Lords Justices for the living of St. Paul’s in Dublin.” This opening was soon closed, and the visit to Ireland was abandoned. A groundless suspicion of Jacobitism was not overcome by the interest of Caroline, Princess of Wales. In June, 1716, Charles Dering wrote from Dublin, that “the Lords Justices have made a strong representation against him.” He had to look elsewhere for the immediate future.

We find him at Turin in November, 1716, with a fresh leave of absence for two years from his College. It seems that Ashe, Bishop of Clogher, had engaged him as travelling tutor to his son, a means not then uncommon for enabling young authors of moderate fortune to see new countries and mix with society. Addison had visited Italy in this way sixteen years before, and Adam Smith long afterwards travelled with the young Duke of Buccleuch. With young Ashe, Berkeley crossed Mont Cenis a second time. They reached Rome at the beginning of 1717. His Journal in Italy  in that year, and occasional letters to Percival, Pope, and Arbuthnot, shew ardent interest in nature and art. With the widest views, “this very great though singular sort of man descended into a minute detail, and begrudged neither pains nor expense for the means of information. He travelled through a great part of Sicily on foot; clambered over the mountains and crept into the caverns, to investigate its natural history and discover the causes of its volcanoes; and I have known him sit for hours in forges and foundries to inspect their  successive operations.” If the Journal had been transformed by his own hand into a book, his letter to Pope from Inarime shews that the book might have rivalled Addison’s Remarks on Parts of Italy in grace of style and large human interest.

In the summer of 1720 we find the travellers at Florence, afterwards for some time at Lyons, and in London at the beginning of the next year. On the way home his metaphysical inspiration was revived. The “Cause of Motion” had been proposed by the French Academy as the subject of a prize dissertation. The subject gave an opportunity for further unfolding his early thought. In the Principles and the Dialogues he had argued for the necessary dependence of matter, for its concrete substantial reality, upon living percipient mind. He would now shew its powerlessness as it is presented to us in sense. The material world, chiefly under the category of substance, inspired the Principles . The material world, under the category of cause or power, inspired the De Motu . This Latin Essay sums up the distinctive thought of Berkeley, as it appears in the authorship of his early life. Moles evolvit et agitat mentes might be taken as the formula of the materialism which he sought to dissolve. Mens percipit et agitat molem significantem, cujus esse est percipi expresses what Berkeley would substitute for the materialistic formula.

 The end of the summer of 1721 found Berkeley still in London. England was in the social agitation and misery consequent upon the failure of the South Sea Company, a gigantic commercial speculation connected with British trade in America. A new inspiration took possession of him. He thought he saw in this catastrophe signs of a decline in public morals worse than that which followed the Restoration. “Political corruption”, “decay of religion,” “growth of atheism,” were descriptive words used by the  thoughtful. Berkeley’s eager imagination was apt to exaggerate the evil. He became inspired by social idealism, and found vent for his fervour in An Essay towards preventing the Ruin of Great Britain , which, as well as the De Motu , made its appearance in 1721. This Essay is a significant factor in his career. It was the Cassandra wail of a sorrowful and indignant prophet, prepared to shake the dust from his feet, and to transfer his eye of hope to other regions, in which a nearer approach to Utopia might be realised. The true personality of the individual is unrealisable in selfish isolation. His favourite non sibi, sed toti mundo was henceforward more than ever the ruling maxim of his life.

 II. Middle Life (1722-34). [image "img137.jpg" file=Image00136.jpg] 

I N O CTOBER , 1721,  Berkeley was in Dublin. The register of the College shews that “on November 14, 1721, Mr. Berkeley had the grace of the House for the Degree of Bachelor and Doctor of Divinity.” There is no ground for the report that he returned to Ireland at this time as Chaplain to the Duke of Grafton, the Lord Lieutenant. But preferment in the Church seemed within his reach. “I had no sooner set foot on shore,” he wrote to Percival in that October, “than I heard that the Deanery of Dromore was vacant.” Percival used his influence with the Lord Lieutenant, and in February, 1722, Berkeley’s patent was  “passing the Seals for the Deanery of Dromore.” But the Bishop of Dromore claimed the patronage, and this led to a protracted and ineffectual lawsuit, which took Berkeley to London in the following winter, “to see friends and inform himself of points of law,” and he tells that “on the way he was nearly drowned in crossing to Holyhead.”

Berkeley’s interest in church preferment was not personal. He saw in it only means to an end. In March, 1723, he surprised Lord Percival by announcing, in a letter from London, a project which it seems for some time had occupied his thoughts. “It is now about ten months,” he says, “since I have determined to spend the residue of my days in Bermuda, where I trust in Providence I may be the mean instrument of doing great good to mankind. Whatever happens, go I am resolved, if I live. Half a dozen of the most ingenious and agreeable men in our College are with me in this project, and since I came hither I have got together about a dozen Englishmen of quality, who intend to retire to those islands.” He then explains the project, opening a vision of Christian civilisation radiating from those fair islands of the West, whose idyllic bliss poets had sung, diffused over the New World, with its magnificent possibilities in the future history of mankind.

I find no further record of the origin of this bright vision. As it had become a practical determination “ten months” before March, 1723, one is carried back to the first months after his return to Dublin and to the Essay  that was called forth by the South Sea catastrophe. One may conjecture that despair of England and the Old World— “such as Europe breeds in her decay” — led him to look westward for the hopeful future of mankind, moved, perhaps, by the connexion of the catastrophe with America. His active imagination pictured a better Republic than Plato’s, and a grander Utopia than More’s,  emanating from a College in the isles of which Waller had sung.

 In the meantime a curious fortune unexpectedly favoured him. Swift’s unhappy Vanessa, associated with Bury Street in 1713, had settled on her property at Marley Abbey near Dublin; and Swift had privately married Stella, as she confessed to Vanessa, who thereafter revoked the bequest of her fortune to Swift, and left it to be divided between Berkeley and Marshal, afterwards an Irish judge. Vanessa died in May, 1723. A few days after Berkeley wrote thus to Lord Percival: “Here is something that will surprise your lordship as it doth me. Mrs. Hester Vanhomrigh, a lady to whom I was a perfect stranger, having never in the whole course of my life exchanged a word with her, died on Sunday. Yesterday her Will was opened, by which it appears that I am constituted executor, the advantage whereof is computed by those who understand her affairs to be worth £3000.... My Bermuda scheme is now stronger in my mind than ever; this providential event having made many things easy which were otherwise before.” Lord Percival in reply concludes that he would “persist more than ever in that noble scheme, which may in some time exalt your name beyond that of St. Xavier and the most famous missionaries abroad.” But he warns him that, “without the protection of Government,” he would encounter insurmountable difficulties. The Vanessa legacy, and the obstructions in the way of the Deanery of Dromore, were the subjects of a tedious correspondence with his friend and business factotum, “Tom Prior,” in 1724 and the three following years. In the end, the debts of Vanessa absorbed most of the legacy. And as to the Deanery of Dromore, he tells Percival, on September 19, 1723: “I despair of seeing it end to my advantage. The truth is, my fixed purpose of going to Bermuda sets me above soliciting anything with earnestness in this part  of the world. It can be of no use to me, but as it may enable me the better to prosecute that design; and it must be owned that the present possession of something in the Church would make my application for an establishment in those islands more considered.”

Nevertheless, he got a Deanery at last. In May, 1724, he informs Lord Percival from Trinity College: “Yesterday I received my patent for the best Deanery in the kingdom, that of Derry. It is said to be worth £1500 per annum. But as I do not consider it with an eye to enriching myself, so I shall be perfectly contented if it facilitates and recommends my scheme of Bermuda, which I am in hopes will meet with a better reception if it comes from one possessed of so great a Deanery.” In September he is on his way, not to Derry, but to London, “to raise funds and obtain a Charter for the Bermuda College from George the First,” fortified by a remarkable letter from Swift to Lord Carteret, the new Lord Lieutenant, who was then in Bath. As Swift predicted in this letter, Berkeley’s conquests spread far and fast in England, where he organised his resources during the four following years. Nothing shews more signally the magic of his personality than the story of his life in London in those years of negotiation and endeavour. The proposal met with a response wonderful in a generation represented by Walpole. The subscriptions soon reached five thousand pounds, and Walpole was among the subscribers. The Scriblerus Club, meeting at Lord Bathurst’s, agreed to rally Berkeley, who was among them, on his Bermuda scheme. He asked to be heard in defence, and presented the case with such force of enthusiasm that the company “were struck dumb, and after a pause simultaneously rose and asked leave to accompany him.” Bermuda for a time inspired London.

Berkeley was not satisfied with this. He remembered what Lord Percival had said about failure without help from Government. Accordingly he obtained a Charter from George the First early in 1726, and after canvassing the House of Commons, secured a grant of £20,000, with only two dissentient votes, in May of that year. This was the beginning of his difficulties. Payment was indefinitely delayed, and he was kept negotiating; besides, with the help of Prior, he was unravelling legal perplexities in which the Vanessa legacy was involved. It was in these years that he was seen at the receptions of Caroline at Leicester Fields, when she was Princess of Wales, and afterwards at St. James’s or at Kensington, when she became Queen in 1727; not, he says, because he loved Courts, but because he loved America. Clarke was still rector of St. James’s, and Butler had not yet migrated to his parsonage at Stanhope; so their society was open to him. The Queen liked to listen to a philosophical discussion. Ten years before, as Princess of Wales, she had been a royal go-between in the famous correspondence between Clarke and Leibniz. And now, Berkeley being in London, he too was asked to her weekly reunions, when she loved to hear Clarke arguing with Berkeley, or Berkeley arguing with Hoadley. Also in 1726 Voltaire made his lengthened visit to England, a familiar figure in the circle of Pope’s friends, attracted to the philosophy of Locke and Newton; and Voltaire mentions that he met “the discoverer of the true theory of vision” during his stay in London.

  From the summer of 1727 until the spring of 1728 there is no extant correspondence either with Percival or “Tom Prior” to throw light on his movements. In February, 1728, he was still in London, but he “hoped to set out for Dublin in March, and to America in May.” There is a mystery about this visit to Dublin. “I propose to set out for Dublin about a month hence,” he writes to “dear  Tom,” “but of this you must not give the least intimation to anybody. It is of all things my earnest desire (and for very good reasons) not to have it known that I am in Dublin. Speak not, therefore, one syllable of it to any mortal whatsoever. When I formerly desired you to take a place for me near the town, you gave out that you were looking for a retired lodging for a friend of yours; upon which everybody surmised me to be the person. I must beg you not to act in the like manner now, but to take for me an entire house in your own name, and as for yourself; for, all things considered, I am determined upon a whole house, with no mortal in it but a maid of your own putting, who is to look on herself as your servant. Let there be two bed-chambers: one for you, another for me; and, as you like, you may ever and anon lie there. I would have the house, with necessary furniture, taken by the month (or otherwise, as you can), for I propose staying not beyond that time; and yet perhaps I may. Take it as soon as possible.... Let me entreat you to say nothing of this to anybody, but to do the thing directly.... I would of all things ... have a proper place in a retired situation, where I may have access to fields and sweet air provided against the moment I arrive. I am inclined to think one may be better concealed in the outermost skirt of the suburbs, than in the country or within the town.... A house quite detached in the country I should have no objection to, provided you judge that I shall not be liable to discovery in it. The place called Bermuda I am utterly against. Dear Tom, do this matter cleanly and cleverly, without waiting for further advice.... To the person from whom you hire it (whom alone I would have you speak of it to) it will not seem strange you should at this time of the year be desirous, for your own convenience or health, to have a place in a free and open air.” This mysterious letter was written in April. From April till September Berkeley again disappears. There is in all  this a curious secretiveness of which one has repeated examples in his life. Whether he went to Dublin in that spring, or why he wanted to go, does not appear.

 But in September he emerges unexpectedly at Gravesend, newly married, and ready to sail for Rhode Island, “in a ship of 250 tons which he had hired.” The marriage, according to Stock, took place on August 1, whether in Ireland or in England I cannot tell. The lady was Anne, daughter of John Forster, late Chief Justice, and then Speaker of the Irish House of Commons. She shared his fortune when he was about to engage in the most romantic, and ideally the grandest, Christian mission of the eighteenth century. According to tradition she was a devoutly religious mystic: Fénelon and Madame Guyon were among her favourites. “I chose her,” he tells Lord Percival, “for her qualities of mind and her unaffected inclination to books. She goes with great thankfulness, to live a plain farmer’s life, and wear stuff of her own spinning. I have presented her with a spinning-wheel.” A letter to Prior, dated “Gravesend September 5, 1728,” thus describes the little party on the eve of their departure:— “To-morrow, with God’s blessing, I set sail for Rhode Island, with my wife and a friend of hers, my Lady Handcock’s daughter, who bears us company. I am married since I saw you to Miss Forster, whose humour and turn of mind pleases me beyond anything that I know in her whole sex. Mr. James, Mr. Dalton, and Mr. Smibert go with us on this voyage. We are now all together at Gravesend, and are engaged in one view.” We are further told that they carried stores and goods to a great value, and that the Dean “embarked 20,000 books, besides what the two gentlemen carried. They  sailed in September for Rhode Island, where the Dean intends to winter, and to purchase an estate, in order to settle a correspondence and trade between that island and Bermudas.” Berkeley was in his forty-fourth year, when, full of glowing visions of Christian Empire in the West, “Time’s noblest offspring,” he left England, on his way to Bermuda, with the promise of Sir Robert Walpole that he should receive the promised grant after he had made an investment. He bought land in America, but he never reached Bermuda.

Towards the end of January, in 1729, the little party, in the “hired ship of 250 tons,” made their appearance in Narragansett Bay, on the western side of Rhode Island. “Blundering about the ocean,” they had touched at Virginia on the way, whence a correspondent, sceptical of the enterprise, informs Lord Percival that the Dean “had dined with the Governor, and visited our College,” but thinks that “when the Dean comes to put his visionary scheme into practice, he will find it no better than a religious frenzy,” and that “he is as much a Don Quixote in zeal as that renowned knight was in chivalry. I wish the good Dean may not find out at last that Waller really kidnapt him over to Bermuda, and that the project he has been drawn into may not prove in every point of it poetical.”

 We have a picture of the landing at Newport, on a winter day early in 1729. “Yesterday arrived here Dean Berkeley of Londonderry, in a pretty large ship. He is a gentleman of middle stature, of an agreeable, pleasant, and erect aspect. He was ushered into the town with a great number of gentlemen, to whom he behaved himself after a very complaisant manner. ’Tis said he proposes to tarry here with his family about three months.” Newport was then a flourishing town, nearly a century old, an emporium of American commerce, in those days the rival of Boston and New York. He was “never more  agreeably surprised,” he says, than “at the size of the town and harbour.” Around him was some of the softest rural and grandest ocean scenery in the world, which had fresh charms even for one whose boyhood was spent in the valley of the Nore, who had lingered in the Bay of Naples, and wandered in Inarime and among the mountains of Sicily. He was seventy miles from Boston, and about as far from Newhaven and Yale College. A range of hills crosses the centre of the island, whence meadows slope to the rocky shore. The Gulf Stream tempers the surrounding sea. “The people,” he tells Percival, “are industrious; and though less orthodox have not less virtue, and I am sure they have more regularity, than those I left in Europe. They are indeed a strange medley of different persuasions.” The gentry retained the customs of the squires in England: tradition tells of a cheerful society: the fox chase, with hounds and horses, was a favourite recreation. The society, for so remote a region, was well informed. The family libraries and pictures which remain argue culture and refinement. Smibert, the artist of the missionary party, who had moved to Boston, soon found employment in America, and his pictures still adorn houses in Rhode Island.

The Dean and his young wife lived in Newport for some months after their arrival. Mr. Honeyman, a missionary of the English Society, had been placed there, in Trinity Church, in 1704. The church is still a conspicuous object from the harbour. Berkeley preached in it three days after his arrival, and occasionally afterwards. Notes of his sermons are included in this edition among his Miscellaneous Works.

 In the summer of 1729 he moved from Newport to a quiet valley in the interior of the island, where he  bought a farm, and built a house. In this island-home, named Whitehall, he lived for more than two years — years of domestic happiness, and of resumed study, much interrupted since he left Dublin in 1713. The house may still be seen, a little aside from the road that runs eastward from Newport, about three miles from the town. It is built of wood. The south-west room was probably the library. The ocean is seen in the distance, while orchards and groves offer the shade and silence which soothed the thinker in his recluse life. No invitations of the three companions of his voyage, who had migrated to Boston, could allure him from this retreat, where he diverted his anxieties about Bermuda by the thoughts which found expression in the dialogues of Alciphron , redolent of Rhode Island and the invigorating breezes of its ocean shore. Tradition tells that much of Alciphron was the issue of meditation in the open air, at a favourite retreat, beneath the Hanging Rocks, which commands an extensive view of the beach and the ocean; and the chair in which he sat in this alcove is still preserved with veneration.

While Berkeley loved domestic quiet at Whitehall and the “still air of delightful studies,” he mixed occasionally in the society of Newport. He found it not uncongenial, and soon after he was settled at Whitehall he led the way in forming a club, which held occasional meetings, the germ of the Redwood Library, still a useful Newport institution. His own house was a place of meeting for the New England missionaries.

 [image "img138.png" file=Image00137.gif] 

Whitehall, Berkeley’s Residence in Rhode Island

 Soon after his arrival in Rhode Island, Berkeley was visited by the Reverend Samuel Johnson, missionary at Stratford, an acute and independent thinker, one of the two contemporary representatives of philosophy in America.  The other was Jonathan Edwards, at that time Congregational minister at Northampton on the Connecticut river. They had both adopted a conception of the meaning and office of the material world in the economy of existence that was in many respects similar to Berkeley’s. It seems that Berkeley’s book of Principles had before this fallen into Johnson’s hands. He hastened to visit the author when he heard of his arrival. A succession of visits and a life-long correspondence followed. The “non-existence of Matter,” interpreted as a whimsical and even insane paradox, was found by Johnson to mean the absence of unrealisable Substance behind the real material world that is presented to our senses, and of unrealisable Power in the successive sense-presented appearances of which alone we are percipient. He came to see the real existence of the things of sense in the constant order of the data of sense, through which we gain our knowledge of the existence of our fellow men, and of the omnipresent constant Providence of God; whose Ideas are the true archetypes of the visible world. He adopted and applied this conception with a lucidity and force which give him a high place among American thinkers.

All the while a cloud darkened the recluse life at Whitehall. In June, 1729, Berkeley explains to Percival the circumstances and secrecy of his departure from England: —

 “Before I left England I was reduced to a difficult situation. Had I continued there, the report would have obtained (which I had found beginning to spread) that I had dropped the design, after it had cost me and my friends so much trouble and expense. On the other hand, if I had taken leave of my friends, even those who assisted and approved my undertaking would have condemned my coming abroad before the King’s bounty was  received. This obliged me to come away in the private manner that I did, and to run the risque of a tedious winter voyage. Nothing less would have convinced the world that I was in earnest, after the report I knew was growing to the contrary.”

Months passed, and Walpole’s promise was still unfulfilled. “I wait here,” he tells Lord Percival in March, 1730, “with all the anxiety that attends suspense, until I know what I can depend upon, or what course I am to take. On the one hand I have no notion that the Court would put what men call a bite upon a poor clergyman, who depended upon charters, grants, votes, and the like engagements. On the other hand, I see nothing done towards payment of the money.” Later on he writes— “As for the raillery of European wits, I should not mind it, if I saw my College go on and prosper; but I must own the disappointments I have met with in this particular have nearly touched me, not without affecting my health and spirits. If the founding a College for the spread of religion and learning in America had been a foolish project, it cannot be supposed the Court, the Ministers, and the Parliament would have given such public encouragement to it; and if, after all that encouragement, they who engaged to endow and protect it let it drop, the disappointment indeed may be to me, but the censure, I think, will light elsewhere.”

 The suspense was at last ended. Gibson, the Bishop of London, pressed Walpole for a final answer. “If,” he replied, “you put this question to me as a Minister, I must, and can, assure you that the money shall most undoubtedly be paid, as soon as suits with public convenience; but if you ask me as a friend, whether Dean Berkeley should continue in America expecting the payment of twenty thousand pounds, I advise him by all means to return home to Europe, and to give up his present expectations.” It was thus that in 1731 the Prime Minister of England  crushed the project conceived ten years before, and to which the intervening period had, under his encouragement, been devoted by the projector with a singular enthusiasm.

 [image "img139.png" file=Image00138.gif] 

Berkeley’s Alcove, Rhode Island

 A few months after this heavy blow, Berkeley, with his wife, and Henry their infant child, bade farewell to the island home. They sailed from Boston in the late autumn of 1731, and in the following February we find them in London. Thus ended the romantic episode of Rhode Island, with its ideal of Christian civilisation, which so moves the heart and touches the imagination in our retrospect of the eighteenth century. Of all who have ever landed on the American shore, none was ever moved by a purer and more self-sacrificing spirit. America still acknowledges that by Berkeley’s visit on this mission it has been invested with the halo of an illustrious name, and associated with religious devotion to a magnificent ideal, even if it was sought to be realised by impracticable means. To reform the New World, and mankind at last, by a College on an island in the Atlantic, six hundred miles from America, the Indians whom it was intended to civilise being mostly in the interior of the continent, and none in Bermuda, was not unnaturally considered Quixotic; and that it was at first supported by the British Court and Parliament is a wonderful tribute to the persuasive genius of the projector. Perhaps he was too much influenced by Lord Percival’s idea, that it could not be realised by private benevolence, without the intervention of the Crown. But the indirect influence of Berkeley’s American inspiration is apparent in many ways in the intellectual and spiritual life of that great continent, during the last century and a half, especially by the impulse given to academical education. It is the testimony of an American author that, “by methods different from those intended by Berkeley, and in ways more manifold than even he could have dreamed, he has since accomplished, and through all coming time, by a thousand ineffaceable  influences, he will continue to accomplish, some portion at least of the results which he had aimed at in the founding of his university. It is the old story over again; the tragedy of a Providence wiser than man’s foresight; God giving the victory to His faithful servant even through the bitterness of overruling him and defeating him.” American Empire, as we now see it with its boundless beneficent influence, is at least an imperfect realisation of Berkeley’s dream.

Berkeley’s head quarters were in London, in Green Street, for more than two years after the return to England in the beginning of 1732. Extant correspondence with Lord Percival ends in Rhode Island, and our picture of the two years in London is faintly formed by letters to Prior and Johnson. These speak of ill-health, and breathe a less sanguine spirit. The brilliant social life of former visits was less attractive now, even if old friends had remained. But Swift had quitted England for ever, and Steele had followed Addison to the grave. Gay, the common friend of Berkeley and Pope, died soon after the return from Rhode Island, and Arbuthnot was approaching his end at Hampstead. Samuel Clarke had passed away when Berkeley was at Whitehall; but Seeker now held the rectory of St. James’s, and Butler was in studious retirement on the Wear; while Pope was at Twickenham, publishing his Essay on Man  , receiving visits from Bolingbroke, or visiting Lord Bathurst at Cirencester Park. Queen Caroline, too, was holding her receptions at Kensington; but “those who imagine (as you write),” he tells Prior in January, 1734, “that I have been making my court here all this time, would never believe (what is most true) that I have not been at the Court or at the Minister’s but once these seven years. The care of my health and  the love of retirement have prevailed over whatsoever ambition might have come to my share.” There is a hint of a visit to Oxford, at Commemoration in 1733, when his friend Seeker received the honorary degree.

Soon after he had settled in London, the fruit of his studies in Rhode Island was given to the world in the Seven Dialogues of Alciphron, or The Minute Philosopher . Here the philosophical inspiration of his early years is directed to sustain faith in Divine Moral Order, and in the Christian Revelation. Alciphron is the longest, and in literary form perhaps the most finished of his works, unsurpassed in lively strokes of irony and satire. Yet if it is to be regarded as a philosophical justification of religion, as against modern agnosticism, one may incline to the judgment of Mr. Leslie Stephen, that it is “the least admirable of all its author’s admirable works.” As we have seen, the sect of free-thinkers was early the object of Berkeley’s ridicule and sarcasm. They claimed for themselves wide intellectual vision, yet they were blind to the deep realities of the universe; they took exclusive credit for freedom of thought, although their thinking was confined within the narrow compass of our data in sense. The book of Principles , the Dialogues , and the De Motu of his early years, were designed to bring into clear light the absolute dependence of the world that is presented to our senses on Omnipresent Spirit; and the necessary subjection of all changes in our surroundings to the immediate agency or providence of God. Boasted “free-thinking” was really a narrow atheism, so he believed, in which meaningless Matter usurped the place that belonged in reason to God, and he employed reason to disclose Omnipotent Intelligence in and behind the phenomena that are presented to the senses in impotent natural sequence.

 The causes of the widespread moral corruption of the Old World, which had moved Berkeley so profoundly,  seem to have been pondered anew during his recluse life in Rhode Island. The decline of morals was explained by the deification of Matter: consequent life of sensuous pleasure accounted for decay of religion. That vice is hurtful was argued by free-thinkers like Mandeville to be a vulgar error, and a fallacious demonstration was offered of its utility. That virtue is intrinsically beautiful was taught by Shaftesbury; but Berkeley judged the abstract beauty, with which “minute philosophers” were contented, unfit to move ordinary human beings to self-sacrificing action; for this involves devotion to a Perfect Person by whom goodness is finally distributed. Religion alone inspires the larger and higher life, in presenting distributive justice personified on the throne of the universe, instead of abstract virtue.

The turning-point in Alciphron  is in man’s vision of God. This is pressed in the Fourth Dialogue. The free-thinker asserts that “the notion of a Deity, or some invisible power, is of all prejudices the most unconquerable; the most signal example of belief without reason for believing.” He demands proof— “such proof as every man of sense requires of a matter of fact.... Should a man ask, why I believe there is a king of Great Britain? I might answer, Because I had seen him. Or a king of Spain? Because I had seen those who saw him. But as for this King of kings, I neither saw Him myself, nor any one else that ever did see Him.” To which Euphranor replies, “What if it should appear that God really speaks to man; would this content you? What if it shall appear plainly that God speaks to men by the intervention and use of arbitrary, outward, sensible signs, having no resemblance or necessary connexion with the things they stand for and suggest; if it shall appear that, by innumerable combinations of these signs, an endless variety of things is discovered and made known to us; and that we are thereby instructed or informed in their different natures; that we are taught  and admonished what to shun and what to pursue; and are directed how to regulate our motions, and how to act with respect to things distant from us, as well in time as place: will this content you?” Euphranor accordingly proceeds to shew that Visible Nature is a Language, in which the Universal Power that is continually at work is speaking to us all, in a way similar to that in which our fellow men speak to us; so that we have as much (even more) reason to believe in the existence of the Universal Person who is the Speaker, as we have to believe in the existence of persons around us; who become known to us, when they too employ sense-symbols, in the words and actions by which we discover that we are not alone in the universe. For men are really living spirits: their bodies are only the sign of their spiritual personality. And it is so with God, who is also revealed in the visible world as a Spirit. “In a strict sense,” says Euphranor, “I do not see Alciphron, but only such visible signs and tokens as suggest and infer the being of that invisible thinking principle or soul. Even so, in the self-same manner, it seems to me that, though I cannot with eyes of flesh behold the invisible God, yet I do, in the strictest sense, behold and perceive, by all my senses, such signs and tokens ... as suggest, indicate, and demonstrate an invisible God as certainly, and with the same evidence, at least, as any other signs, perceived by sense, do suggest to me the existence of your  soul, spirit, or thinking principle; which I am convinced of only by a few signs or effects, and the motions of one small organised body; whereas I do, at all times, and in all places, perceive sensible signs which evince the being of God.” In short, God is the living Soul of the Universe; as you and I are the living souls that keep our bodies and their organs in significant motion. We can interpret the character of God in the history of the universe, even as we can interpret the  character of our neighbour by observing his words and outward actions.

This overwhelmed Alciphron. “You stare to find that God is not far from any one of us, and that in Him we live and move and have our being,” rejoins Euphranor. “You who, in the beginning of this conference, thought it strange that God should leave Himself without a witness, do now think it strange the witness should be so full and clear.” “I must own I do,” was the reply. “I never imagined it could be pretended that we saw God with our fleshly eyes, as plain as we see any human person whatsoever, and that He daily speaks to our senses in a manifest and clear dialect.”

Although this reasoning satisfied Alciphron, others may think it inconclusive. How one is able to discover the existence of other persons, and even the meaning of finite personality, are themselves questions full of speculative difficulty. But, waiving this, the analogy between the relation of a human spirit to its body, and that of the Omnipresent and Omnipotent Spirit to the Universe of things and persons, fails in several respects. God is supposed to be continually creating the world by constant and continuous Providence, and His Omniscience is supposed to comprehend all its concrete relations: a man’s body is not absolutely dependent on the man’s own power and providence; and even his scientific knowledge of it, in itself and in its relations, is scanty and imperfect, as his power over it is limited and conditioned. Then the little that a man gradually learns of what is going on in the surrounding universe is dependent on his senses: Omniscience comprehends Immensity and Eternity (so we suppose) in a single intuition. Our bodies, moreover, are visible things: the universe, this organism of God, is crowded with persons , to whom there is nothing corresponding within the organism which reveals one man to another.

 But this is not all. After Euphranor has found that the Universal Power is Universal Spirit, this is still an inadequate  God; for what we want to know is what sort of Spirit God is. Is God omnipotent or of limited power, regarded ethically, fair or unfair in His treatment of persons; good or evil, according to the highest yet attained conception of goodness; a God of love, or a devil omnipotent? I infer the character of my neighbour from his words and actions, patent to sense in the gradual outward evolution of his life. I am asked to infer the character of the Omnipresent Spirit from His words and actions, manifested in the universe of things and persons. But we must not attribute to the Cause more than it reveals of itself in its effects. God and men alike are known by the effects they produce. The Universal Power is, on this condition, righteous, fair, and loving to the degree in which those conceptions are implied in His visible embodiment: to affirm more or other than this, on the basis of analogy alone , is either to indulge in baseless conjecture, or to submit blindly to dogma and authority.

Now the universe, as far as it comes within the range of human experience on this planet, is full of suffering and moral disorder. The “religious hypothesis” of a perfectly righteous and benevolent God is here offered to account for the appearances which the universe presents to us. But do these signify exact distributive justice? Is not visible nature apparently cruel and unrelenting? If we infer cruelty in the character of a man, because his bodily actions cause undeserved suffering, must we not, by this analogy, infer in like manner regarding the character of the Supreme Spirit, manifested in the progressive evolution of the universal organism?

 We find it impossible to determine with absolute certainty the character even of our fellow men, from their imperfectly interpreted words and actions, so that each man is more or less a mystery to his fellows. The mystery deepens when we try to read the character of animals, — to interpret the motives which determine the overt acts  of dogs or horses. And if we were able to communicate by visible signs with the inhabitants of other planets, with how much greater difficulty should we draw conclusions from their visible acts regarding their character? But if this is so when we use the data of sense for reading the character of finite persons, how infinite must be the difficulty of reading the character of the Eternal Spirit, in and through the gradual evolution of the universe of things and persons, which in this reasoning is supposed to be His body; and the history of that universe the facts of His biography, in and by which He is eternally revealing Himself! For we know nothing about the unbeginning and unending. The universe of persons is assumed to have no end ; and I know not why its evolution must be supposed to have had a beginning , or that there ever was a time in which God was unmanifested, to finite persons.

Shall we in these circumstances turn with Euphranor, in the Fifth and Sixth Dialogues, to professed revelation of the character of the Universal Mind presented in miraculous revelation, by inspired prophets and apostles, who are brought forward as authorities able to speak infallibly to the character  of God? If the whole course of nature, or endless evolution of events, is the Divine Spirit revealed in omnipresent activity, what room is there for any other less regular revelation? The universe of common experience, it is implied by Berkeley, is essentially miraculous, and therefore absolutely perfect. Is it consistent with fairness, and benevolence, and love of goodness in all moral agents for its own sake, that the Christian revelation should have been so long delayed, and be still so incompletely made known? Is not the existence of wicked persons on this or any other planet, wicked men or devils, a dark spot in the visible life of God? Does not perfect goodness in God mean restoration of goodness in men, for its own sake, apart from their merit; and must not Omnipotent Goodness, infinitely opposite to all evil, either  convert to goodness all beings in the universe who have made themselves bad, or else relieve the universe of their perpetual presence in ever-increasing wickedness?

Sceptical criticism of this sort has found expression in the searching minute philosophy of a later day than Berkeley’s and Alciphron’s; as in David Hume and Voltaire, and in the agnosticism of the nineteenth century. Was not Euphranor too ready to yield to the demand for a visible God, whose character had accordingly to be determined by what appears in nature and man, under the conditions of our limited and contingent experience? Do we not need to look below data of sensuous experience, and among the presuppositions which must consciously or unconsciously be taken for granted in all man’s dealings with the environment in which he finds himself, for the root of trustworthy experience? On merely physical reasoning, like that of Euphranor, the righteous love of God is an unwarranted inference, and it even seems to be contradicted by visible facts presented in the history of the world. But if Omnipotent Goodness must a priori be attributed to the Universal Mind, as an indispensable condition for man’s having reliable intercourse of any sort with nature; if this is the primary postulate necessary to the existence of truth of any kind — then the “religious hypothesis” that God is Good, according to the highest conception of goodness, is no groundless fancy, but the fundamental faith-venture in which man has to live. It must stand in reason; unless it can be demonstrated that the mixture of good and evil which the universe presents, necessarily contradicts this fundamental presupposition: and if so, man is lost in pessimistic Pyrrhonism, and can assert nothing about anything.

 The religious altruism, however inadequate, which  Berkeley offered in Alciphron made some noise at the time of its appearance, although its theistic argument was too subtle to be popular. The conception of the visible world as Divine Visual Language was “received with ridicule by those who make ridicule the test of truth,” although it has made way since. “I have not seen Dean Berkeley,” Gay the poet writes to Swift in the May following the Dean’s return, and very soon after the appearance of Alciphron , “but I have been reading his book, and like many parts of it; but in general think with you that it is too speculative.” Warburton, with admiration for Berkeley, cannot comprehend his philosophy, and Hoadley shewed a less friendly spirit. A Letter from a Country Clergyman , attributed to Lord Hervey, the “Sporus” of Pope, was one of several ephemeral attacks which the Minute Philosopher encountered in the year after its appearance. Three other critics, more worthy of consideration, are mentioned in one of Berkeley’s letters from London to his American friend Johnson at Stratford: “As to the Bishop of Cork’s book, and the other book you allude to, the author of which is one Baxter, they are both very little considered here; for which reason I have taken no public notice of them. To answer objections already answered, and repeat the same things, is a needless as well as disagreeable task. Nor should I have taken notice of that Letter about Vision, had it not been printed in a newspaper, which gave it course, and spread it through the kingdom. Besides, the theory of Vision I found was somewhat obscure to most people; for which reason I was not displeased at an opportunity to explain it.” The explanation was given in The Theory of Visual Language Vindicated , in January, 1733, as a supplement to Alciphron . Its blot is a tone of polemical bitterness directed against Shaftesbury.

Although Berkeley “took no public notice” of “the Bishop of Cork’s book” it touched a great question, which periodically has awakened controversy, and been the occasion of mutual misunderstanding among the controversialists in past ages. “Is God knowable by man; or must religion be devotion to an object that is unknowable?” In one of his first letters to Lord Percival, as we saw, Berkeley animadverted on a sermon by the Archbishop of Dublin, which seemed to deny that there was goodness, or understanding God, any more than feet or hands. An opinion somewhat similar had been attributed to Bishop Browne, in his answer to Toland, and afterwards in 1728, in his Procedure and Limits of Human Understanding .

 This touched to the quick Berkeley’s ultimate conception of the universe, as realisable only in, and therefore necessarily dependent on, living mind. We are reminded of the famous analogy of Spinoza. If the omnipresent and omnipotent Mind, on which Euphranor rested, can be called “mind” only metaphorically, and can be called “good” only when the term is used without human meaning, it may seem to be a matter of indifference whether we have unknowable Matter or unknowable Mind at the root of things and persons. Both are empty words. The Power universally at work is equally unintelligible, equally unfit to be the object of worship in the final venture of faith, whether we use the term Matter or the term Mind.  The universe is neither explained nor sustained by a “mind” that is mind only metaphorically. To call this “God” is to console us with an empty abstraction. The minutest philosopher is ready to grant with Alciphron that “there is a God in this indefinite sense”; since nothing can be inferred from such an account of God about conduct or religion.

The Bishop of Cork replied to the strictures of Euphranor in the Minute Philosopher . He qualified and explained his former utterances in some two hundred dull pages of his Divine Analogy , which hardly touch the root of the matter. The question at issue is the one which underlies modern agnosticism. It was raised again in Britain in the nineteenth century, with deeper insight, by Sir William Hamilton; followed by Dean Mansel, in controversy with F. D. Maurice, at the point of view of Archbishop King and Bishop Browne, in philosophical vindication of the mysteries of Christian faith; by Mr. Herbert Spencer and by Huxley in a minute philosophy that has been deepened by Hume’s criticism of the rationale of theism in Berkeley.

Andrew Baxter’s Inquiry into the Nature of the Human Soul  , referred to in Berkeley’s letter to Johnson, appeared in 1733. It has a chapter on “Dean Berkeley’s Scheme against the existence of Matter and a Material World,” which is worthy of mention because it is the earliest elaborate criticism of the New Principle, although it had then been before the world for more than twenty years. The title of the chapter shews Baxter’s imperfect comprehension of the proposition which he attempts to refute. It suggests  that Berkeley argued for the non-existence of the things we see and touch, instead of for their necessary dependence on, or subordination to, realising percipient Mind, so far as they are concrete realities. Baxter, moreover, was a Scot; and his criticism is interesting as a foretaste of the protracted discussion of the “ideal theory” by Reid and his friends, and later on by Hamilton. But Baxter’s book was not the first sign of Berkeley’s influence in Scotland. We are told by Dugald Stewart, that “the novelty of Berkeley’s paradox attracted very powerfully the attention of a set of young men who were then prosecuting their studies at Edinburgh, who formed themselves into a Society for the express purpose of soliciting from him an explanation of some parts of his theory which seemed to them obscurely or equivocally expressed. To this correspondence the amiable and excellent prelate seems to have given every encouragement; and I have been told on the best authority that he was accustomed to say that his reasoning had been nowhere better understood than by this club of young Scotsmen.” Thus, and afterwards through Hume and Reid, Berkeley is at the root of philosophy in Scotland.

The two years of indifferent health and authorship in London sum up what may be called the American period of Berkeley’s life. Early in 1734 letters to Prior open a new vista in his history. He was nominated to the bishopric of Cloyne in the south of Ireland, and we have now to follow him to the remote region which was his home for eighteen years. The interest of the philosophic Queen, and perhaps some compensation for the Bermuda disappointment, may explain the appearance of the metaphysical and social idealist in the place where he shone as a star of the first magnitude in the Irish Church of the eighteenth century.

 III. Later Years (1734-53). [image "img140.jpg" file=Image00139.jpg] 

I N M AY , 1734, Berkeley was consecrated as Bishop of Cloyne, in St. Paul’s Church, Dublin. Except occasional visits, he had been absent from Ireland for more than twenty years. He returned to spend eighteen years of almost unbroken seclusion in his remote diocese. It suited a growing inclination to a recluse, meditative life, which had been encouraged by circumstances in Rhode Island. The eastern and northern part in the county of Cork formed his diocese, bounded on the west by Cork harbour, and on the east by the beautiful Blackwater and the mountains of Waterford; the sea, which was its southern boundary, approached within two miles of the episcopal residence in the village of Cloyne.

As soon as he was settled, he resumed study “with unabated attention,” but still with indifferent health. Travelling had become irksome to him, and at Cloyne he was almost as much removed as he had been in Rhode Island from the thinking world. Cork took the place of Newport; but Cork was twenty miles from Cloyne, while Newport was only three miles from Whitehall. His episcopal neighbour at Cork was Bishop Browne, the critic of Alciphron  . Isaac Gervais, afterwards Dean of Tuam, often enlivened the “manse-house” at Cloyne by his wit and intercourse with the great world. Secker, the Bishop of Bristol, and Benson, the Bishop of Gloucester, now and then exchanged letters with him, and correspondence was kept up as of old with Prior at Dublin and Johnson at Stratford. But there is no trace of intercourse with Swift, who was wearing out an unhappy old age, or with Pope, almost the only survivor of the brilliant society of other years. We are told, indeed, that the beauty of Cloyne  was so described to the bard of Twickenham, by the pen which in former days had described Ischia, that Pope was almost moved to visit it. And a letter from Secker in February, 1735, contains this scrap: “Your friend Mr. Pope is publishing small poems every now and then, full of much wit and not a little keenness.” “Our common friend, Dr. Butler,” he adds, “hath almost completed a set of speculations upon the credibility of religion from its analogy to the constitution and course of nature, which I believe in due time you will read with pleasure.” Butler’s Analogy appeared in the following year. But I have found no remains of correspondence between Berkeley and their “common friend”; the two most illustrious religious thinkers of the Anglican communion.

When he left London in 1734 Berkeley was on the eve of what sounded like a mathematical controversy, although it was in his intention metaphysical, and was suggested by the Seventh Dialogue in Alciphron . In one of his letters to Prior, early in that year, he told him that though he “could not read, owing to ill health,” yet his thought was as distinct as ever, and that for amusement “he passed his early hours in thinking of certain mathematical matters which may possibly produce something.” This turned, it seems, upon a form of scepticism among contemporary mathematicians, occasioned by the presence of mysteries of religion. The Analyst  was the issue. It was followed  by a controversy in which some of the most eminent mathematicians took part. Mathematica exeunt in mysteria might have been the motto of the Analyst . The assumptions in mathematics, it is argued, are as mysterious as those of theologians and metaphysicians. Mathematicians cannot translate into perfectly intelligible thought their own doctrines in fluxions. If man’s knowledge of God is rooted in mystery, so too is mathematical analysis. Pure science at last loses itself in propositions which usefully regulate action, but which cannot be comprehended. This is the drift of the argument in the Analyst ; but perhaps Berkeley’s inclination to extreme conclusions, and to what is verbally paradoxical, led him into doubtful positions in the controversy to which the Analyst gave rise. Instead of ultimate imperfect comprehensibility, he seems to attribute absolute contradiction to the Newtonian fluxions. Baxter, in his Inquiry , had asserted that things in Berkeley’s book of Principles forced the author “to suspect that even mathematics may not be very sound knowledge at the bottom.” The metaphysical argument of the Analyst was obscured in a cloud of mathematics.

The social condition of Ireland attracted Berkeley almost as soon as he was settled in Cloyne. He was surrounded by a large native Irish population and a small group of English colonists. The natives, long governed in the interest of the stranger, had never learned to exert and govern themselves. The self-reliance which Berkeley preached fifteen years before, as a mean for “preventing the ruin of Great Britain,” was more wanting in Ireland, where the simplest maxims of social economy were neglected. It was a state of things fitted to move one who was too independent to permit his aspirations to be confined to the ordinary routine of the Irish episcopate, and who could not forget the favourite moral maxim of his life.

 The social chaos of Ireland was the occasion of what  to some may be the most interesting of Berkeley’s writings. His thoughts found vent characteristically in a series of penetrating practical queries. The First Part of the Querist appeared in 1735, anonymously, edited by Dr. Madden of Dublin, who along with Prior had lately founded a Society for promoting industrial arts in Ireland. The Second and Third Parts were published in the two following years. A Discourse to Magistrates occasioned by the Enormous Licence and Irreligion of the Times , which appeared in 1736, was another endeavour, with like philanthropic intention. And the only important break in his secluded life at Cloyne, in eighteen years of residence, was when he went for some months to Dublin in 1737, to render social service to Ireland in the Irish House of Lords.

His metaphysic, at first encountered by ridicule, was now beginning to receive more serious treatment. A Scotsman had already recognised it. In 1739 another and more famous Scotsman, David Hume, refers thus to Berkeley in one of the opening sections of his Treatise of Human Nature : “A very material question has been started concerning abstract or general ideas — whether they be general or particular in the mind’s conception of them. A great philosopher, Dr. Berkeley, has disputed the received opinion in this particular, and has asserted that all general ideas are nothing but particular ones, annexed to a certain term which gives them a more extensive signification, and makes them recall upon occasion other individuals which are similar to them. I look upon this to be one of the greatest and most valuable discoveries that has been made of late years in the republic of letters.” It does not appear that Berkeley heard of Hume.

 A curious interest began to engage him about this time. The years following 1739 were years of suffering in the  Irish diocese. It was a time of famine followed by widespread disease. His correspondence is full of allusions to this. It had consequences of lasting importance. Surrounded by disease, he pondered remedies. Experience in Rhode Island and among American Indians suggested the healing properties of tar. Further experiments in tar, combined with meditation and much curious reading, deepened and expanded his metaphysical philosophy. Tar seemed to grow under his experiments, and in his thoughts, into a Panacea for giving health to the organism on which living mind in man is meanwhile dependent. This natural dependence of health upon tar introduced thoughts of the interdependence of all things, and then of the immediate  dependence of all in nature upon Omnipresent and Omnipotent Mind. The living Mind that underlies the phenomena of the universe began to be conceived under a new light. Since his return to the life of thought in Rhode Island, he had been immersed in Platonic and Neoplatonic literature, and in books of mystical Divinity, encouraged perhaps by the mystical disposition attributed to his wife. An eccentric ingenuity connected the scientific experiments and prescriptions with the Idealism of Plato and Plotinus. The natural law according to which tar-water was universally restorative set his mind to work about the immanence of living Mind. He mused about a medicine thus universally beneficial, and the thought occurred that it must be naturally charged with ‘pure invisible fire, the most subtle and elastic of bodies, and the vital element in the universe’; and water might be the natural cause which enables this elementary fire to be drawn out of tar and transferred to vegetable and animal organisms. But the vital fire could be only a natural cause; which in truth is no efficient cause at all, but only a sign of divine efficiency transmitted through the world of sense: the true cause of this and all other natural effects must be the immanent Mind or Reason in which  we all participate; for in God we live and move and have our being.

It is thus that Berkeley’s thought culminates in Siris , that Chain of Philosophical Reflexions and Inquiries concerning the Virtues of Tar-water, and divers other subjects connected together and arising one from another , which appeared in 1744. This little book made more noise at the time of its appearance than any of his books; but not because of its philosophy, which was lost in its medicinal promise to mankind of immunity from disease. Yet it was Berkeley’s last attempt to express his ultimate conception of the universe in its human and divine relations. When Siris is compared with the book of Principles , the immense difference in tone and manner of thought shews the change wrought in the intervening years. The sanguine argumentative gladiatorship of the Principles is exchanged for pensive speculation, which acknowledges the weakness of human understanding, when it is face to face with the Immensities and Eternities. Compare the opening sections of the Introduction to the Principles with the closing sections of Siris . The contingent data of our experience are now felt to be insufficient, and there is a more or less conscious grounding of the Whole in the eternal and immutable Ideas of Reason. “Strictly, the sense knows nothing. We perceive, indeed, sounds by hearing and characters by sight. But we are not therefore said to understand them.... Sense and experience acquaint us with the course and analogy of appearances and natural effects: thought, reason, intellect, introduce us into the knowledge of their causes.... The principles of science are neither objects of sense nor imagination: intellect and reason are alone the sure guides to truth.” So the shifting basis of the earlier thought is found to need support in the intellectual and moral faith that must be involved in all reasonable human intercourse with the phenomena presented in the universe.

The inadequate thought of God, as only a Spirit or Person supreme among the spirits or persons, in and through whom the material world is realised, a thought which pervades Alciphron , makes way in Siris for the thought of God as the infinite omnipresent Ground, or final sustaining Power, immanent in Nature and Man, to which Berkeley had become accustomed in Neoplatonic and Alexandrian metaphysics. “Comprehending God and the creatures in One general notion, we may say that all things together (God and the universe of Space and Time) make One Universe, or τὸ Πᾶν. But if we should say that all things make One God, this would be an erroneous notion of God; but would not amount to atheism, as long as Mind or Intellect was admitted to be τὸ ἡγεμονικόν, or the governing part.... It will not seem just to fix the imputation of atheism upon those philosophers who hold the doctrine of τὸ Ἕν.” It is thus that he now regards God. Metaphysics and theology are accordingly one.

No attempt is made in Siris to articulate the universe in the light of unifying Mind or Reason. And we are still apt to ask what the truth and goodness at the heart of all really mean; seeing that, as conceived in human minds, they vary in the gradual evolution of intellect and conscience in men. Omnia exeunt in mysteria is the tone of Siris at the end. The universe of reality is too much for our articulate intellectual digestion: it must be left for omniscience; it transcends finite intelligence and the via media of human understanding. Man must be satisfied to pass life, in the infinitesimal interval between birth and death, as a faith-venture, which he may convert into a growing insight, as the generations roll on, but which can never be converted into complete knowledge. “In this state we must be satisfied to make the best of those glimpses within our reach. It is Plato’s remark in his Theætetus  , that while we sit still we are never the wiser; but going into the river, and moving up and down,  is the way to discover its depths and shallows. If we exercise and bestir ourselves, we may even here discover something. The eye by long use comes to see even in the darkest cavern; and there is no subject so obscure but we may discern some glimpse of truth by long poring on it. Truth is the cry of all, but the game of a few. Certainly where it is the chief passion it doth not give way to vulgar cares and views; nor is it contented with a little ardour in the early time of life: a time perhaps to pursue, but not so fit to weigh and revise. He that would make a real progress in knowledge must dedicate his age as well as his youth, the later growth as well as the first-fruits, at the altar of Truth.” Such was Berkeley, and such were his last words in philosophy. They may suggest the attitude of Bacon when, at a different view-point, he disclaims exhaustive system: “I have made a beginning of the work: the fortune of the human race will give the issue. For the matter in hand is no mere felicity of speculation, but the real business and fortunes of the human race.”

 While Berkeley’s central thought throughout his life is concerned with God as the one omnipresent and omnipotent Providential Agent in the universe, he says little about the other final question, of more exclusively human interest, which concerns the destiny of men. That men are born into a universe which, as the visible expression of Moral Providence, must be scientifically and ethically trustworthy; certain not to put man to confusion intellectually or morally, seeing that it could not otherwise be trusted for such in our ultimate venture of faith — this is one thing. That all persons born into it are certain to continue living self-consciously for ever, is another thing. This is not obviously implied in the former presupposition, whether or not it can be deduced  from it, or else discovered by other means. Although man’s environment is essentially Divine, and wholly in its smallest details Providential, may not his body, in its living organisation from physical birth until physical death, be the measure of the continuance of his self-conscious personality? Is each man’s immortal existence, like God’s, indispensable?

Doubt about the destiny of men after they die is, at the end of the nineteenth century, probably more prevalent than doubt about the underlying Providence of God, and His constant creative activity; more perhaps than it was in the days of Toland, and Collins, and Tindal. Future life had been made so familiar to the imagination by the early and mediaeval Church, and afterwards by the Puritans, as in Milton, Bunyan, and Jonathan Edwards, that it then seemed to the religious mind more real than anything that is seen and touched. The habit wholly formed by natural science is apt to dissipate this and to make a human life lived under conditions wholly strange to its “minute philosophy” appear illusory.

A section in the book of Principles in which the common argument for the “natural immortality” of the human soul is reproduced, strengthened by his new conception of what the reality of body means, is Berkeley’s metaphysical contribution for determining between the awful alternatives of annihilation or continued self-conscious life after physical death. The subject is touched, in a less recondite way, in two of his papers in the Guardian , and in the Discourse delivered in Trinity College Chapel in 1708, in which a revelation of the immortality of men is presented as the special gospel of Jesus Christ. To argue, as Berkeley does in the Principles  , that men cannot be annihilated at death, because they are spiritual substances having powers independent of the sequences of nature, implies assumptions regarding finite persons which are  open to criticism. The justification in reason for our venture of faith that Omnipotent Goodness is at the heart of the universe is — that without this presupposition we can have no reasonable intercourse, scientific or otherwise, with the world of things and persons in which we find ourselves; for reason and will are then alike paralysed by universal distrust. But it can hardly be maintained a priori that men, or other spiritual beings in the universe, are equally with God indispensable to its natural order; so that when they have once entered on conscious existence they must always continue to exist consciously. Is not the philosophical justification of man’s hope of endless life ethical rather than metaphysical; founded on that faith in the justice and goodness of the Universal Mind which has to be taken for granted in every attempt to interpret experience, with its mixture of good and evil, in this evanescent embodied life? Can a life such as this is be all for men, in a universe that, because it is essentially Divine, must operate towards the extinction of the wickedness which now makes it a mystery of Omnipotent Goodness?

A cheerful optimism appears in Berkeley’s habit of thought about death, as we have it in his essays in the Guardian : a sanguine apprehension of a present preponderance of good, and consequent anticipation of greater good after death; unlike those whose pessimistic temperament induces a lurid picture of eternal moral disorder. But his otherwise active imagination seldom makes philosophy a meditation upon death. He does not seem to have exercised himself in the way those do who find in the prospect of being in the twenty-first century as they were in the first, what makes them appalled that they have ever come at all into transitory percipient life; or as those others who recoil from an unbodied life after physical death, as infinitely more appalling than the thought of being transported in this body  into another planet, or  even to a material world outside our solar system. In one of his letters to Johnson he does approach the unbodied life, and in a characteristic way: —

“I see no difficulty in conceiving a change of state, such as is vulgarly called death , as well without as with material substance. It is sufficient for that purpose that we allow sensible bodies, i.e. such as are immediately perceived by sight and touch; the existence of which I am so far from questioning, as philosophers are used to do, that I establish it, I think, upon evident principles. Now it seems very easy to conceive the soul to exist in a separate state (i.e. divested from those limits and laws of motion and perception with which she is embarrassed here) and to exercise herself on new ideas, without the intervention of these tangible things we call bodies . It is even very possible to apprehend how the soul may have ideas of colour without an eye, or of sounds without an ear.”

But while we may thus be supposed to have all our present sensuous experience in an unbodied state, this does not enable one to conceive how unbodied persons can communicate with one another in the absence of all sense signs; whether of the sort derived from our present senses, or from other senses of whose data we can in this life have no imagination.

Berkeley’s tar-water enthusiasm lasted throughout the rest of his life, and found vent in letters and pamphlets in support of his Panacea, from 1744 till 1752. Notwithstanding this, he was not forgetful of other interests — ecclesiastical, and the social ones which he included in his large meaning of “ecclesiastical.” The Rising under Charles Edward in 1745 was the occasion of a Letter to the Roman Catholics of Cloyne  , characteristically humane  and liberal. It was followed in 1749 by an Exhortation to the Roman Catholic Clergy of Ireland in a similar spirit; and this unwonted courtesy of an Irish Protestant bishop was received by those to whom it was addressed in a corresponding temper.

It is difficult to determine Berkeley’s relation to rival schools or parties in Church and State. His disposition was too singular and independent for a partisan. Some of his early writings, as we have seen, were suspected of high Tory and Jacobite leanings; but his arguments in the suspected Discourse were such as ordinary Tories and Jacobites failed to understand, and the tenor of his words and actions was in the best sense liberal. In religious thought Siris might place him among latitudinarians; perhaps in affinity with the Cambridge Platonists. His true place is foremost among the religious philosophers of the Anglican Church; the first to prepare the religious problem for the light in which we are invited to look at the universe by modern agnostics, and under the modern conception of natural evolution. He is the most picturesque figure in that Anglican succession which, in the seventeenth century, includes Hooker and Cudworth; in the eighteenth, Clarke and Butler; and in the nineteenth, may we say Coleridge, in lack of a representative in orders; although Mansel, Maurice, Mozley, and Jowett are not to be forgotten, nor Isaac Taylor among laymen: Newman and Arnold, illustrious otherwise, are hardly representatives of metaphysical philosophy.

 A more pensive tone runs through the closing years at Cloyne. Attempts were made in vain to withdraw him from the “remote corner” to which he had been so long confined. His friends urged his claims for the Irish Primacy. “I am no man’s rival or competitor in this matter,” were his words to Prior. “I am not in love with feasts,  and crowds, and visits, and late hours, and strange faces, and a hurry of affairs often insignificant. For my own private satisfaction, I had rather be master of my time than wear a diadem.” Letters to his American friends, Johnson and Clap, shew him still moved by the inspiration which carried him over the Atlantic, and record his influence in the development of American colleges. The home education of his three sons was another interest. We are told by his widow that “he would not trust his sons to mercenary hands. Though old and sickly, he performed the constant tedious task himself.” Of the fruit of this home education there is little to tell. The death of William, his favourite boy, in 1751, “was thought to have struck too close to his father’s heart.” “I am a man,” so he writes, “retired from the amusements, politics, visits, and what the world calls pleasure. I had a little friend, educated always under mine own eye, whose painting delighted me, whose music ravished me, and whose lively gay spirit was a continual feast. It has pleased God to take him hence.” The eldest son, Henry, born in Rhode Island, did not long survive his father. George, the third son, was destined for Oxford, and this destiny was connected with a new project. The “life academico-philosophical,” which he sought in vain to realise in Bermuda, he now hoped to find for himself in the city of colleges on the Isis. “The truth is,” he wrote to Prior as early as September 1746, “I have a scheme of my own for this long time past, in which I propose more satisfaction and enjoyment to myself than I could in that high station, which I neither solicited, nor so much as wished for. A greater income would not tempt me to remove from Cloyne, and set aside my Oxford scheme; which, though delayed by the illness of my son, yet I am as intent upon it and as much resolved as ever.”

The last of Berkeley’s letters which we have is to Dean Gervais. It expresses the feeling with which in April, 1752, he was contemplating life, on the eve of his departure from Cloyne.

“I submit to years and infirmities. My views in this world are mean and narrow; it is a thing in which I have small share, and which ought to give me small concern. I abhor business, and especially to have to do with great persons and great affairs. The evening of life I choose to pass in a quiet retreat. Ambitious projects, intrigues and quarrels of statesmen, are things I have formerly been amused with, but they now seem to be a vain, fugitive dream.”

Four months after this, Berkeley saw Cloyne for the last time. In August he quitted it for Oxford, which he had long pictured in imagination as the ideal home of his old age. When he left Cork in the vessel which carried his wife, his daughter, and himself to Bristol, he was prostrated by weakness, and had to be taken from Bristol to Oxford on a horse-litter. It was late in August when they arrived there.

Our picture of Berkeley at Oxford is dim. According to tradition he occupied a house in Holywell Street, near the gardens of New College and not far from the cloisters of Magdalen. It was a changed world to him. While he was exchanging Ireland for England, death was removing old English friends. Before he left Cloyne he must have heard of the death of Butler in June, at Bath, where Benson, at the request of Secker, affectionately watched the last hours of the author of the Analogy . Benson followed Butler in August.

We hear of study resumed in improved health in the home in Holy well Street. In October a Miscellany, containing several Tracts on various Subjects , “by the Bishop of Cloyne,” appeared simultaneously in London and Dublin. The Tracts were reprints, with the exception of Further Thoughts on Tar-water , which may have been written before he left Ireland. The third edition of Alciphron also appeared in this autumn. But Siris is the latest record of his philosophical thought. A comparison of the Commonplace Book and the Principles with the Analyst and Siris gives the measure of his advancement. After the sanguine beginning perhaps the comparison leaves a sense of disappointment, when we find metaphysics mixed up with mathematics in the Analyst , and metaphysics obscurely mixed up with medicine in Siris .

It is curious that, although in 1752 David Hume’s Treatise of Human Nature had been before the world for thirteen years and his Inquiry concerning Human Understanding for four years, there is no allusion to Hume by Berkeley. He was Berkeley’s immediate successor in the eighteenth-century evolution of European thought. The sceptical criticism of Hume was applied to the dogmatic religious philosophy of Berkeley, to be followed in its turn by the abstractly rational and the moral reconstructive criticism of Kant. Alciphron is, however, expressly referred to by Hume; indirectly, too, throughout the religious agnosticism of his Inquiry , also afterwards in the Dialogues on Natural Religion  , in a vindication of minute philosophy by profounder reasonings than those which satisfied Lysicles and Alciphron. Berkeley, Hume, and Kant are the three significant philosophical figures of their century, each holding the supreme place successively in its beginning, middle, and later years. Perhaps Reid in Scotland did more than any other in his generation to make Berkeley known; not, however, for his true work in constructive  religious thought, but for his supposed denial of the reality of the things we see and touch.

The ideal life in Oxford did not last long. On the evening of Sunday, January 14, 1753, Berkeley was suddenly confronted by the mystery of death. “As he was sitting with my mother, my sister, and myself,” so his son wrote to Johnson at Stratford, in October, “suddenly, and without the least previous notice or pain, he was removed to the enjoyment of eternal rewards; and although all possible means were instantly used, no symptom of life ever appeared after; nor could the physicians assign any cause for his death. He arrived at Oxford on August 25, and had received great benefit from the change of air, and by God’s blessing on tar-water, insomuch that for some years he had not been in better health than he was the instant before he left us.”

Six days later he was buried in Oxford, in the Cathedral of Christ Church, where his tomb bears an appropriate inscription by Dr. Markham, afterwards Archbishop of York.

 George Berkeley by Robert Adamson [image "img57.jpg" file=Image00056.jpg] 

From ‘1911 Encyclopædia Britannica, Volume 3’

GEORGE BERKELEY, (1685-1753), Irish bishop and philosopher, the eldest son of William Berkeley (an officer of customs who had, it seems, come to Ireland in the suite of Lord Berkeley of Stratton, lord lieutenant, 1670-1672, to whom he was related), was born on the 12th of March 1685, in a cottage near Dysert Castle, Thomastown, Ireland. He passed from the school at Kilkenny to Trinity College, Dublin (1700), where, owing to the peculiar subtlety of his mind and his determination to accept no doctrine on the evidence of authority or convention, he left the beaten track of study and was regarded by some as a dunce, by others as a genius. During his career at Dublin the works of Descartes and Newton were superseding the older text-books, and the doctrines of Locke’s Essay were eagerly discussed. Thus he “entered on an atmosphere which was beginning to be charged with the elements of reaction against traditional scholasticism in physics and in metaphysics” (A. C. Fraser). He became a fellow in 1707. His interest in philosophy led him to take a prominent share in the foundation of a society for discussing the new doctrines, and is further shown by his Common Place Book , one of the most valuable autobiographical records in existence, which throws much light on the growth of his ideas, and enables us to understand the significance of his early writings. We find here the consciousness of creative thought focused in a new principle which is to revolutionize speculative science. There is no sign of any intimate knowledge of ancient or scholastic thought; to the doctrines of Spinoza, Leibnitz, Malebranche, Norris, the attitude is one of indifference or lack of appreciation, but the influence of Descartes and specially of Locke is evident throughout. The new principle (nowhere in the Common Place Book explicitly stated) may be expressed in the proposition that no existence is conceivable — and therefore possible — which is not either conscious spirit or the ideas (i.e. objects) of which such spirit is conscious. In the language of a later period this principle may be expressed as the absolute synthesis of subject and object; no object exists apart from Mind. Mind is, therefore, prior both in thought and in existence, if for the moment we assume the popular distinction. Berkeley thus diverted philosophy from its beaten track of discussion as to the meaning of matter, substance, cause, and preferred to ask first whether these have any significance apart from the conscious spirit. In the pursuit of this inquiry he rashly invaded other departments of science, and much of the Common Place Book is occupied with a polemic, as vigorous as it is ignorant, against the fundamental conceptions of the infinitesimal calculus.

In 1707 Berkeley published two short mathematical tracts; in 1709, in his New Theory of Vision , he applied his new principle for the first time, and in the following year stated it fully in the Principles of Human Knowledge . In these works he attacked the existing theories of externality which to the unphilosophical mind is proved by visual evidence. He maintained that visual consciousness is merely a system of arbitrary signs which symbolize for us certain actual or possible tactual experience — in other words a purely conventional language.

The contents of the visual and the tactual consciousness have no element in common. The visible and visual signs are definitely connected with tactual experiences, and the association between them, which has grown up in our minds through custom or habit, rests upon, or is guaranteed by, the constant conjunction of the two by the will of the Universal Mind. But this synthesis is not brought forward prominently by Berkeley. It was evident that a similar analysis might have been applied to tactual consciousness which does not give externality in its deepest significance any more than the visual; but with deliberate purpose Berkeley at first drew out only one side of his argument. In the Principles of Human Knowledge , externality in its ultimate sense as independence of all mind is considered. Matter, as an abstract, unperceived substance or cause, is shown to be impossible, an unreal conception; true substance is affirmed to be conscious spirit, true causality the free activity of such a spirit, while physical substantiality and causality are held to be merely arbitrary, though constant, relations among phenomena connected subjectively by suggestion or association, objectively in the Universal Mind. In ultimate analysis, then, nature is conscious experience, and forms the sign or symbol of a divine, universal intelligence and will.

In 1711 Berkeley delivered his Discourse on Passive Obedience , in which he deduces moral rules from the intention of God to promote the general happiness, thus working out a theological utilitarianism, which may be compared with the later expositions of Austin and J. S. Mill. From 1707 he had been engaged as college tutor; in 1712 he paid a short visit to England, and in April 1713 he was presented by Swift at court. His abilities, his courtesy and his upright character made him a universal favourite. While in London he published his Dialogues (1713), a more popular exposition of his new theory; for exquisite facility of style these are among the finest philosophical writings in the English language. In November he became chaplain to Lord Peterborough, whom he accompanied on the continent, returning in August 1714. He travelled again in 1715-1720 as tutor to the only son of Dr St George Ashe (?1658-1718, bishop successively of Cloyne, Clogher and Derry). In 1721, during the disturbed state of social relations consequent on the bursting of the South Sea bubble he published an Essay towards preventing the Ruin of Great Britain , which shows the intense interest he took in practical affairs. In the same year he returned to Ireland as chaplain to the duke of Grafton, and was made divinity lecturer and university preacher. In 1722 he was appointed to the deanery of Dromore, a post which seems to have entailed no duties, as we find him holding the offices of Hebrew lecturer and senior proctor at the university. The following year Miss Vanhomrigh, Swift’s Vanessa, left him half her property. It would appear that he had only met her once at dinner. In 1724 he was nominated to the rich deanery of Derry, but had hardly been appointed before he was using every effort to resign it in order to devote himself to his scheme of founding a college in the Bermudas, and extending its benefits to the Americans. With infinite exertion he succeeded in obtaining from government a promise of £20,000, and after four years spent in preparation, sailed in September 1728, accompanied by some friends and by his wife, daughter of Judge Forster, whom he had married in the preceding month. Three years of quiet retirement and study were spent in Rhode Island, but it gradually became apparent that government would never hand over the promised grant, and Berkeley was compelled to give up his cherished plan. Soon after his return he published the fruits of his studies in Alciphron, or the Minute Philosopher (1733), a finely written work in the form of dialogue, critically examining the various forms of free-thinking in the age, and bringing forward in antithesis to them his own theory, which shows all nature to be the language of God. In 1734 he was raised to the bishopric of Cloyne. The same year, in his Analyst , he attacked the higher mathematics as leading to freethinking; this involved him in a hot controversy. The Querist , a practical work in the form of questions on what would now be called social or economical philosophy, appeared in three parts, 1735, 1736, 1737. In 1744 was published the Siris , partly occasioned by the controversy as to the efficacy of tar-water in cases of small-pox, but rising far above the circumstance from which it took its rise, and revealing hidden depths in the Berkeleian metaphysics. In 1751 his eldest son died, and in 1752 he removed with his family to Oxford for the sake of his son George, who was studying there. He died suddenly in the midst of his family on the 14th of January 1753, and was buried in Christ Church, Oxford.

In the philosophies of Descartes and Locke a large share of attention had been directed to the idea of matter, which was held to be the abstract, unperceived background of real experience, and was supposed to give rise to our ideas of external things through its action on the sentient mind. Knowledge being limited to the ideas produced could never extend to the unperceived matter, or substance, or cause which produced them, and it became a problem for speculative science to determine the grounds for the very belief in its existence. Philosophy seemed about to end in scepticism or in materialism. Now Berkeley put this whole problem in a new light by pointing out a preliminary question. Before we deduce results from such abstract ideas as cause, substance, matter, we must ask what in reality do these mean — what is the actual content of consciousness which corresponds to these words? Do not all these ideas, when held to represent something which exists absolutely apart from all knowledge of it, involve a contradiction? In putting this question, not less than in answering it, consists Berkeley’s originality as a philosopher. The essence of the answer is that the universe is inconceivable apart from mind — that existence, as such, denotes conscious spirits and the objects of consciousness. Matter and external things, in so far as they are thought to have an existence beyond the circle of consciousness, are impossible, inconceivable. External things are things known to us in immediate perception. To this conclusion Berkeley seems, in the first place, to have been led by the train of reflection that naturally conducts to subjective or egoistic idealism. It is impossible to overstep the limits of self-consciousness; whatever words I use, whatever notions I have, must refer to and find their meaning in facts of consciousness. But this is by no means the whole or even the principal part of Berkeley’s philosophy; it is essentially a theory of causality, and this is brought out gradually under the pressure of difficulties in the first solution of the early problem. To merely subjective idealism, sense percepts differ from ideas of imagination in degree, not in kind; both belong to the individual mind. To Berkeley, however, the difference is fundamental; sense ideas are not due to our own activity; they must therefore be produced by some other will-by the divine intelligence. Sense experience is thus the constant action upon our minds of supreme active intellect, and is not the consequence of dead inert matter. It might appear, therefore, that sensible things had an objective existence in the mind of God; that an idea so soon as it passes out of our consciousness passes into that of God. This is an interpretation, frequently and not without some justice, put upon Berkeley’s own expression. But it is not a satisfactory account of his theory. Berkeley is compelled to see that an immediate perception is not a thing, and that what we consider permanent or substantial is not a sensation but a group of qualities, which in ultimate analysis means sensations either immediately felt or such as our experience has taught us would be felt in conjunction with these. Our belief in the reality of a thing may therefore be said to mean assurance that this association in our minds between actual and possible sensations is somehow guaranteed. Further, Berkeley’s own theory would never permit him to speak of possible sensations, meaning by that the ideas of sensations called up to our minds by present experience. He could never have held that these afforded any explanation of the permanent existence of real objects. His theory is quite distinct from this, which really amounts to nothing more than subjective idealism. External things are produced by the will of the divine intelligence; they are caused, and caused in a regular order; there exists in the divine mind archetypes, of which sense experience may be said to be the realization in our finite minds. Our belief in the permanence of something which corresponds to the association in our minds of actual and possible sensations means belief in the orderliness of nature; and that is merely assurance that the universe is pervaded and regulated by mind. Physical science is occupied in endeavouring to decipher the divine ideas which find realization in our limited experience, in trying to interpret the divine language of which natural things are the words and letters, and in striving to bring human conceptions into harmony with the divine thoughts. Instead, therefore, of fate or necessity, or matter, or the unknown, a living, active mind is looked upon as the centre and spring of the universe, and this is the essence of the Berkeleian metaphysics.

The deeper aspects of Berkeley’s new thought have been almost universally neglected or misunderstood. Of his spiritual empiricism one side only has been accepted by later thinkers, and looked upon as the whole. The subjective mechanism of association which with Berkeley is but part of the true explanation, and is dependent on the objective realization in the divine mind, has been received as in itself a satisfactory theory. Sunt Cogitationes has been regarded by thinkers who profess themselves Berkeleians as the one proposition warranted by consciousness; the empiricism of his philosophy has been eagerly welcomed, while the spiritual intuition, without which the whole is to Berkeley meaningless, has been cast aside. For this he is himself in no small measure to blame. The deeper spiritual intuition, present from the first, was only brought into clear relief in order to meet difficulties in the earlier statements, and the extension of the intuition itself beyond the limits of our own consciousness, which completely removes his position from mere subjectivism, rests on foundations uncritically assumed, and at first sight irreconcilable with certain positions of his system. The necessity and universality of the judgments of causality and substantiality are taken for granted; and there is no investigation of the place held by these notions in the mental constitution. The relation between the divine mind and finite intelligence, at first thought as that of agent and recipient, is complicated and obscure when the necessity for explaining the permanence of real things comes forward. The divine archetypes, according to which sensible experience is regulated and in which it finds its real objectivity, are different in kind from mere sense ideas, and the question then arises whether in these we have not again the “things as they are,” which Berkeley at first so contemptuously dismissed. He leaves it undetermined whether or not our knowledge of sense things, which is never entirely presentative, involves some reference to this objective course of nature or thought of the divine mind. And if so, what is the nature of the notions necessarily implied in the simplest knowledge of a thing , as distinct from mere sense feeling? That in knowing objects certain thoughts are implied which are not presentations or their copies is at times dimly seen by Berkeley himself; but he was content to propound a question with regard to those notions, and to look upon them as merely Locke’s ideas of relation. Such ideas of relation are in truth the stumbling-block in Locke’s philosophy, and Berkeley’s empiricism is equally far from accounting for them.

With all these defects, however, Berkeley’s new conception marks a distinct stage of progress in human thought. His true place in the history of speculation may be seen from the simple observation that the difficulties or obscurities in his scheme are really the points on which later philosophy has turned. He once for all lifted the problem of metaphysics to a higher level, and, in conjunction with his successor, Hume, determined the form into which later metaphysical questions have been thrown.

Bibliography. — The standard edition of Berkeley’s works is that of A. Campbell Eraser in 4 vols. (i.-iii. Works ; iv. Life, Letters and Dissertation ) published by the Clarendon Press (1871); this edition, revised throughout and largely re-written, was re-published by the same author (1901). Another complete edition edited by G. Sampson, with a biographical sketch by A. J. Balfour, and a useful bibliographical summary, appeared in 1897-1898. Prof. Fraser also published an excellent volume of selections (5th ed., 1899), and a short general account in a volume on Berkeley in the Blackwood Philos. Class. For Berkeley’s theory of vision see manuals of psychology ( e.g. G. F. Stout, Wm. James); for his ethical views H. Sidgwick, Hist, of Ethics (5th ed., 1902); A. Bain, Mental and

Moral Science (1872). See also Sir L. Stephen, English Thought in the 18th Century (3rd ed., 1902); J. S. Mill’s Dissertations , vols. ii. and iv.; T. Huxley, Critiques and Addresses , p seq.; G. S. Fullerton, System of Metaphysics (New York, 1904); John Watson, Outline of Philos. (New York, 1898); J. McCosh, Locke’s Theory of Knowledge (1884); T. Lorenz, Ein Beitrag zur Lebensgeschichte G. Berkeleys (1900) and Weitere Beiträge z. Leb. G. B.’s (1901); histories of modern philosophy generally.

  The Delphi Classics Catalogue [image "img141.png" file=Image00140.gif] 

We are proud to present a listing of our complete catalogue of English titles, with   new titles being added every month.  Buying direct from our website means you can make great savings and take advantage of our instant Updates service.  You can even purchase an entire series (Super Set) at a special discounted price.

Only from our website can readers purchase a complete Parts Edition of our titles. When you buy a Parts Edition, you will receive a folder of your chosen author’s works, with each novel, play, poetry collection, non-fiction book and more divided into its own special volume. This allows you to read individual novels etc. and to know precisely where you are in an eBook. For more information, please visit our   Parts Edition page .

 Series Contents [image "img142.jpg" file=Image00141.jpg] 

Series One

Anton Chekhov
Charles Dickens
D.H. Lawrence
Dickensiana Volume I
Edgar Allan Poe
Elizabeth Gaskell
Fyodor Dostoyevsky
George Eliot
H. G. Wells
Henry James
Ivan Turgenev
Jack London
James Joyce
Jane Austen
Joseph Conrad
Leo Tolstoy
Louisa May Alcott
Mark Twain
Oscar Wilde
Robert Louis Stevenson
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
Sir Walter Scott
The Brontës
Thomas Hardy
Virginia Woolf
Wilkie Collins
William Makepeace Thackeray

 [image "img143.jpg" file=Image00142.jpg] 

Series Two

Alexander Pushkin
Alexandre Dumas (English)
Andrew Lang
Anthony Trollope
Bram Stoker
Christopher Marlowe
Daniel Defoe
Edith Wharton
F. Scott Fitzgerald
G. K. Chesterton
Gustave Flaubert (English)
H. Rider Haggard
Herman Melville
Honoré de Balzac (English)
J. W. von Goethe (English)
Jules Verne
L. Frank Baum
Lewis Carroll
Marcel Proust (English)
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Nikolai Gogol
O. Henry
Rudyard Kipling
Tobias Smollett
Victor Hugo
William Shakespeare

 [image "img144.jpg" file=Image00143.jpg] 

Series Three

Ambrose Bierce
Ann Radcliffe
Ben Jonson
Charles Lever
Émile Zola
Ford Madox Ford
Geoffrey Chaucer
George Gissing
George Orwell
Guy de Maupassant
H. P. Lovecraft
Henrik Ibsen
Henry David Thoreau
Henry Fielding
J. M. Barrie
James Fenimore Cooper
John Buchan
John Galsworthy
Jonathan Swift
Kate Chopin
Katherine Mansfield
L. M. Montgomery
Laurence Sterne
Mary Shelley
Sheridan Le Fanu
Washington Irving

 [image "img145.jpg" file=Image00144.jpg] 

Series Four

Arnold Bennett
Arthur Machen
Beatrix Potter
Bret Harte
Captain Frederick Marryat
Charles Kingsley
Charles Reade
G. A. Henty
Edgar Rice Burroughs
Edgar Wallace
E. M. Forster
E. Nesbit
George Meredith
Harriet Beecher Stowe
Jerome K. Jerome
John Ruskin
Maria Edgeworth
M. E. Braddon
Miguel de Cervantes
M. R. James
R. M. Ballantyne
Robert E. Howard
Samuel Johnson
Stendhal
Stephen Crane
Zane Grey

 [image "img146.jpg" file=Image00145.jpg] 

Series Five

Algernon Blackwood
Anatole France
Beaumont and Fletcher
Charles Darwin
Edward Bulwer-Lytton
Edward Gibbon
E. F. Benson
Frances Hodgson Burnett
Friedrich Nietzsche
George Bernard Shaw
George MacDonald
Hilaire Belloc
John Bunyan
John Webster
Margaret Oliphant
Maxim Gorky
Oliver Goldsmith
Radclyffe Hall
Robert W. Chambers
Samuel Butler
Samuel Richardson
Sir Thomas Malory
Thomas Carlyle
William Harrison Ainsworth
William Dean Howells
William Morris

 [image "img147.jpg" file=Image00146.jpg] 

    Series Six

Anthony Hope
Aphra Behn
Arthur Morrison
Baroness Emma Orczy
Captain Mayne Reid
Charlotte M. Yonge
Charlotte Perkins Gilman
E. W. Hornung
Ellen Wood
Frances Burney
Frank Norris
Frank R. Stockton
Hall Caine
Horace Walpole
One Thousand and One Nights
R. Austin Freeman
Rafael Sabatini
Saki
Samuel Pepys
Sir Issac Newton
Stanley J. Weyman
Thomas De Quincey
Thomas Middleton
Voltaire
William Hazlitt
William Hope Hodgson

 [image "img148.jpg" file=Image00147.jpg] 

Series Seven

Adam Smith
Benjamin Disraeli
Confucius
David Hume
E. M. Delafield
E. Phillips Oppenheim
Edmund Burke
Ernest Hemingway
Frances Trollope
Galileo Galilei
Guy Boothby
Hans Christian Andersen
Ian Fleming
Immanuel Kant
Karl Marx
Kenneth Grahame
Lytton Strachey
Mary Wollstonecraft
Michel de Montaigne
René Descartes
Richard Marsh
Sax Rohmer
Sir Richard Burton
Talbot Mundy
Thomas Babington Macaulay
W. W. Jacobs

 [image "img149.jpg" file=Image00148.jpg] 

Series Eight

Anna Katharine Green 
 Arthur Schopenhauer 
 The Brothers Grimm 
 C. S. Lewis 
 Charles and Mary Lamb 
 Elizabeth von Arnim 
 Ernest Bramah 
 Francis Bacon 
 Gilbert and Sullivan 
 Grant Allen 
 Henryk Sienkiewicz 
 Hugh Walpole 
 Jean-Jacques Rousseau 
 John Locke 
 John Muir 
 Joseph Addison 
 Lafcadio Hearn 
 Lord Dunsany 
 Marie Corelli 
 Niccolò Machiavelli 
 Ouida 
 Richard Brinsley Sheridan 
 Sigmund Freud 
 Theodore Dreiser 
 Walter Pater 
 W. Somerset Maugham

 [image "img150.jpg" file=Image00149.jpg] 

  Series Nine

Aldous Huxley

August Strindberg

Booth Tarkington

C. S. Forester

Erasmus

Eugene Sue

Fergus Hume

George Moore

Gertrude Stein

Giovanni Boccaccio

Izaak Walton

J. M. Synge

Johanna Spyri

John Galt

Maurice Leblanc

Max Brand

Molière

Norse Sagas

R. D. Blackmore

R. S. Surtees

Sir Thomas More

Stephen Leacock

The Harvard Classics

Thomas Love Peacock

Thomas Paine

William James

 [image "img151.jpg" file=Image00150.jpg] 

Series Ten

A. E. W. Mason

Abraham Lincoln

Baruch Spinoza

Carolyn Wells

Charles Brockden Brown

Earl Derr Biggers

Evelyn Waugh

F. Marion Crawford

Fred M. White

Frederick Douglass

Gaston Leroux

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

George Berkeley

Howard Pyle

John Kendrick Bangs

John Steinbeck

John Stuart Mill

Martin Luther

Penny Dreadfuls Collection

Sherwood Anderson

Thomas Dekker

Thomas Hobbes

Thomas Jefferson

Willa Cather

William Faulkner

William Le Queux

 [image "img152.jpg" file=Image00151.jpg] 

Ancient Classics

Achilles Tatius
Aeschines
Aeschylus
Ammianus Marcellinus
Apollodorus
Appian
Apuleius
Apollonius of Rhodes
Aristophanes
Aristotle
Arrian
Athenaeus
Augustine
Aulus Gellius
Bede
Callimachus
Cassius Dio
Cato
Catullus
Cicero
Claudian
Clement of Alexandria
Cornelius Nepos
Demosthenes
Dio Chrysostom
Diodorus Siculus
Dionysius of Halicarnassus
Diogenes Laërtius
Ennius
Epictetus
Euripides
Florus
Frontius
Fronto
Herodotus
Hesiod
Hippocrates
Homer
Horace
Isocrates
Josephus
Julian
Julius Caesar
Juvenal
Livy
Longus
Lucan
Lucian
Lucretius
Marcus Aurelius
Manetho
Martial
Nonnus
Ovid
Pausanias
Petronius
Pindar
Plato
Plautus
Pliny the Elder
Pliny the Younger
Plotinus
Plutarch
Polybius
Procopius
Propertius
Quintus Curtius Rufus
Quintus Smyrnaeus
Sallust
Sappho
Seneca the Younger
Septuagint
Sidonius
Sophocles
Statius
Strabo
Suetonius
Tacitus
Terence
Tertullian
Theocritus
Thucydides
Tibullus
Varro
Virgil
Xenophon

 [image "img153.jpg" file=Image00152.jpg] 

Delphi Poets Series

Adam Mickiewicz
A. E. Housman
Alexander Pope
Alfred, Lord Tennyson
Algernon Charles Swinburne
Andrew Marvell
Beowulf
Charlotte Smith
Christina Rossetti
Confederation Poets
D. H Lawrence (poetry)
Dante Alighieri (English)
Dante Gabriel Rossetti
Delphi Poetry Anthology
Edgar Allan Poe (poetry)
Edmund Spenser
Edward Lear
Edward Thomas
Edwin Arlington Robinson
Ella Wheeler Wilcox
Elizabeth Barrett Browning
Emily Dickinson
Epic of Gilgamesh
Ezra Pound
Friedrich Schiller (English)
George Chapman
George Herbert
Gerard Manley Hopkins
Gertrude Stein
Hafez
Heinrich Heine
Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey
Henry Lawson
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
Isaac Rosenberg
James Russell Lowell
Johan Ludvig Runeberg
John Clare
John Donne
John Dryden
John Gower
John Keats
John Milton
John Wilmot, Earl of Rochester
Joseph Addison
Kahlil Gibran
Leigh Hunt
Lord Byron
Ludovico Ariosto
Luís de Camões
Matthew Arnold
Matthew Prior
Michael Drayton
Nikolai Nekrasov
Paul Laurence Dunbar
Percy Bysshe Shelley
Petrarch
Rabindranath Tagore
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Robert Browning
Robert Burns
Robert Frost
Robert Southey
Rumi
Rupert Brooke
Sanskrit Epics
Sara Teasdale
Samuel Taylor Coleridge
Sir Philip Sidney
Sir Thomas Wyatt
Sir Walter Raleigh
Thomas Chatterton
Thomas Gray
Thomas Hardy (poetry)
Thomas Hood
Thomas Moore
Torquato Tasso
T. S. Eliot
W. B. Yeats
Walter Savage Landor
Walt Whitman
Wilfred Owen
William Blake
William Congreve
William Cowper
William Wordsworth

 [image "img154.jpg" file=Image00153.jpg] 

Masters of Art

Albrecht Dürer
Amedeo Modigliani
Artemisia Gentileschi
Berthe Morisot
Camille Pissarro
Canaletto
Caravaggio
Caspar David Friedrich
Claude Lorrain
Claude Monet
Correggio
Dante Gabriel Rossetti
Diego Velázquez
Donatello
Edgar Degas
Édouard Manet
Edvard Munch
El Greco
Eugène Delacroix
Francisco Goya
Giotto
Giovanni Bellini
Gustave Courbet
Gustav Klimt
Hieronymus Bosch
Jacques-Louis David
James Abbott McNeill Whistler
Jan van Eyck
J. M. W. Turner
Johannes Vermeer
John Constable
Leonardo da Vinci
Masaccio
Michelangelo
Paul Cézanne
Paul Gauguin
Paul Klee
Peter Paul Rubens
Pierre-Auguste Renoir
Pieter Bruegel the Elder
Piet Mondrian
Sandro Botticelli
Raphael
Rembrandt van Rijn
Thomas Gainsborough
Tintoretto
Titian
Vincent van Gogh
Wassily Kandinsky

 [image "img155.jpg" file=Image00154.jpg] 

Great Composers

Antonio Vivaldi
Antonín Dvořák
Franz Schubert
Frédéric Chopin
Giuseppe Verdi
Johann Sebastian Bach
Joseph Haydn
Ludwig van Beethoven
Piotr Illitch Tchaïkovsky
Richard Wagner
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart

 Alphabetical List of Titles [image "img156.jpg" file=Image00155.jpg] 

A. E. Housman

A. E. W. Mason

Abraham Lincoln

Achilles Tatius

Adam Mickiewicz

Adam Smith

Aeschines

Aeschylus

Albrecht Dürer

Aldous Huxley

Alexander Pope

Alexander Pushkin

Alexandre Dumas (English)

Alfred, Lord Tennyson

Algernon Blackwood

Algernon Charles Swinburne

Ambrose Bierce

Amedeo Modigliani

Ammianus Marcellinus

Anatole France

Andrew Lang

Andrew Marvell

Ann Radcliffe

Anna Katharine Green

Anthony Hope

Anthony Trollope

Anton Chekhov

Antonín Dvořák

Antonio Vivaldi

Aphra Behn

Apollodorus

Apollonius of Rhodes

Appian

Apuleius

Aristophanes

Aristotle

Arnold Bennett

Arrian

Artemisia Gentileschi

Arthur Machen

Arthur Morrison

Arthur Schopenhauer

Athenaeus

August Strindberg

Augustine

Aulus Gellius

Baroness Emma Orczy

Baruch Spinoza

Beatrix Potter

Beaumont and Fletcher

Bede

Ben Jonson

Benjamin Disraeli

Beowulf

Berthe Morisot

Booth Tarkington

Bram Stoker

Bret Harte

C. S. Forester

C. S. Lewis

Callimachus

Camille Pissarro

Canaletto

Captain Frederick Marryat

Captain Mayne Reid

Caravaggio

Carolyn Wells

Caspar David Friedrich

Cassius Dio

Cato

Catullus

Charles and Mary Lamb

Charles Brockden Brown

Charles Darwin

Charles Dickens

Charles Kingsley

Charles Lever

Charles Reade

Charlotte M. Yonge

Charlotte Perkins Gilman

Charlotte Smith

Christina Rossetti

Christopher Marlowe

Cicero

Claude Lorrain

Claude Monet

Claudian

Clement of Alexandria

Confederation Poets

Confucius

Cornelius Nepos

Correggio

D. H Lawrence (poetry)

D.H. Lawrence

Daniel Defoe

Dante Alighieri (English)

Dante Gabriel Rossetti

Dante Gabriel Rossetti

David Hume

Delphi Poetry Anthology

Demosthenes

Dickensiana Volume I

Diego Velázquez

Dio Chrysostom

Diodorus Siculus

Diogenes Laërtius

Dionysius of Halicarnassus

Donatello

E. F. Benson

E. M. Delafield

E. M. Forster

E. Nesbit

E. Phillips Oppenheim

E. W. Hornung

Earl Derr Biggers

Edgar Allan Poe

Edgar Allan Poe (poetry)

Edgar Degas

Edgar Rice Burroughs

Edgar Wallace

Edith Wharton

Edmund Burke

Edmund Spenser

Édouard Manet

Edvard Munch

Edward Bulwer-Lytton

Edward Gibbon

Edward Lear

Edward Thomas

Edwin Arlington Robinson

El Greco

Elizabeth Barrett Browning

Elizabeth Gaskell

Elizabeth von Arnim

Ella Wheeler Wilcox

Ellen Wood

Émile Zola

Emily Dickinson

Ennius
Epic of Gilgamesh

Epictetus

Erasmus

Ernest Bramah

Ernest Hemingway

Eugène Delacroix

Eugene Sue

Euripides

Evelyn Waugh

Ezra Pound

F. Marion Crawford

F. Scott Fitzgerald

Fergus Hume

Florus

Ford Madox Ford

Frances Burney

Frances Hodgson Burnett

Frances Trollope

Francis Bacon

Francisco Goya

Frank Norris

Frank R. Stockton

Franz Schubert

Fred M. White

Frédéric Chopin

Frederick Douglass

Friedrich Nietzsche

Friedrich Schiller (English)

Frontius

Fyodor Dostoyevsky

G. A. Henty

G. K. Chesterton

Galileo Galilei

Gaston Leroux

Geoffrey Chaucer

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

George Berkeley

George Bernard Shaw

George Chapman

George Eliot

George Gissing

George Herbert

George MacDonald

George Meredith

George Moore

George Orwell

Gerard Manley Hopkins

Gertrude Stein

Gertrude Stein

Gilbert and Sullivan

Giotto

Giovanni Bellini

Giovanni Boccaccio

Giuseppe Verdi

Grant Allen

Gustav Klimt

Gustave Courbet

Gustave Flaubert (English)

Guy Boothby

Guy de Maupassant

H. G. Wells

H. P. Lovecraft

H. Rider Haggard

Hafez

Hall Caine

Hans Christian Andersen

Harriet Beecher Stowe

Heinrich Heine

Henrik Ibsen

Henry David Thoreau

Henry Fielding

Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey

Henry James

Henry Lawson

Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

Henryk Sienkiewicz

Herman Melville

Herodotus

Hesiod

Hieronymus Bosch

Hilaire Belloc

Hippocrates

Homer

Honoré de Balzac (English)

Horace

Horace Walpole

Howard Pyle

Hugh Walpole

Ian Fleming

Immanuel Kant

Isaac Rosenberg

Isocrates

Ivan Turgenev

Izaak Walton

J. M. Barrie

J. M. Synge

J. M. W. Turner

J. W. von Goethe (English)

Jack London

Jacques-Louis David

James Abbott McNeill Whistler

James Fenimore Cooper

James Joyce

James Russell Lowell

Jane Austen

Jean-Jacques Rousseau

Jerome K. Jerome

Johan Ludvig Runeberg

Johann Sebastian Bach

Johanna Spyri

Johannes Vermeer

John Buchan

John Bunyan

John Clare

John Constable

John Donne

John Dryden

John Galsworthy

John Galt

John Gower

John Keats

John Kendrick Bangs

John Locke

John Milton

John Muir

John Ruskin

John Steinbeck

John Stuart Mill

John Webster

John Wilmot, Earl of Rochester

Jonathan Swift

Joseph Addison

Joseph Addison

Joseph Conrad

Joseph Haydn

Josephus

Jules Verne

Julian

Julius Caesar

Juvenal

Kahlil Gibran

Karl Marx

Kate Chopin

Katherine Mansfield

Kenneth Grahame

L. Frank Baum

L. M. Montgomery

Lafcadio Hearn

Laurence Sterne

Leigh Hunt

Leo Tolstoy

Leonardo da Vinci

Lewis Carroll

Livy

Longus

Lord Byron

Lord Dunsany

Louisa May Alcott

Lucan

Lucian

Lucretius

Ludovico Ariosto

Ludwig van Beethoven

Luís de Camões

Lytton Strachey

M. E. Braddon

M. R. James

Manetho

Marcel Proust (English)

Marcus Aurelius

Margaret Oliphant

Maria Edgeworth

Marie Corelli

Mark Twain

Martial

Martin Luther

Mary Shelley

Mary Wollstonecraft

Masaccio

Matthew Arnold

Matthew Prior

Maurice Leblanc

Max Brand

Maxim Gorky

Michael Drayton

Michel de Montaigne

Michelangelo

Miguel de Cervantes

Molière

Nathaniel Hawthorne

Niccolò Machiavelli

Nikolai Gogol

Nikolai Nekrasov

Nonnus

Norse Sagas

O. Henry

Oliver Goldsmith

One Thousand and One Nights

Oscar Wilde

Ouida

Ovid

Paul Cézanne

Paul Gauguin

Paul Klee

Paul Laurence Dunbar

Pausanias

Penny Dreadful Collection

Percy Bysshe Shelley

Peter Paul Rubens

Petrarch

Petronius

Piero della Francesca

Pierre-Auguste Renoir

Piet Mondrian

Pieter Bruegel the Elder

Pindar

Piotr Illitch Tchaïkovsky

Plato

Plautus

Pliny the Elder

Pliny the Younger

Plotinus

Plutarch

Polybius

Procopius

Propertius

Quintus Curtius Rufus

Quintus Smyrnaeus

R. Austin Freeman

R. D. Blackmore

R. M. Ballantyne

R. S. Surtees

Rabindranath Tagore

Radclyffe Hall

Rafael Sabatini

Ralph Waldo Emerson

Raphael

Rembrandt van Rijn

René Descartes

Richard Brinsley Sheridan

Richard Marsh

Richard Wagner

Robert Browning

Robert Burns

Robert E. Howard

Robert Frost

Robert Louis Stevenson

Robert Southey

Robert W. Chambers

Rudyard Kipling

Rumi

Rupert Brooke

Saki

Sallust

Samuel Butler

Samuel Johnson

Samuel Pepys

Samuel Richardson

Samuel Taylor Coleridge

Sandro Botticelli

Sanskrit Epics

Sappho

Sara Teasdale

Sax Rohmer

Seneca the Younger

Septuagint

Sheridan Le Fanu

Sherwood Anderson

Sidonius

Sigmund Freud

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle

Sir Issac Newton

Sir Philip Sidney

Sir Richard Burton

Sir Thomas Malory

Sir Thomas More

Sir Thomas Wyatt

Sir Walter Raleigh

Sir Walter Scott

Sophocles

Stanley J. Weyman

Statius

Stendhal

Stephen Crane

Stephen Leacock

Strabo

Suetonius

T. S. Eliot

Tacitus

Talbot Mundy

Terence

Tertullian

The Brontës

The Brothers Grimm

The Harvard Classics

Theocritus

Theodore Dreiser

Thomas Babington Macaulay

Thomas Carlyle

Thomas Chatterton

Thomas De Quincey

Thomas Dekker

Thomas Gainsborough

Thomas Gray

Thomas Hardy

Thomas Hardy (poetry)

Thomas Hobbes

Thomas Hood

Thomas Jefferson

Thomas Love Peacock

Thomas Middleton

Thomas Moore

Thomas Paine

Thucydides

Tibullus

Tintoretto

Titian

Tobias Smollett

Torquato Tasso

Varro

Victor Hugo

Vincent van Gogh

Virgil

Virginia Woolf

Voltaire

W. B. Yeats

W. Somerset Maugham

W. W. Jacobs

Walt Whitman

Walter Pater

Walter Savage Landor

Washington Irving

Wassily Kandinsky

Wilfred Owen

Wilkie Collins

Willa Cather

William Blake

William Congreve

William Cowper

William Dean Howells

William Faulkner

William Harrison Ainsworth

William Hazlitt

William Hope Hodgson

William James

William Le Queux

William Makepeace Thackeray

William Morris

William Shakespeare

William Wordsworth

Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart

Xenophon

Zane Grey

www.delphiclassics.com

Is there an author or artist you would like to see in a series?  Contact us at sales@delphiclassics.com (or via the social network links below) and let us know!

Be the first to learn of new releases and special offers:

Like us on Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/delphiebooks

Follow our Tweets: https://twitter.com/delphiclassics

Explore our exciting boards at Pinterest:   https://www.pinterest.com/delphiclassics/

 [image "img157.jpg" file=Image00156.jpg] 

Berkeley College, one of Yale University’s 14 residential colleges, is named after George Berkeley

 [image "img158.jpg" file=Image00157.jpg] 

Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford — Berkeley’s final resting place

 [image "img159.jpg" file=Image00158.jpg] 

Berkeley’s grave

 

