  This book made available by the Internet Archive. 




  




  




  




  




     EDITOR'S PREFACE

  In  the  following  pages,  Dr.  Gustave  Le  Bon  develops  further  the

strikingly novel and original theories put forward by him in Linvolution de la

Matierc} As in the last-named work, he enunciated the doctrine, which he

was the first to deduce, that all matter is continually in a state of dissociation

and decay, so in this he goes in detail into the corollary, there only briefly

stated, that the atom is a great reservoir of energy, and itself the source of

most of the forces of the universe. In support of this position, he calls in the

aid  of  his  earlier  researches  into  the  nature  of  invisible  radiations,

phosphorescence,  and  the  Hertzian  waves,  all  which,  with  several  related

phenomena, he declares to be explicable by the hypothesis that the atom, on

dissociating, sets free, either wholly or in part; the energy stored up within it

on its formation. Yet he is careful to declare that this is rather suggested than

demonstrated by his researches,

  ^ Paris, 1905. An English translation, under the title " The Evolution of

Matter," was published in 1907.

  and that the conchisive proof of the vaHdity of his assertion must be

delayed for the result of further experiments by himself or others.

  In the meantime, it is well to notice that both Dr. Le Bon's original thesis

and its corollary have received approval from an unexpected quarter. Every

new scientific theory, if sufficiently far-reaching, is received with disapproval

by  those  brought  up  on  the  ideas  it  would  supplant,  and  Dr.  Le  Bon's

assertion of the universal dissociation of matter formed no exception to this

rule.  In  France,  as  he  reminds  us  in  L'Involution  de  la  Mature,  his  first

discovery of the phenomena which he classed together under the odd name of

'■ Black Light," aroused a perfect storm of obloquy which has long since

died away. In England, Avhither his theories penetrated only after they had

been in great part accepted by the scientific world, this was not the case; but

two  members  of  the  Cavendish  Laboratory  at  Cambridge  took  upon

themselves, upon the appearance of L£volutioii de la Mature, to assail its

teaching as well as its novelty with more virulence than force.^ It is therefore

pleasing  to  find  Mr.  P.  D.  Innes,  himself  a  member  of  the  Cavendish

Laboratory,  writing,  with  the  apparent  approval  of  its  Director,  in  the

Proceed-

  ^ See the Athencmm of February 17 and 24, and of March 3, 10, 17, and

24, 190ti ; and the Jahrbuch fiir Elcktronik, ii. (1895), p. 45!t et seq.

  ings ^ of the Royal Socidy, with regard to radio-active    phenomena, that

  "  the  only  theory  which  can  satisfactorily  account  for  the  phenomena

observed is that of atomic disintegration, a process that is apparently going on

in several, if not in all, of the elements " ;

  and further (p. 443),

  " that there is a great store of energy in the atom seems now beyond

question, and if this reservoir could only become available, all our present

conditions might be completely revolutionised."

  This is exactly—as any one can see for himself —the position taken up

by  Dr.  Le  Bon  in  L'£volution  de  la  Mature,  and  further  defined  and

emphasized by him in the present work. There seems therefore good reason

to suppose that Dr. Le Bon's later theories, as well as his earlier ones, are now

widely accepted by men of science, and that before long this acceptance will

be extended to all points of his doctrine.

  It should be added that the present Avork was written expressly for the

International Scientific Series, and was intended to appear simultaneously in

England and France. Difficulties connected

  o

  ^  Proceediwjs  of  the  Royal  Society,  A,  vol.  Ixxix.,  No.  4,  532  (Sept.

1907), p. 442.

  with the reproduction of the illustrations have caused the appearance of

this version to lag some months behind the French, of which eight editions of

1000  copies  apiece  have  been  rapidly  exhausted.  The  delay  has  not  been

useless, as it has enabled me to add a few corrections and notes, together with

indexes, which are wanting in the French editions.

  F. LEGGE.

  Royal Institution of Great Britain, February, 1908. 




   PAGE

    CHAPTER  III  The  Buildix(4-up  of  Forces  and  the  Mechanical

Explanations of the Universe § I. The cycle of forces—§ 2. The mechanical

explanations

  of the universe 3 2

  BOOK III The Dogma of the Indestructibility of Energy

    CHAPTER I

  The  Monistic  Conception  of  Forces  and  the  Theory  OF  THE

Conservation of Energy § I. The conservation of energy—§2. The principles

of thermodynamics 39

    CHAPTER II

  The Energetical Explanation of Phenomena

  § I. The principles of energetic mechanics—§ 2. Quantity and tension of

energy—§ 3. Transformation of quantity into tension, and conversely—§ 4.

Part of matter in energetic mechanics .......... 46

    CHAPTER III

  The Degradation of Energy and Potential Energy

  § I. The theory of the degradation of energy—§ 2. Potential

  energy 56

  BOOK IV

  The New Conception of Forces

    CHAPTER I

  The  Individualization  of  Forces  and  the  Supposed  Transformations  of

Energy

  § I. The transformations of energy—§ 2. Forms of energy in

  matter .......... 63

  PAGE

    CHAPTER II

  The Changes op Equilibria of Matter and the Ether Origin of Forces § I.

Alterations of level as genei'ators of energy—§2. Elements

  of entity called energy ....... 69

    CHAPTER III

  The Evolution of the Cosmos—Origin of Matter and Universal Forces §

I. The origin of matter—§ 2. Formation of a solar system — § 3. Molecular

and  intra-atomic  energies—§  4.  Intra-atomic  energy  source  of  universal

forces . ■ . . -78

    CHAPTER IV  The Vanishing of Energy and End of our Universe § I. The old age of

enei'gy and vanishing of forces—§ 2. Summary of doctrine of vanishing of

energy and discussion of objections—§ 3. Periods of evolution of world ... 89

  PART II

  THE PROBLEMS OF PHYSICS

  BOOK I

  The Dematerialization of Matter and the Problems of Electricity

    CHAPTER I

  The Genesis of Current Ideas on Relations of Electricity and Matter § I.

Part of electricity in transformation of chemical compounds—§ 2. The like in

dissociation of simple bodies . 103

    CHAPTER II

  The  Transformation  of  Matter  into  Electricity  §  I.  Transformation  of

matter into energy—§ 2. Electrification by influence—§ 3. Different forms of

electric  influence  —§4.  Mechanism  of  leak  from  insulating  bodies—§5.

Difference of tension between electricity produced by chemical changes and

by friction explained . . . -IIS

  PAGE

    CHAPTER III The Problems of Magxetism, Magnetic Inductiox, AXD

Lines of Force § I. Problem of magnetism—§ 2. Problem of induction—§ 3.

  Problem of origin of lines of force 130

    CHAPTER IV The Electric Waves § I. Properties of electric waves—§ 2.

Sensitiveness of matter to electric waves—§ 3. Propagation of electric waves

to a distance and their utilization 140

    CHAPTER V

  The Transparency of Matter to Electric Waves § I. History of experiments

on  transparency—§2.  Opaqueness  of  metals  to  electric  waves—§  3.

Transparency of dielectrics to same 150

    CHAPTER VI The Different Forms of Electricity and their Origin § I.

Does electricity exist in matter?—§ 2. Various forms of

  electricity 164

  BOOK II

  The Problems of Heat and of Light

    CHAPTER I

  The Problems of Heat

  § 1. Old and new ideas on the causes of heat—§ 2. Changes

  of state under heat and energy resulting therefrom—  § 3. Can heat be the measure of all forms of energy?—

  §4. The conception of the absolute zero . . . -173

    CHAPTER II Transformation of Material Movements into Ethereal

    Vibrations  and  Radiant  Heat  §  I.  Nature  of  radiant  heat  and

transformation  by  matter  of  ethereal  vibrations—§  2.  Permanence  of  the

radiation of matter—§ 3. Electric emissions which accompany heat . 186

  PAGE

    CHAPTER III

    Traxsformatiox of Matter into Light

  §  I.  Emission  of  light  by  matter—§  2.  Influence  of  wavelength  and

amplitude  on  light—§  3.  The  invisible  spectrum  —§  4.  Distribution  of

.energy  throughout  spectrum—§  5.  Absorption  of  light  by  matter—§  6.

Chemical and photographic action of light 194

    CHAPTER IV The Deiiaterialization of Matter by Light § I. Dissociation

of matter by different radiations of solar

    spectrum—§ 2. Origin of phenomena exhibited by radium 216

  BOOK III

  The Problems of Phosphorescence

  • CHAPTER I Phosphorescence produced by Light § I. Difiierent forms

of  phosphorescence—§  2.  Action  of  different  parts  of  spectrum  on

phosphorescent bodies— § 3. Phosphorescence of diamond—§ 4. Intensity of

phosphorescence and temperature—§ 5. Decay of phosphorescence by action

of time 224

    CHAPTER II

    Phosphorescence  produced  by  Heat  §  I.  Method  of  observation—§  2.

Properties  of  bodies  phosphorescing  by  heat—§  3.  Analogies  between

phosphorescence by light and by heat 242

    CHAPTER III

    Phosphorescence from Other Causes than above § I. Phosphorescence by

impact and friction—§ 2. By X and cathode rays and high-frequency effluves

—§ 3. By chemical reaction—§ 4. Phosphorescence of living beings —§ 5-

Of gases .259

    CONTENTS

  PAQE

    CHAPTER IV The Causes of Phosphorescence § I. Phosphorescence as a

manifestation of intra-atomic energy

  _§ 2. Chemical reactions causing phosphorescence . 271  BOOK IV Black Light

    CHAPTER 1

  Invisible Phosphorescence § I. Divisions of black light—§ 2. History of

invisible phosphorescence—§ 3. Properties of invisible phosphorescence —§

4. Transformation of invisible phosphorescence into visible—§ 5. Invisible

phosphorescence preceding visible —§ 6. Comparative effects of infra-red

rays  and  heat  on  phosphorescence—§  7.  Radiations  of  metals  and  non-

phosphorescent bodies 279

    CHAPTER II

  The Infra-Red Rays and Photography through

  Opaque Bodies

  § I. Visibility through opaque bodies —§ 2. Photography

  through same—§ 3. Instantaneous photography in dark

  —§ 4. Transparency of different bodies to infra-red rays—

  § 5. Use of invisible rays to make distant bodies visible . 300

    CHAPTER III The Part Played by the Various Luminous Radiations

  IN  Vital  Phenomena  §  I.  The  part  of  light  in  vital  phenomena—§2.

Observation of effects of solar spectrum in plant life—§ 3. New method of

study of physiological action of infra-red rays . -319

    CHAPTER IV

  The Anta(;oxistic Properties of Some Regions OF the Spectrum § I. Rays

which illuminate and rays which extinguish—§ 2.

    Opposite properties of different regions of the spectrum . 329

  BOOK V

  Forces of Unknown Origin and Hidden Forces

  PACE

    CHAPTER I

    Universal Gravitation and Hidden Forces

  § I. Causes of gravitation —§ 2. Consequences of gravitation

  —§ 3. Forces dimly seen ....... 342

    CHAPTER II

  The Molecular and Intra-Atomic Forces

  § I. Attractions and repulsions of material elements—§ 2.

  Molecular equilibria^§ 3. The force and the form . . 352

    CHAPTER III

  The Forces Manifested by Living Beings"

  § I. Living matter and cellular life—§ 2. Instability the condition of lifeand intra-atomic energies — §3. Forces which regulate the organism—§4.

Morphogenic forces— § 5. Interpretaticn of vital phenomena .... 361

  Index of Subjects 378

  Index of Names 387

  PART I

  THE NEW PRINCIPLES

  THE EVOLUTION OF FORCES

  BOOK I

  THE NEW BASES OF THE PHYSICS OF THE UNIVERSE

    CHAPTER I

  THE PRESENT ANARCHY OF SCIENCE

  Every  philosopher  devoted  to  the  study  of  subjects  with  rather  vague

outhnes and uncertain conchisions, such as Psychology, Politics, or History,

who had a few years ago to peruse a work on Physical Science, must have

been  struck  by  the  clearness  of  the  definitions,  the  exactness  of  the

demonstrations, and the precision of the experiments. Everything was strictly

linked  together  and  interpreted.  By  the  side  of  the  most  complicated

phenomenon there always figured its explanation.

  If the same philosopher had the curiosity to look for the general principles

on which these precise sciences were founded, he could not but be compelled

to admire their marvellous simplicity and their imposing grandeur. Chemistry

and mechanics had the indestructible atom for their foundation, physics the

indestructible energy. Learned equations, produced

  either by experiment or by pure reasoning, united by rigid formulas the

four fundamental elements of things— i.e. time, space, matter, and force. All

the  bodies  in  the  universe,  from  the  gigantic  star  describing  its  eternal

revolutions in space down to the infinitesimal grain of dust which the wind

seems to blow about at will, were subject to their laws.

  We were right to be proud of such a science, the fruit of centuries of

effort. To it was due the unity and simplicity which everywhere reigned. A

few  minds  enamoured  of  formulas  thought  it  possible  to  simplify  them

further  by  taking  into  account  only  the  mathematical  relations  between

phenomena. These last appeared to them solely as manifestations of one great

entity, viz.: energy. A few differential equations sufficed to explain all the

facts discovered by observation. The principal researches of science consisted

in discovering new formulas that from that moment became universal laws

which nature was forced to obey.  Before  such  important  results,  the  philosopher  bent  low,  and

acknowledged that if but little certainty existed in the surroundings in which

he lived, at least it could be found in the domain of pure science. How could

he doubt it ? Did he not notice that the majority of learned men were so sure

of their demonstrations that not even the shadow of a doubt ever crossed their

minds ?

  Placed above the changing flux of things, above the chaos of unstable and

contradictory opinions, they dwelt in that serene region of the absolute where

all uncertainty vanishes and where shines the dazzling light of pure truth.

  Our great scientific theories are not all very

    ancient,  since  the  cycle  of  precise  experimental  science  hardly  covers

more than three centuries. This period, relatively so short, reveals two very

distinct phases of evolution in the minds of scholars.

  The first is the period of confidence and certainty to which I have just

referred. In face of the daily increase of discoveries, especially during the

first half of last century, the philosophical and religious dogmas on which our

conception of the universe had for so loncj been based, faded and vanished

com-pletely. No complaint was raised. Were not absolute truths to replace the

former uncertainties of ancient beliefs ? The founders of each new science

imagined that they had once for all built up for that science a framework

which only needed filling in. This scientific edifice once built up, it would

alone remain standing on the ruins of the vain imaginings and illusions of the

past.  The  scientific  creed  was  complete.  No  doubt  it  presented  nature  as

regardless of mankind and the heavens as tenant-less; but it was hoped to

repeople the latter at an early date and to set up for our adoration new idols,

somewhat wooden perhaps, but which at least Avould never play us false.

  This happy confidence in the great dogmas of modern science remained

unaltered until the quite recent day when unforeseen discoveries condemned

scientific thought to suffer doubts from which it imagined itself for ever free.

The  edifice  of  which  the  fissures  were  only  visible  to  a  few  superior

intelligences  has  been  suddenly  and  violently  shaken.  Contradictions  and

impossibilities,  hardly  perceptible  at  first,  have  become  striking.  The

disilhision was so rapid that, in a short space of time, the question

  arose whether the principles which seemingly constituted the most certain

foundations of our knowledge in physics were not simply fragile hypotheses

which  wrapped  profound  ignorance  in  a  delusive  veil.  Then  that  befell

scientific dogmas which formerly happened to religious dogmas so soon asany one dared discuss them. The hour of criticism was quickly followed by

the hour of decadence, and then by that of disappearance and oblivion.

  No doubt those great principles of which science was so proud have not

yet perished entirely. For a long while they will continue to be positive truths

to the multitude and will be propagated in elementary text-books, but they

have already lost their prestige in the eyes of real scholars. The discoveries

just  alluded  to  have  simply  accentuated  the  uncertainties  which  the  latest

works had already commenced to reveal; and it is thus that science herself

has entered into a phase of anarchy from which she might have been thought

for  ever  safe.  Principles  which  appeared  to  have  a  sure  mathematical

foundation are now contested by those whose profession it is to teach and

defend them. Such profound books as La Science et VHypotltese of M. Henri

Poincare give proofs of this on nearly every page. Even in the domain of

mathematics,  this  illustrious  scholar  has  shown  that  we  only  subsist  on

hypotheses and conventions.

  One  of  M.  Poincare's  most  eminent  colleagues  in  the  Institut,  the

mathematician fimile Picard, has ghown in one of his publications how "

incoherent" are the present principles of another almost fundamental science,

—mechanics. He says : " At the end of the eighteenth century, the principles

of mechanics

  seemed to defy all criticism, and the work, of the founders of the science

of motion formed a block which seemed for ever safe against the lapse of

time. Since that epoch, searching analysis has examined the foundations of

the edifice with a magnifying glass. As a matter of fact, where learned men

like Lagrange and Laplace deemed everything quite simple, we to-day meet

with the most serious difficulties. Every one who has had to teach the first

steps  of  mechanics,  and  who  has  troubled  to  think  for  himself,  has

experienced how incoherent are the more or less traditional explanations of

its principles."

  The principles of mechanics, which are apparently most simple, writes

Professor Mach in his History of Mechanics, " are of a very complicated

nature. They are based on unrealized, and even on unrealizable, experiments.

In  no  way  can  they  be  considered  in  themselves  as  demonstrated

mathematical truths."

  At the present time we possess three systems of mechanics, each of which

declares the other two to be absurd. Even if none of them, perhaps, deserves

this qualification, they may at least be considered very incoherent, and asfurnishing no acceptable explanation of phenomena.

  "There hardly now exist," writes M. Lucien Poincare, "any of those great

theories  once  universally  admitted,  to  which,  by  common  consent,  all

searchers subscribed. A certain anarchy reigns in the domain of the natural

sciences, all presumptions are allowed, and no law appears rigidly necessary.

. . . We are witnessing at this moment, rather a demolition than a definite

work of construction. . . . The ideas which to our predecessors

  seemed strongly established are now controverted. . . . To-day the idea

that  all  phenomena  are  capable  of  mechanical  explanations  is  generally

abandoned. . . . The very principles of mechanics are contested, and recent

facts unsettle our belief in the absolute value of laws hitherto considered

fundamental."

    Assuredly the great theories which dominated the science of each epoch,

and gave direction to its studies, did not remain for ever undisputed. After an

existence generally pretty long, they slowly vanished, but did not give place

to  new  doctrines,  until  those  last  were  strongly  founded.  To-day  the  old

principles are dead or dying, and those destined to replace them are only in

course of formation. Modern man destroys faster than he builds. The legacies

of the past are merely shadows. Gods, ideas, dogmas, ancl creeds vanish one

after the other. Before new edifices capable of sheltering our thoughts can be

built, many ruins will have crumbled into dust. We are still in an age of

destruction, and therefore of anarchy.

  Nothing, fortunately, is more favourable to progress than this anarchy.

The  world  is  full  of  things  we  do  not  see,  and  it  is  of  the  erroneous  or

insufficient  ideas  imposed  by  the  traditions  of  classic  teachings  that  the

bandage  is  woven  which  covers  our  sight.  History  shows  to  what  degree

scientific theories retard progress so soon as they have acquired a certain

fixity.  A  fresh  step  forward  only  becomes  possible  after  a  sufficient

dissociation  of  the  earlier  ideas.  To  point  out  error  and  to  follow  up  its

consequences is at times as useful as discovering new facts. Perhaps the most

dangerous thing to the progress of the human mind is to place before readers

—

  as is invariably the case with all educational works— uncertainties as

indisputable truths, and to presume to impose limits to science, or, as Auguste

Comte  wished  to  do,  to  the  knowable.  The  celebrated  philosopher  even

proposed the creation of an Areopagus of scholars with the mission of fixing

limits  to  the  researches  which  should  be  permitted.  Such  tribunals  are,unfortunately, already too numerous, and no one can be unaware how baneful

has been their influence.

  There  should  therefore  be  no  hesitation  to  examine  closely  the

fundamental dogmas of science for the sole reason that they are venerated

and at first sight appear indestructible. The great merit of Descartes lay in his

viewing as doubtful what down to his time had been considered uncontested

truth. Too often do we forget that the scientific idols of the present day have

no more right to invulnerability than those of the past.

  The two dogmas of modern science formerly most respected were those

of  the  indestructibility  of  matter  and  energy.  The  first  was  already  two

thousand years old, and all discoveries had only tended to confirm it. By a

marvellous  exception,  the  strangeness  of  which  struck  no  one,  while  all

things  in  the  universe  were  condemned  to  perish,  matter  remained

mdestructible. The beings formed by the combination of atoms had but an

ephemeral existence; but they were composed of immortal elements. Created

at the beginning of the ages, these elements defied the action of centuries and,

like the gods of ancient legends, enjoyed eternal youth.

  Matter  was  not,  however,  alone  in  possessing  this  privilege  of

immortality. The Forces—which are

  lo THE EVOLUTION OF FORCES

  now  termed,  Energy—were  equally  indestructible.  This  last  might

incessantly  change  its  form,  but  the  quantity  of  it  in  the  world  remained

invariable. A form of energy could not disappear without being replaced by

another equivalent one.

  I  have  devoted  nearly  ten  years  of  the  experimental  researches

summarized in my book, L'involution de la Matiere, to proving that the first

of the above-mentioned dogmas can no longer be maintained, and that matter

also must enter into the cycle of things condemned to grow old and die. But if

matter be perishable, can we suppose that energy alone enjoys the privilege

of immortality ? The dogma of the conservation of energy still retains so

much prestige that no criticism seems to shake it. In this work we shall have

to discuss its value, and this study will necessitate many others. My own

experimental researches have led me to explore somewhat different chapters

of  physics  without  much  heeding  what  was  taught  regarding  them.

Notwithstanding the necessarily fragmentary character of these researches,

they will perhaps interest those readers whose scientific beliefs are not yet

settled.  What has finally given very great force to certain principles of physics

and  mechanics  has  been  the  very  complicated  mathematical  apparatus  in

which they have been wrapped. Everything presented in an algebraical form

at once acquires for certain minds the character of mdisputable truth. The

most perfect sceptic willingly attributes a mysterious virtue to equations and

bows  to  their  supposed  power.  They  tend  more  and  more  to  replace,  in

teaching, reason and experiments. These delusive veils which now surround

  THE NEW DOCTRINES tl

  the most simple principles only too often serve to mask uncertainties. It is

by lifting them that I have succeeded more than once in showing the frailty of

scientitic beliefs which for many scholars possess the authority of revealed

dogmas.

    CHAPTER II

  THE NEW DOCTRINES

  Newton, wrote Lagrange, was the greatest and, at the same time, the most

fortunate  of  geniuses,  for  one  does  not  more  than  once  in  a  way  find  a

universe in want of a system.

  In saying this, the illustrious mathematician was evidently persuaded that

the system of the universe must be considered as established once for all.

This  simple  belief  has  no  longer  many  adherents.  It  now  appears  pretty

clearly that we know very little of the general laws of our universe. We can

only  dimly  see  in  the  far-oft'  future  the  epoch  when  these  laws  will  be

established.  It  is,  however,  already  felt  that  the  actual  mechanism  of  the

world differs greatly from that constructed by the science of the past. We

now feel ourselves surrounded by gigantic forces of which we can only get a

glimpse, and which obey laws unknown to us.

  Ideas necessarily follow one another in a chain. A new theory cannot be

started without bringing with it a series of equally new consequences. After I

had proved that the dissociation of atoms was a universal phenomenon, and

that matter is an immense reser-

  voir of an energy hitherto unsuspected in spite of its colossal grandeur, I

was  naturally  led  to  ask  myself  whether  all  the  forces  of  the  universe—

notably solar heat and electricity—did not proceed solely from this reservoir

of energy, and therefore from the dissociation of matter.

  As regards solar heat, the source of most terrestrial energies, dissociation

appeared sufficient to explain the maintenance of the sun's temperature on the

hypothesis that the atoms of incandescent stars must have contained moreintra-atomic energy than they possess when once grown cool. As regards

electricity, I recall the result of my experiments:— that the particles emitted

by an electrified point are identical with those which come forth from a radio-

active body such as radium. This fact proves that electricity also is a product

of the dema-terialization of matter.

  The  phenomenon  of  the  dissociation  of  atoms  presented  therefore

consequences of considerable importance, since it was possible to regard it as

the origin of the forces of the universe. Matter became a simple reservoir of

forces, and could itself be considered as a relatively stable form of energy.

This conception caused the disappearance of the classic dichotomy between

matter and energy, and between matter and the ether. It allowed us to connect

the two worlds of the Ponderable and the Imponderable, once considered

very distinct, which science believed she had definitely separated. Berthelot

even asserted at the recent inauguration of the Lavoisier monument, that "the

distinction between ponderable matter and imponderable agencies is one of

the greatest discoveries ever made."

  It now seems, however, that physicists should have seen a long time ago

—that is, long before the recent discoveries—that matter and the ether are

intimately connected, that they are unceasingly interchanging energies, and

are in no way two separate worlds. Matter continuously emits luminous or

calorific  radiations,  and  can  absorb  them.  Down  to  the  absolute  zero  it

radiates  continuously—that  is  to  say,  it  emits  ethereal  vibrations.  The

agitations of matter propagate themselves in the ether, and those of the ether

in matter, and without this propagation there would be neither light nor heat.

The ether and matter are one thing under different forms, and we cannot put

them asunder. If we had not taken as a starting point the narrow view that

light and heat are imponderable agents because they appear to add nothing to

the  weight  of  bodies,  the  distinction  between  the  ponderable  and  the

imponderable, to which scholars attach so much importance, would long ago

have vanished.

  The ether is doubtless a mysterious agent which we have not yet learnt to

isolate, but its reality is manifest, since no phenomenon can be explained

without it. Its existence now seems to several physicists more certain than

even that of matter. It cannot be isolated, but it is impossible to say it cannot

be seen or touched. It is, on the contrary, the substance we most often see and

touch.  When  a  body  radiates  the  heat  which  warms  or  burns  us,  what

constitutes this heat, if it be not the vibrations of the ether ? When we see agreen landscape on the ground glass of a camera obscura, what constitutes

this image, if not the ether ?

  The theory of the dissociation of matter has not

  only served to clear away the two great dichotomies, force and matter,

ponderable  and  imponderable,  which  seemed  established  for  ever.  The

doctrine of the vanishing of matter by its transformation into energy carries

with it important consequences in regard to current ideas of energy.

    According to the most fundamental principles of mechanics, when we

communicate to a material body a determined quantity of energy, this energy

may be transformed, but the body will never give back a quantity in excess of

that received by it. This principle was considered too self-evident ever to

have been disputed. In fact it was indisputable so long as it was admitted that

matter could only give up the energy transmitted to it and was unable to

create any. By showing that matter is an immense reservoir of energy, I at the

same time proved that the quantity of energy it emits, under the influence of

an outside force acting on it as a kind of excitant, may far exceed that which

it has received.

  With such a very slight excitement as that of a thin pencil of invisible

ultra-violet radiations,—or even with no excitement at all, as we observe in

the emission of spontaneously dissociating bodies, such as radium,—we can

obtain considerable quantities of energy. No doubt, we do not create this

liberated  energy,  since  it  already  exists  in  matter,  but  we  obtain  it  under

conditions which the old laws of mechanics could never have imagined. The

idea  that  matter  could  be  transformed  into  energy  would  have  seemed

absolutely absurd only a very few years ago.

  It will be the part of the science of the future

  to discover the means of freeing, in a practical form, the considerable

forces which matter contains.

    "Intra-atomic energy, scientifically brought into play," recently wrote M.

Ferrand, "will create the totally new science of modern Energetics; it will

give us the formula of the thermodynamic potential of energy freed from

matter. Turned commercially to account, it is capable of turning upside down

the productive activity of our old world."

  The researches which I have set forth in numerous papers for the last ten

years have rapidly spread through the laboratories, and have been largely

utilized, especially by those physicists who have not quoted them. Some of

my propositions, considered very revolutionary when first formulated, arenow  beginning  to  be  almost  commonplaces,  although  they  are  far  from

having yet produced all their consequences. When these last are unfolded,

they will lead to the renewal of a great part of a scientific edifice the stability

of which seemed eternal.

  It is useful to prove that this edifice, so stable in appearance, is far from

being so, and that things may be viewed from very different points from

those  to  which  our  regular  education  has  accustomed  us.  It  is  to  the

demonstration of this that a portion of this work will be devoted.

  The fundamental principles which will guide us are these enunciated in

my preceding work, which I repeat:—

  1.  Matter,  hitherto  deemed  indestructible,  slowly  vanishes  by  the

continuous dissociation of its component atoms.

  2. The products of the demxxterialization of matter constitute substances

'placed by their prop>erties betiveen ponderable bodies and the imponderable

ether — that is to say, between ttuo worlds hitherto considered as ividely

seijarate.

  3.  Matter,  formerly  regarded  as  inert  and  only  able  to  give  back  the

energy originally supplied to it, is, on the other hand, a colossal reservoir of

energy — intra-atomic energy — which it can expend without borrowing

anything from without.

  4. It is from the intra-atomic energy liberoied during the dissociation of

matter  that  most  of  the  forces  in  the  universe  are  derived,  and  notably

electricity and solar heat.

  5. Force and matter are tivo different forms of one and the same thing.

Matter represents a stable form of intra-atomic energy: heat, light, electricity,

&c., represent unstable forms of it.

  6. By the dissociation of atoms — that is to say, by the matericdization of

matter, the stable form of energy termed matter is simply changed into those

unstable forms known by the names of electricity, light, heat, &c. Matter

therefore is continuously transformed into energy.

  7. The law of evolution applicable to living beings is also applicable to

simple  bodies;  chemical  species  are  no  more  invariable  than  are  living

species.

  8.  Energy  is  no  onore  indestructible  than  the  matter  from  ivhich  it

emanates.

  BOOK II

  THE IRREDUCIBLE MAGNITUDES OF THE UNIVERSE    CHAPTER I

  TIME, SPACE, MATTER, AND FORCE

  §1.— The Conception of the Irreducible Magnitudes of tlce Universe

  Time,  space,  matter,  and  force  form  the  elements  of  things,  and  the

fundamental basis of all our knowledge.

  Time and space are the two magnitudes in which we confine the universe.

Force is the cause of phenomena, matter their web.

  Three of these elements—time, space, and force— are quite irreducible.

Matter may be reconverted into force, not only because it is, as I have proved,

a particular form of energy, but also because it is only defined, in equations

of mechanics, hy^ the symbols of force.^

  ^ In the C. G. S. system now generally adopted for the evaluation of the

maffnitndes  of  physical  quantifies,  we  take  into  consideration  :  (1)  the

fundamental quantity, length, mass, and time; and (2) the derived quantities.

These last, which are very numerous, comprise notably the derived quantities

of  geometry—surface,  volume,  and  angle;  those  of  mechanics—speed,

acceleration, force, energy, work, power, &c. ; and those of electricity and

magnetism—resistance, intensity, potential difference, &c.

  Time,  space,  and  force  being  irreducible,  cannot  be  compared  witb

anything and are indefinable. We only know of them that which our common

sense tells us. So soon as, in order to define these great entities, we endeavour

to  go  beyond  what  is  revealed  by  ordinary  observation,  we  meet  with

inextricable difficulties and end by acknowledging, as do the philosophers,

that they are simply creations of the mind, and cover completely unknown

realities.

  These realities are not knowable to us, because our senses ever remain

interposed between them and us. What we perceive of the universe are only

the  impressions  produced  on  our  senses.  The  form  we  give  to  things  is

conditioned  by  the  nature  of  our  intelligence.  Time  and  space  are,  then,

subjective notions imposed by our senses on the representation of things, and

this is why Kant considered time and space as forms of sensibility. To a

superior  intelligence,  capable  of  grasping  at  the  same  time  the  order  of

succession and that of the co-existence of phenomena, our notions of space

and time would have no meaning.

  It is, moreover, not space and time only, but all phenomena, from matter

which we think we know up to the divinities created by our dreams, which

have to be considered as forms necessary for our understanding. The worldconstructed with the impressions of our senses is a summary translation, and

necessarily a far from faithful one of the real world which we know not. Time

is, for man, nothing but a relation between events. He measures it by the

changes in position of a mobile body, such as a star or a clock. It is only by a

change, that is to say, by movement, that the notion of time

  is accessible to us. " In a world void of all kind of movement," says Kant,

"  there  would  not  be  seen  the  slightest  sequence  in  the  internal  state  of

substances. Hence, the abolition of the relation of substances to one another

carries with it the annihilation of sequence and of time." If there are no events

there is evidently no sequence, and consequently no time.

  To immobilize the world and the beings which inhabit it would be to

immobilize time—that is to say, to cause it to vanish. If this fixedness were

absolute,  life  would  be  impossible,  since  life  implies  change;  but  neither

could anything grow old. The immortal gods who, according to the legends,

never  undergo  change,  cannot  know  time.  For  them  the  clock  of  heaven

marks always the same hour. Change is therefore the true generator of time. It

is  only  conceivable,  like  forces  and  all  phenomena,  under  the  form  of

movement. This fundamental concept of movement will be found at the base

of all phenomena. It serves to define the magnitudes of the universe, and can

only be defined by them. It is not an irreducible concept, for it is formed by

the combination of the notions of force, of matter, of space, and of time. It is

evident that we require the intervention of all these in order to define the

displacement of a body.

  In physics most variations of quantities are expressed by reference to the

variations of time. When the curve expressing the relations of a phenomenon

with time is known, science can go back from the present to the past and can

know the future.

  The notion of space is as little clear as that of time. Leibnitz defined it as

the order of co-existence of phenomena, time being the order of their succes-

  sion. Space and time are perhaps two forms of the same thing.

  Space does not appear conceivable without the existence of bodies. A

world entirely void could not give birth to the idea of space, and this is the

reason philosophers refuse to space an objective reality. In their view, space

being, like time, a quality, where there is neither phenomenon nor substance,

there is neither space nor time.

  The above brief expose suffices to show how inexact and limited are the

ideas  man  can  form  as  to  the  fundamental  elements  of  the  universe.  Ourknowledge  being  only  relative,  we  only  define  unknown  phenomena  by

connecting  them  with  a  known  one.  All  knowledge  therefore  implies  a

comparison, l)ut to what can we compare the irreducible elements of things ?

They condition phenomena, and remain hidden behind them.

  If  the  irreducible  magnitudes  of  the  universe  are  not  known  in  their

essence, they at least produce measurable effects. We are situated with regard

to them like the railway porter who can weigh with exactness parcels of the

contents of which he is ignorant.

  It is of these measurements alone that science is composed. By means of

them are established the numerical relations which form the one web of our

knowledge, since the realities which uphold them escape us. The properties

of  things  are  only  properly  definable  by  measurement.  The  qualitative

represents a subjective appreciation which may vary from one individual to

another.  The  quantitative  represents  a  fixed  magnitude  which  can  be

preserved, and which gives precision to our sensations. The substitution of

the quantitative for the qualitative is the

  principal task of tlie scholar. "I often say," writes Lord Kelvin, " that if

you can measure that of which you speak, and can express it by a number,

you  know  something  of  your  subject;  but  if  you  cannot  measure  it,  your

knowledge is meagre and unsatisfactory,"

  § 2.— The Measurement of the Irreducible Magnitudes of the Universe

  By measuring and placing one on the other the heterogeneous elements

which  form  the  web  of  things,  science  has  managed  to  create  certain

concepts,  such  as  those  of  mass,  kinetic  energy,  &c.,  which  we  have  to

consider realities by reason of our incapacity to imagine others.

  These  concepts  vary  with  the  way  in  which  we  bring  together  the

irreducible elements of things. Associate force with space, and we create the

science of energy. Associate space and time, and we create the science of

velocities —that is to say, kinematics. Associate force, space, and time, and

we create the science of mechanical power. It is evident that, by thus acting,

we must associate very heterogeneous elements.

  Force  (F  =  M7)  is  a  coefficient  of  resistance  multiplied  by  an

acceleration. Work (T = F x E) is a

  force multiplied by a length. Velocity fv = ^) is

  a space divided by a time. Mass (^= «) is a weight divided by a velocity,

&c. It is only by the combination of these very different magnitudes, that it

has been possible to state precisely the concepts of mechanics on which theinterpretation of the phenomena of the universe is still based.

  To define completely a phenomenon there have to be associated the three

great co-ordinates of things— time, space, and force. If one or two of these

only are measured, the phenomenon is only partially known. The formation

of the modern notions of energy and of power furnishes excellent examples

of  this.  They  were  not  precisely  stated  until  to  the  vague  idea  of  force

considered as the synonym of effort was added the notion of space, and then

that of time.

  In mechanics, force is defined as a cause of movement ; the unit of force

is represented by the acceleration produced on the unit of mass. AVhen a

force  displaces  its  point  of  application  it  generates  work.  This  last  is  the

product of the force considered as a cause of movement by the displacement

due to that movement. The kilogrammetre has been chosen as the unit of

work. It is the work necessary to displace a kilogramme for the length of a

metre. This unit of mechanical energy is now used to measure all forms of

energy.

  Thus, by the sole fact that Ave have associated space with force, we can

measure this last and comprise it in a formula. This enables us to understand

how with an invariable quantity of energy we can produce forces of variable

magnitude. If, in fact, we call the force F, the space E, and the work T, we

obtain according to the preceding definitions T = F X E. In this formula,

which defines the unit of work, the force F and the space E can evidently be

inversely varied without changing their product— that is to say, the work.

We  can  therefore  largely  increase  the  force  on  condition  that  we

proportionately  reduce  the  space  covered.  It  is  this  operation  which  is

effected by certain machines, such as the

  lever, which multiplies the force but not the work. By the expenditure of

one  kilogrammetre,  hundreds  of  kilogrammes  can  be  raised,  but  what  is

gained in force will be lost in the space covered, and the product FxE will

never exceed a kilogrammetre. Force therefore can be multiplied, but not

energy, of which the magnitude remains invariable.

  Into the unit of work there enter only the elements force and space, but

not the element time. One kilogrammetre may be expended in one second or

in a thousand years, and the results will necessarily be very different in the

two cases. This is very well illustrated in the case of radium, of which one

gramme  contains  thousands  of  millions  of  kiiogrammetres.  Such  a  force

appears immense, but its production is in each instant so slight that it wouldrequire  about  a  thousand  years  to  liberate  it  entirely.  It  is  the  case  of  a

reservoir containing an immense quantity of water which can escape by a

drop at a time. Hence, by contining ourselves to the association force and

space,  we  have  already  created  a  unit  which  permits  us  to  evaluate  in

kilogram-metres the power of any machine moved by any motor; but it does

not tell us if these kilogram-metres are produced in one minute or in a year.

We know therefore very little of the power of the machine.

  To ascertain this, it suffices to superpose on the two elements force and

space, which give us the unit of work, the element time. We shall then have

what is called the unit of poAver, which is the quotient of the work by the

time. It shows us the work produced in a given time. If we are told that a

machine produces a kilogrammetre, we know nothing as to its

  power. If it be added that this kilogrammetre is produced in one second,

Ave are fully informed.

  The  kilogrammetre  per  second  being  too  small  a  unit  from  the

commercial point of view, one seventy-five times larger has been adopted.

This is the horse-power, which represents seventy-five kilogrammes raised

one metre in one second.^

  In this last unit are found collected, as will be seen, the three irreducible

elements  of  things—time,  space,  and  force.  Matter  hkewise  figures  in  it

indirectly ; for that which is measured is the force employed to combat its

inertia and to give it certain movements.

  We have just seen how, by enclosing in space and time that mysterious

Proteus called force, it is possible to grasp it and know it under its deceiving

forms. On penetrating further into the inmost nature of phenomena, we shall

see that space and time not only serve to measure force, but that they also

condition its form and its magnitude.

    CHAPTER II

  THE GREAT CONSTANTS OF THE UNIVERSE RESISTANCE AND

MOVEMENT

  § 1.— Inertia or Resistance to Change

  Forces  are  known  to  us  solely  by  the  movements  they  generate.

Mechanics, which claims to be the

  1 In physics other units are often made use of-, but do not alter what has

been  said.  If,  instead  of  being  evaluated  in  kilogrammes,  the  force  is

evaluated in dynes, and if the space, instead of being evaluated in metres, is

measured  in  centimetres,  the  work,  instead  of  being  expressed  inkilogrammetres, is expressed in crrjs.

  THE GREAT CONSTANTS OF THE UNIVERSE 25

  foundation of the other sciences and to explain the universe, is devoted to

the study of these movements.

  The  notion  of  movement  implies  that  of  things  to  move.  Observation

shows that these things to move present a certain resistance. The resistance of

matter to movement or to a change of movement is what is termed its inertia.

It is from this property that is derived the notion of mass.

  We thus find ourselves in presence of two elements, not irreducible like

those just studied, but fundamental. These are movement and resistance to

movement, or, in other words, change and resistance to change. Inertia—that

is to say, the aptitude of matter to resist movement or a change in movement

—is the most important of its properties, and even the only one which allows

us to follow it through all its moditications. While its other characteristics,

solidity,  colour,  &c.,  depend  on  several  variable  causes  and  consequently

may change, inertia depends on no factor and is unchangeable. Whether it be

liquid, solid, or gaseous, whether it be isolated or in combination, the same

body possesses an unvarying quantity of inertia. Measured indirectly by the

balance, this allows us to follow it through all its changes.

  On this notion of the invariability of inertia, or, in other words, of the

mass, are based the edifices of chemistry and mechanics. The preponderant

part played by inertia in phenomena is a matter of daily observation. It is by

virtue of inertia that the worlds continue to circulate in space, that a ball

hurled from a cannon by the explosion of gunpowder travels several thousand

metres. Inertia being opposed to a change of movement, bodies would even

continue

  their  course  indefinitely  if  dift'erent  antagonistic  forces,  such  as  the

resistance of the air, did not finally arrest them. A railway train would thus

continue to advance with the same velocity without the help of any motor if

its inertia did not unceasingly tend to be annulled by various resistances,

friction,  &c.,  which  the  locomotive  only  serves  to  overcome.  The  same

inertia  of  matter  forbids  the  train  stopping  abruptly.  To  effect  this,  very

powerful brakes must be employed even if the engine has ceased working.

Inertia being opposed to movement as well as to change of movement, it

requires a very great force to start the train from its repose, and one equally

great to stop it Avhen once in motion.

  It results therefore from the principle of inertia that, when a moving bodytends to slacken speed from any cause whatever, inertia tends to maintain that

speed,  since,  by  its  definition,  it  is  opposed  to  change  of  movement.

Conversely, when the speed of the moving body increases, inertia comes in to

retard this acceleration for the same reason, viz. that it is opposed to change

of movement.

    Electricity,  which  possesses,  or  at  least  appears  to  possess,  inertia,

behaves like matter in motion. Its inertia acts in the phenomena of induction

exactly, as has been said above, by opposing itself to change of movement—

that is to say, in the converse direction to the cause which tends to produce its

slackening  or  acceleration.  This  is  expressed  by  the  law  of  Lenz,  which

governs the phenomena of induction. It would perhaps be possible to explain

them on the principle of the equality of action and reaction without invoking

inertia at all. To measure the inertia of matter is easy, to note its properties is

  THE GREAT CONSTANTS OF THE UNIVERSE 27

  likewise easy, but to explain its nature is as yet impossible.

  Newton, who was the first to study inertia scientifically, considered it to

be a force. " The force which dwells in matter," he says, " is its power of

resistance, and it is by this force that every body perseveres of itself in its

actual state of repose or of movement in a straight line."

  At the present day, the tendency is to admit that matter is connected with

the ether by lines of force, and that the whole of the inertia of matter should

be that of the ether gripped by the lines of force. But whether inertia be

attributed to matter or to the medium in which it is plunged, this does not

bring us any nearer to an explanation.

  Perhaps the least improbable thing that may be said regarding inertia is

that  matter,  beino',  as  I  have  shown,  an  immense  aggregate  of  forces,

possesses certain relations of equilibrium with the ether surrounding it. The

movement of a body must break up this equilibrium and create others, from

which would result the continuation of the movement and its resistance to

change of speed. In the internal equilibria of a body in motion something is

probably changed.

  To the notion of inertia there should, doubtless, be attached the principle

of  the  equality  of  action  and  reaction.  Although  this  is  a  fundamental

principle in mechanics, it, too, is very little explicable. It has been formulated

by Newton as follows:—

  " A body exercising on another a pressure or a traction, receives from the

latter an equal and opposite traction or pressure." This would signify that ifyou exercise a traction of 100 kilogrammes

  on an infinitely rigid wall it will exercise the same traction on you. The

wall thus becomes, as M. Wickersheimer points out, a metaphysical person

entering into antagonism with you. At bottom, mechanics, which seems to be

the most precise of sciences, the one most foreign to metaphysics, is the one

which contains most evident or hidden metaphysical notions. They evidently

cover profound but entirely unknown causes. Perhaps we should explain the

principle of equal reaction in the direction contrary to action by considering

certain forces as couples — that is to say, as acting like a spring stretched

between two points. It is evidently impossible then to act on one without the

other reacting immediately. Gravity and electricity would come under this

head.

  § 2.—Mass

  The mass which serves to characterize matter is only the measure of its

inertia—that  is  to  say,  of  its  resistance  to  movement.  It  is  measured  by

seeking the magnitude of the force which must be opposed to inertia in order

to annul it. Gravity has been chosen because it is*easy to handle. We can by

means of weights, each of which represent a certain quantity of attraction,

measure the inertia of a certain portion of matter placed on one of the scales

of a balance.

  The notion of mass was slow in establishing itself. Mach, in his History

of Mechanics, points out that Descartes, Newton, and Leibnitz had only a

very vague comprehension of it. Galileo confused mass with weight, which

many people do even at the

  THE GREAT CONSTANTS OF THE UNIVERSE 29

  present  time,  although  by  reason  of  the  units  adopted,  weight  is

represented by a figure about ten times greater than that expressed by mass.^

  The term mass is, moreover, employed at the present day in two different

senses. For physicists mass is a coefficient of inertia, and for astronomers a

coefficient of attraction. If the attraction due to gravity were the same all over

the globe, the mass of a 1(3ody—that is to say, the quantity of inertia it

possesses—would be measured according to the force of attraction necessary

to  annul  it.  Chemists,  who  have  only  to  compare  the  masses  of  bodies,

proceed in no other way. For the calculations of n:iechanics it was necessary

to find another element, because gravity alters with the latitude and the height

from the earth. This last variation even shows itself at the different storeys of

a house."  The  weight  of  a  body  varies  from  one  place  to  another,  but  the

acceleration which this body may take undergoes the same variation. The

ratio of these two magnitudes is therefore constant at all

  points of the globe. It is this relation - which

  always figures in the calculations of mechanics. Given the value of the

number g, it follows that in

  1  The  distinction  between  weight  and  mass,  formerly  considered

synonymous, only became manifest when the observation of the pendulum

revealed that the same body may receive a different acceleration of gravity in

different parts of the globe. It was in 1671 that it was noted for the first time

in astronomical observations that a clock giving the exact time at Paris no

longer did so in Guiana. To render itspace regular, it is necessary to shorten

the length of the regulating pendulum.

  2 A very slight difference evidently, but still appreciable. In Poynting's

Text-Booh  of  Physics  will  be  found  a  summary  of  his  deiicateresearches

showing  the  variations  of  weight  in  a  body  on  the  different  floors  of  a

building.

  numerical expressions the mass of a body hardly represents the tenth part

of its weight. The equation

  M = - which defines mass, refers to the gravity;

  but as the Aveight may be replaced by any force F, which produces an

acceleration 7, we obtain as a

  F

    general expression of mass M = -. This is the fundamental equation of

mechanics. One must not look too closely into its meaning.

  Mass has been considered as an invariable magnitude down to the recent

researches mentioned in my last book. These last have shown that not only

does  the  mass  vary  by  the  dissociation  of  atoms,  but,  further,  that  the

products of this dissociation have a mass varying with their velocity. This

mass can even increase to the point of becoming infinite —that is to say, of

opposing itself to any change of movement, when the velocity approaches

that of light. Nothing proves, moreover, that it would not be the same with

ordinary matter animated by a like velocity.

  Not only does the mass vary with the velocity, but it has lately become a

question whether it does not also vary with the temperature. The question has

not  yet  been  elucidated.  However  that  may  be,  mass  is  not  at  all  that

invariable magnitude which chemistry and mechanics formerly supposed it tobe.  The  element  which  science  considered  as  the  immovable  pivot  of

phenomena, the starting-point to which it endeavoured to refer all thino's, has

become a variable magnitude of which the apparent fixity was only due to the

imperfection of our means of observation.

  THE GREAT CONSTANTS OF THE UNIVERSE 31

  The  inertia  of  matter  is  still,  however,  the  most  stable  thing  in  the

changing ocean of phenomena. This stability is not absolute, but as regards

our ordinary requirements the inertia of matter can be considered as one of

the great constants of the universe.

  § 3.— Movement and Force

  For half a century science thought she had discovered a second constant

element in the universe. This element is energy, of which forces would be

simple manifestations.

  We will now examine only the fundamental elements of forces. They are

only knowable to us by the movements they produce, and that is why, in the

classic mechanics, force is simply defined as a cause of movement.

  By virtue of their inertia alone, bodies would only assume a uniform and

rectilinear movement. Directly this movement is accelerated, we recognize

that a force has intervened. It is solely this acceleration which mechanics

measures and which figures in its equations.

  Force  is  therefore  only  known  to  mechanics  through  movement.

Movement is not an irreducible magnitude, since it is derived from the four

great elements of the universe—time, space, matter, and force—which alone

enable it to be defined.

  We have seen previously how by associating force and space the unit of

mechanical energy and of work has been constituted; we shall see in a later

chapter the transformations which the modern notion of the conservation of

energy has introduced into the conception of force.

  What precedes shows us how notions of movement

  and of resistance are derived from those of force and mass, on which the

principles of mechanics were built up. The equation F = iwy defines force by

the acceleration imparted to a body endowed with resistance to movement.

  To sum up, movement—that is to say, change— and inertia—that is to

say, resistance to change— constitute the fundamental elements accessible to

mechanics.  We  will  now  see  how,  by  associating  them,  this  science  has

sought to interpret the phenomena of the universe.

    CHAPTER III  THE  BUILDING  UP  OF  FOECES  AND  THE  MECHANICAL

EXPLANATIONS OF THE UNIVERSE

  § I.—The Cycle of Forces

  We have just seen that on reducing to their essential elements the forces

of  the  universe  there  still  remain  resistance  and  movement.  Resistance  is

represented by the inertia of matter or of the ether, and movement by the

displacement of these substances in space and time.

  The magnitude of forces is determined by the velocity of the movements

that  they  produce,  their  form  by  the  nature  of  these  movements.  The

movements of matter are only apparent to us when it comes into contact with

an antagonistic factor which annuls or diminishes its velocity. The earth, for

instance, by reason of its movements of rotation and of translation in space,

possesses an immense kinetic energy ; but it is not noticed, because our globe

meets

  no  obstacles  in  its  path.  Yet  its  kinetic  energy  would  be  sufficient,

perhaps, to reduce to vapour any planet it chanced to strike. All things living

on the surface of our globe are carried along with it in its movement, and

possess in consequence a considerable kinetic energy. This would appear if

they  were  suddenly  transported  from  one  point  on  the  globe's  surface  to

another endowed with different velocity; for instance, from the pole to the

equator. On arriving at the equator they would be hurled into space with a

speed more than six times that of a railway train.

    Independently of the movements of translation in a straight line like that

of a cannon ball, or of rotation like that of the stars, matter and the ether may

show very different forms of movement. There result from this forces very

different in aspect. We observe notably vibratory movements like those of a

tuning-fork, and circular undulations such as those produced by casting a

stone into the water, &c. Light and heat show exactly these last forms of

movement. It is not only the kind of movements, but also the variations in

velocity  which  condition  the  nature  of  forces.  The  recent  theories  on

electricity put this last point well in evidence. They show, in fact, that forces

differing from each other so widely as magnetism, the electric current, and

light  are  generated  by  simple  variations  in  the  movements  of  electric

particles.

  An electrified body in repose produces effects of attraction and repulsion

only,  and  possesses  no  magnetic  property.  Set  it  in  motion,  and  it  is

immediately  surrounded  by  magnetic  lines  of  force,  and  produces  all  theeffects of a current like that which traverses

  c

    telegraph wires. Let us vary by a sudden acceleration the speed of the

particles,  and  they  immediately  radiate  through  the  ether  Hertzian  waves,

calorific waves, and lastly light. These forms of energy, although so different

in  kind,  only  appear  therefore  as  the  consequence  of  simple  changes  of

movement.

  The forces of nature probably contain other elements than movement.

These  elements  do  not  affect  our  reao-ents,  and  we  are  therefore  not

cognizant of them. In the ocean of phenomena, science can only pick out

what is accessible to it.

  § 2.—The Mechanical Explanations of the Universe

  That  which  precedes  makes  us  feel  in  advance  how  fragmentary,  and

consequently how insufficient, must be the final explanation of phenomena

which the science of mechanics proposes.

    Naturally this conclusion is not the one arrived at by the defenders of the

doctrine which claims to explain everything by means of the equations of

movement. In no way stopped by the excessive simplicity of their concepts,

persuaded that all phenomena were wrapped up in their formulas, they have

known neither mistrust nor uncertainty, and have imagined that they had for

all eternity built up an edifice of imposing grandeur.

  For the majority of scholars, this sublime confidence still endures. One of

the most eminent among them, Cornu, the Academician, at the Congfres de

Physique in 1900, delivered himself as follows :—

  " The spirit of Descartes soars over modern physics. What am I saying ?

He is its shining light; The more we penetrate into the knowledge

  of natural phenomena, the more developed and precise is the audacious

Cartesian  conception  of  the  mechanism  of  the  universe.  There  is  in  the

physical world only matter and movement."

  At the very moment these words were uttered, the classic edifice was

furrowed  by  deep  chasms.  While  the  mathematicians  were  drawing  up

formulas,  the  physicists  were  making  experiments,  and  these  experiments

fitted in less and less with the formulas. These discrepancies, however, did

not greatly trouble the mathematicians. So soon as the equations no longer

agreed with the experiments, they rectified the equations by imagining the

intervention of " hidden movements," which completely baffled observation.

The process was evidently ingenious, but evidently also a little childish. "Since," says M. Duhem, " no condition, no restriction, is imposed on these

hidden  movements,  on  what  should  we  found  the  proof  that  a  given

difference may not find in them its raison d'etre ? "

    Notwithstanding  such  subterfuges,  the  insufficiency  of  the  classical

mechanics has every day become more manifest with the progress of physics.

"  There  exists,"  writes  the  author  I  have  just  quoted,  "  a  radical

incompatibility  between  the  mechanics  of  Lagrange,"  that  is  to  say,  the

classical mechanics, "and the laws of physics: this incompatibility attacks not

only the laws of those phenomena in which the reduction to movement is the

object of hypothesis, but also the laws which govern perceptible movements."

  It is not wholly in the great questions relating to the synthesis of the

universe that the classical mechanics has shown itself very insufficient, but

  also in apparently much more modest problems like the theory of gases. It

is  by  invoking  the  calculation  of  probabilities,  by  imagining  a  kind  of

statistics, that it arrives at establishing extraordinarily complicated and also

extraordinarily uncertain equations, which elude all verification.

  Professors who continue to teach the formulas of mechanics renounce

more  and  more  their  beliefs  in  them.  This  fictitious  universe,  reduced  to

points to which forces are applied, seems to them very chimerical. " There is

not a single one of the principles of rational mechanics which is applicable to

realities," recently wrote to me one of the scholars who have most deeply

sounded the problems of mechanics, the eminent Professor Dwelshauwers

Dery.

  In fact, mechanics has fallen into a state of anarchy from which it does

not seem likely to emerge, notwithstanding the numerous attempts made to

transform it. At the present time there exist three very different systems of

mechanics :—

  1. The classical mechanics, built up on the concepts of mass, force, space,

and time.

  2.  The  mechanics  of  Hertz,  which  discards  the  notion  of  force  and

replaces it by hidden links, supposed to exist between bodies.

  3. The energetic mechanics, founded on the principle of the conservation

of energy, which we shall study later on. In this, matter and force disappear.

There is not in the universe an}' other fundamental element but energy. This

element is indestructible, while unceasingly changing its aspect. The various

phenomena only represent mutations of energy.

  We might, however, vary mechanical systems to infinity by replacing theconcepts of time, space,

  and mass by arbitrary magnitudes and expressing phenomena as functions

of these new magnitudes. This is sometimes done by introducing into the

equations, instead of the co-ordinates of the classical mechanics, the physical

magnitudes  such  as  pressure,  volume,  temperature,  electric  charge,  &c.,

which determine the state of a body. From the principles derived from the

study of the dissociation of matter cited in a previous chapter, there might be

deduced a new mechanics in which matter would figure as the source of the

various forces of the universe. We should write in the equations that such and

such a force is simply matter minus something, that inertia is a consequence

of the relations of equilibrium between intra-atomic energy and the ether, &c.

We should thus link force to matter, and we should express the former as a

function of the latter comformably with the teachings of experiment.

  But the moment has not arrived to translate into equations magnitudes of

which the relations are not yet fixed. It is not very probable that this new

mechanics would explain much better than the old one the mysteries of the

universe.

  The fact that we only perceive in the universe matter and movement does

not authorize us to maintain that it is not composed of anything else. We can

only  say  that  by  reason  of  the  insufficiency  of  our  senses  and  of  our

instruments we only perceive that which presents itself in the form of matter

and movement. Twenty years ago we might strictly have said that there was

nothing else. But the very unforeseen phenomena revealed by the study of the

dissociation of matter have proved that the universe

  is  full  of  formidable  powers  hitherto  unexpected,  and  has  shown  the

existence of immense territories completely unexplored. The edifice built by

science which has so long sheltered our uncertainty now appears like a fragile

shelter, of which the entire foundations have to be set up anew.

  BOOK III

  THE DOGMA OF THE INDESTRUCTIBILITY OF ENERGY

    CHAPTER I

  THE MONISTIC CONCEPTION OF FORCES AND THE THEORY OF

THE CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

  I 1.— The Conservation of Energy

  The various forces of the universe were considered by the old physicists

as different from, and as exhibiting no connection with each other. Heat,

electricity, light, &c., seemed unrelated phenomena.  The ideas which sprang up during the second half of the last century

differ  much  from  this.  After  having  settled  that  the  disappearance  of  one

force  was  always  followed  by  the  appearance  of  another,  it  was  soon

recognised that they all depended on the transformation of one indestructible

entity,— energy. Like matter it might change its form, but the quantity of it in

the universe remained invariable. The various forces, light, heat, &c., were

only different manifestations of energy.

  The idea that forces might be indestructible is of fairly recent origin. The

dogma of the conservation of energy only boasts, in fact, about half a century

of existence. Up to the date of its discovery, science

  only possessed one permanent element,—matter. For the last sixty years

it has possessed, or has thought it possessed, a second,—energy.

  The principle of the conservation of energy presents itself in a form so

imposing and so simple, and answers so completely to certain tendencies of

the mind, that one would suppose that it must have attracted keen attention

the very day it was promulgated. Quite other was its fate. For ten years not a

single scholar in the world could be found who would even consent to discuss

it. In vain did its immortal author, Dr. Maj^er of Heilbronn, multiply his

memoirs ^ and his experiments. Mayer died of despair and so unknown that

when Helmholtz repeated the same discovery a few years later, taking as a

basis only mathematical considerations, he did not even suspect the existence

of his predecessor. The critical mind is so rare a gift that the most profound

ideas and the most convincing experiments exercise no influence so long as

they are not adopted by scholars enjoying the prestige of official authority.

    Nevertheless, it always happens in the long run that a new idea finds a

champion in some scholar possessing this prestige, and it then rapidly makes

its way. As soon as the grandeur of the idea of the conservation of energy

was understood by one such, it had an immense success.

  It was especially the discussions of W. Thomson (later Lord Kelvin) and

the experiments of Joule, confirming the results of Mayer on the equivalence

  1 The first paper of Mayer, Bcmerkunrjcn iiber die Krdfte der unhclebtcn

Natur ("Remarks on the Forces of Inanimate Nature "), was published in

1842. His last, Bcmerhungcn iiber das mechanische Aquiv(dcnt der Wdrnie

(" Kemarks on the Mechanical Equivalent of Heat"), was published in 1851.

  THE MONISTIC CONCEPTION OF FORCES 41

  of heat and work, which attracted the attention of specialists. The whole

army of labourers of science then pounced upon this subject, and in a fewyears the unity and the equivalence of physical forces came to be proclaimed,

though on rather narrow grounds.

  This generalization proceeded from experiments which in reality did not

include it. It was, in fact, deduced from the researches made to determine the

rise in temperature produced by the fall of a weight from a given height into a

liquid.  It  was  noted  that  in  order  to  raise  by  V  the  temperature  of  a

kilogramme of water and to produce what to-day is called a great calorie, it

was  necessary  to  let  drop  from  a  height  of  1  metre  a  weight  of  425

kilogrammes. This number 425 was called the mechanical equivalent of heat.

  In this experiment and other similar ones we simply establish that the

different  forms  of  energy  can  be  transformed  into  mechanical  work;  but

nothing  indicates  any  relationship  between  them.  We  can,  by  making  a

machine to turn by human arms, steam, the wind, electricity, &c., produce the

same amount of work, although its causes are perceptibly different. To speak

of the mechanical equivalent of heat only signiiies that with 425 kilogrammes

falling from a height of 1 metre we raise the temperature of water by 1°. In

reality, heat or any form of energy is equivalent to work rather as a piece of

twenty sous is equivalent to the pound of beef which one can buy with it.

  Since the part of science is much more to measure things than to define

them, the acquisition of a unit of measure always realizes for it an immense

pro-

  gress.  Thanks  to  tlie  creation  of  a  unit  of  energy  or  work,  we  have

succeeded in stating exactly notions which were formerly very vague. When,

by  means  of  any  form  of  energy,  it  is  possible  to  produce  a  determined

number of calories or of kilogrammetres, our minds are made up as to its

magnitude.  Practically  it  is  always  by  means  of  the  heat  they  produce,

measured by the elevation of the temperature of the water of a calorimeter,

that most chemical, electrical, and other forces are calculated.

  To  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy  others  have  been

successively  added  which  have  allowed  the  laws  of  its  distribution  to  be

clearly  established.  Applied  at  first  solely  to  heat—that  is  to  say,  to  that

branch of physics called thermodynamics—they were soon extended to all

forms  of  energy.  Thus  was  founded  a  particular  science,  Energetic

Mechanics, which we will briefly examine later on.

  § 2.— The Principles of Thermodynamics

    Thermodynamics and energetic mechanics, which is only the extension of

the first named, rest on the three principles (1) of the conservation of energy,  (2) of its distribution, or the principle of Carnot, and

  (3) of the law of least action.

  The first, already indicated above, is formulated as follows: The quantity

of energy contained in the universe is invariable.

    Generalizing  a  little  less  confidently  at  the  present  time,  we  limit

ourselves to saying that, in an isolated system, the sum of the visible energy

and of the potential energy is constant. In this form the principle evidently

remains unassailable, because the

  THE MONISTIC CONCEPTION OF FORCES 43

  potential energy not being always measurable, we can always attribute to

it the value necessary to satisfy the required ratio.

  The second principle of thermodynamics, or principle of Carnot, although

it has become very complicated from the introduction into it of very different

things in a purely mathematical form, is nevertheless completely contained in

the following enunciation given by Clausius: Heat cannot pass from a cold

body to a hot without work. This is now generalized thus: The transport of

energy can only be effected by a fall in tension. This signifies that energy

always goes from the point where the tension is highest to that where it is

lowest.  The  importance  of  the  principle  of  Carnot  dwells  in  this

generalization. It is applicable not only to heat but to all known modes of

energy—calorific, thermal, electrical, or otherwise.

  This passage of energy from the point where its tension is highest to that

where it is lowest is perfectly comparable to the flowing of a liquid contained

in a vessel communicating by a tube with another vessel placed at a lower

level. It may equally be compared to the flowing of the water of a river into

the sea.

  Heat goes from a heated to a cold body, and never from a cold to a heated

body, by a law analogous to that which compels rivers to flow down to the

sea and prevents them from flowing back to their source. To say that rivers

flow down to the sea and do not retrace their course is a simple translation of

the principle of Carnot.

  Expressed in this way, it appears as a self-evident fact. Carnot put it into

almost as simple a form,

  and yet physicists took nearly twenty-five years to grasp its full bearing.

His genius-inspired idea was just to compare a fall of heat to a fall of water,

and  all  subsequent  progress  has  consisted  in  recognizing  that  the  various

forms of energy, electricity in particular, obey, in their distribution, the lawswhich regulate the flow of liquids. Let us see, however, exactly what Carnot

wrote :—

  " The production of motive power is due, in steam engines, not to an

actual consumption of caloric, but to its transport from a heated body to a

cool  body—  that  is  to  say,  to  the  restoration  of  its  equilibrium  which  is

supposed to be broken by one cause or another, by a chemical reaction such

as combustion or by some other. . . . The motive power of heat may be

compared to that of a fall of water. Both have a maximum that cannot be

passed, and this irrespective of the machine employed to receive the action of

the water and the substance used to receive the action of the heat. The motive

power of a fall of water depends on the height and the quantity of the liquid ;

the motive power of heat depends likewise on the quantity of caloric used,

which we will call the height of its fall—that is to say, the difference of

temperature of the bodies between which is effected the exchange of caloric."

^

  Carnot was not an experimenter. His brief memoir is based on simple

arguments, and can, in its essence, be brought down to the short passage I

have quoted. And yet, by the sole fact of his principle being understood, the

theoretical and practical science of the last century was entirely overturned.

No physicist or chemist now enunciates a

  * Sadi Carnot, Reflexions sur la Puissance motrice du i^e«, 1824, pp. G,

15.

  THE MONISTIC CONCEPTION OF FORCES 45

  new proposition without first verifying whether it is in contradiction to

the principle of Carnot. It might be said that never did so simple an idea have

such profound consequences. It w^ill for ever serve to show the preponderant

role  of  directing  ideas  in  scientific  evolution,  and  also  how  slow  is  the

acquisition of the most simple generalizations.

  The  second  principle  of  thermodynamics  has,  in  reality,  much  greater

importance than the first, of which, moreover, it is almost independent. Even

if energy were not preserved, its distribution would always take place, at least

in the immense majority of cases, in accordance with the principle of Carnot.

  The  generality  of  this  principle  permits  it  to  be  extended  to  all  the

phenomena in the universe. It regulates their march, and forbids them to be

reversible—that  is  to  say,  it  condemns  them  always  to  take  the  same

direction, and consequently not to go backwards up the course of time. If

some  magic  power  greater  than  that  of  the  demons  of  the  mathematicianMaxwell  were  to  compel  the  molecular  edifices  to  pass  again  into  their

former condition, it would slowly lead the world backward, and oblige it to

retreat up the course of ages, and would thus force its inhabitants to assume

successively the earlier forms in which they appeared during the chain of

geological periods.

  The principle of Carnot was completed by that called the principle of least

action, or principle of Hamilton, which shows us the road which is followed

by molecules constrained by superior force to transport themselves from one

point to another. He tells us that these molecules can only take one direction,

viz. the one which requires the least effort. This

  again  is  one  of  those  principles  of  very  great  simplicity  and  yet

immensely far-reaching. Reverting to the form given above to the principle of

Carnot, that rivers descend to the sea and do not go back along their course,

we may add that, by reason of the principle of least effort, rivers flow to the

sea by the way which demands the least effort for the flow of water—that is

to say, by the greatest slope.

    CHAPTER II

  THE ENERGETICAL EXPLANATION OF PHENOMENA

  § 1.— The Principles of Energetic Mechanics It is on the principles of

thermodynamics,  just  briefly  set  forth,  that  the  science  of  energetic

mechanics,  Avhich  claims  to  replace  the  classical  mechanics,  has  been

founded.

  Energetic  mechanics  occupies  itself  solely  with  the  measurement  of

phenomena,  and  never  with  their  interpretation.  Nothing  inaccessible  to

calculation exists. Eliminating matter and force, it studies nothing but the

transformations of energy, and only knows phenomena from their energetic

actions.  It  measures  quantities  of  heat,  magnetic  flelds,  diff'erences  of

potential, &c., and confines itself to establishing the mathematical relations

between these magnitudes.

  A few brief indications will suffice to show how, in this theory, the forces

of the universe are conceived. The energetic theory is rather a method than a

doctrine. Still it has introduced into science certain important conceptions

which I will briefly state.

  In energetic mechanics, energy is considered

  under  two  forms,—the  kinetic  and  the  potential.  The  first  represents

energy in movement, the second energy at rest, but capable of acting when

the repose ceases. Such, for instance, is the force of a coiled spring, of theweight of a wound-up clock, &c.

  The potential and kinetic energy of a system may vary inversely, but their

sum  remains  constant  within  the  system.  Kinetic  energy  depends  on  the

position  of  the  molecules  and  their  velocities,  and  is  proportioned  to  the

square of these velocities. Potential energy depends solely on the position of

the molecules. The principle of least action, explained above, permits the

equations  of  movement  to  be  established  when  the  kinetic  and  potential

energies are known.

  § 2.— The Quantity of Energy and its Tension Bringing precision into

certain notions which are rather confused in the old mechanics, the enersfetic

theory has shown that the energy of a body, whatever be the natural force to

which it is related, is the product of two factors, the one tension or intensity,

the other quantity. Tension regulates the direction of the transport of energy.

According to the forms of energy, it is represented by a velocity, a pressure, a

temperature,  a  height,  an  electromotive  force,  &c.  By  returning  to  the

comparison  of  a  force  with  the  flow  of  a  liquid  which  served  Carnot  to

explain his principle, it is easy to understand the part played by these two

factors,—quantity and tension. In a reservoir, quantity is represented by the

mass of the liquid, tension by its height above the oritice through which it

escapes.

  All forms of energy being known only by the work they produce, and

there being nothing to ditferentiate

  the work of the various forces—electrical, mechanical, thermal, &c.—it

follows that they can all be expressed by the same unit of Avork, viz. the

kilogrammetre. For the sake of convenience others are sometimes used, but

they can always be reduced to kilogram-metres. It is thus, for instance, that

the joule used in electricity as the unit of work represents about one-tenth of

the kilogrammetre. In the language of modern physicists, energy has become

synonymous with work reckoned in kilogrammetres.

  The two factors quantity and tension are magnitudes to which we can

give no other definitions than their measurement. In gravity, the quantity is

represented  by  kilogrammes,  the  tension  by  the  number  of  metres  in  the

height of the drop. Their product represents the gravific energy. In electricity,

the  quantity  is  represented  by  the  output  of  the  source  in  coulombs,  the

tension by the electric pressure in volts. In kinetic energy the quantity is

represented by the mass and the tension by the velocity, &c.

  In a general way, therefore, if we designate by E the energy expressed inunits of work, by Q the quantity, and by T the tension, we have E = Q x T. It

follows that Q = 7j^. The quantity is therefore represented by the energy

divided by the tension.^

  ' In thermal energy the name of entropy is generally given to the

  quotient J*, in which Q represents the thermal energy and T the

  absolute temperature. This is expressed in a more general way by

  the integral (—• When a certain quantity of thermal energy

  passes from a heated to a cold body, its entropy diminishes, and that of

the cold body increases. The entropy can be varied without changing the

temperature. It is therefore a variable which under certain conditions may

change in an independent manner.

  Out of this notion of entropy certain physicists seem desirous of making a

special physical magnitude which can be generalized in

  One finds indeed things which seem analogous in the different forms of

energy,  but  these  analogies  are  often  very  superficial.  In  electricity  the

resistance almost corresponds to mass in kinetic energy, but to what does it

correspond in thermal energy ? Is it to the heat necessary to change the state

of  a  body  without  modifying  its  temperature,  and  to  simply  conquer  the

resistance of the molecules to the change ? On these important points the

text-books are silent. However that may be, in all forms of energy these two

elements, quantity and tension, of which the pro-

  tbe  different  forms  of  energy.  We  have  seen  that  by  the  artifice  of

expressing  tlie  most  varied  forms  of  energy  in  work  measured  by

kilogrammetres all energies are made equivalent, which allows them to be

added up arithmetically. But there is no basis of equivalence for the factors of

which they are composed. It is therefore not possible to add up the entropies

of the different energies of a body to obtain one single total entropy. It is easy

to see that the factors of the different energies express things very different in

reality. In thermal energy, for example, the factor tension is represented by a

temperature ; in kinetic energy by a velocity ; in gravific energy by a height,

&c.

  One can be sure that a notion is obscure when it is understood in very

different ways by the scholars who make use of it. Poincare regards entropy

as " a prodigiously abstract concept," and it must be singularly so for the

most celebrated physicists to comprehend it in such different fashions. This

can be gathered from a long discussion published in the English journals,

iVaiwrc,  ThcElecirkal  Review,  and  The  Electrician,  for  1903  and  1904.Eminent physicist s published therein the most contradictory opinions, and

seemed, moreover, astonished at their reciprocal ignorance of each other's

ideas. To engineers, the concept of entropy is a very simple matter calculable

in figures, because they have only applied it to the case of steam engines. To

them the entropy of a body simply represents the variation"(esti-mable in

calories)  of  its  thermal  energy  available  for  external  work  by  degree  of

temperature and by kilogramme of matter when heat is neither added to nor

taken away from it. The difHculties relative to entropy are derived from the

impossibility of defining in what the different forms of energy consist. So far

as electricity and heat, for instance, are concerned, one may remark with M.

Lucien Poincare, "that it is impossible to establish a connection translatable

into exact numerical ratios between a quantity of heat which is equivalent to a

quantity of energy and a quantity of electricity which must be multiplied by a

certain potential to express a certain quantity of work."

  D

  duct represents the work, are always found. Without tension there could

be no transmission of energy. It is especially in electricity that the difference

between  the  two  factors  quantity  and  tension  is  clearly  seen.  The  static

machines in our laboratories yield electricity under a very high tension, since

it may reach as high as 50,000 volts; but their output is insignificant, since it

never  amounts  to  more  than  a  fewthousandths  of  an  ampere.  A  galvanic

battery, on the contrary, has a high yield in amperes, while the electricity

issues from it at a very feeble tension hardly exceeding two volts.

  The  old  electricians,  who  knew  not  these  distinctions,  thought  very

erroneously that the static machines in our laboratories were, by reason of the

loud sparks they produced, powerful generators of electricity. The tension is

enormous, but the quantity infinitesimal, so that the product of these two

magnitudes represents an insignificant amount of work. It is for this reason

that the sparks from these noisy machines produce insignificant results, while

with industrial machines where the tension hardly exceeds a hundred volts or

so, but which give a high output, the physiological, calorific, and luminescent

effects are considerable.

  In the study of heat, the difference between the two magnitudes tension

and quantity can likewise be clearly shown. Tension is represented by the

temperature of a body, quantity by the number of calories it can produce. A

very simple example will show the difference between the two factors.

  Let us burn a match of fir-wood or a whole forest of the same tree, andthe thermometer thrust into the flame of the match or into that of the forest

will

  THE ENERGETICAL EXPLANATION 51

  indicate the same temperature. It is evident, however, that the quantity of

heat generated in the two cases will be far different. With the heat produced

by the combustion of the match we can only bring a few drops of water to

boiling-point, while with the quantity of heat resulting from the combustion

of the forest, we could boil several tons of the same liquid.

  § 3.— Transformation of QuoMtity into Tension, and conversely

  The product of the quantity by the tension—that is to say, the work—is a

constant  magnitude;  but  it  is  possible,  without  altering  that  product,  to

increase one of the factors and to diminish the other. These are operations to

which commerce has recourse daily.

  The hydraulic analogies given above—and to which we should always

turn if we wish to thoroughly understand the distribution of energy—enable

us to conceive how quantity can be transformed into tension, or conversely,

without  varying  their  total  product.  As  regards  a  reservoir  of  liquid,  for

example, we can see that without varying the weight of the liquid and by

simply modifying the height and width of the receptacle, we can obtain at

will a very great output with very feeble pressure, or, on the other hand, a

very small output with a very great pressure.

  The transformation of quantity into tension, and conversely, is in constant

use in electricity. With a battery having a tension of only a few volts, but an

output in amperes fairly great, it is possible, by passing the current through an

induction coil, to bring the electricity to a tension of more than 20,000

  volts,  while  greatly  reducing  its  output.  The  converse  operation  may

likewise  be  effected.  In  certain  industrial  installations  we  succeed  in

producing electricity under a tension of 100,000 volts, and then this tension,

much too great to be of practical use, is transformed so as to obtain a great

output at a feeble voltage. In all these operations, the product of the quantity

by  the  tension—that  is  to  say,  of  the  coulombs  by  the  volts—remains

invariable.

  Judging  by  their  effects,  we  might  believe  that  quantity  and  tension

constitute two very different elements. They are in reality but two forms of

the same thing. The transformation of quantity into tension results simply

from  the  mode  of  distribution  of  the  same  energy.  We  realize  the

transformation by concentrating the energy within a very small space, whichamounts to raising its level above that of the zero of energy. The converse

operation will transform, on the contrary, tension into quantity. A coulomb

spread over a sphere of 10,000 kilometres radius will give only a pressure of

one volt. Let us spread the same quantity of electricity over a sphere of a

diameter 100,000 times less—that is to say, of 100 metres, and this same

quantity  of  electricity  will  produce  a  potential  a  hundred  thousand  times

higher —that is to say, a pressure of 100,000 volts.

  It would be the same for any other form of energy —for instance, light. If

we possess a pencil of light, lighting feebly a surface of given extent, and

wish to increase the light of a part of this surface, we have only to concentrate

the pencil on a small space by means of a lens. The intensity of the part

lighted will be considerably increased, but the illuminated surface will be

notably reduced. By the

  THE ENERGETICAL EXPLANATION 53

  same operation, we might increase the temperature produced by a pencil

of radiant heat to the melting-point of a metal. By a converse operation—that

is to say, by dispersing a pencil of radiations by a prism or diverging lens—

we increase the surface lighted or warmed, but reduce the intensity by the

unit  of  surface.  None  of  the  above  operations  has  varied  the  quantity  of

energy expended. Its distribution has alone altered.

  § 4.— The Part of Matter in Energetic Mechanics

  In  the  above  summary,  we  have  had  resource  to  the  principles  of

energetic mechanics especially. As a method of calculation they are above

criticism, but we must not try to get from them an attempt at the explanation

of  phenomena.  Moreover,  the  energetic  theory  utterly  rejects  such

explanations.  Confining  its  role  to  the  measurement  of  magnitudes

subsequently  connected  together  by  equations,  it  denies  the  existence  of

force, ignores matter, and replaces them both by a single entity,—energy, the

varieties of which it limits itself to measuring.

  " But then, it will be said," writes one of the defenders of the doctrine

(Professor  Ostwald),  "if  we  have  to  give  up  atoms  and  mechanics,  what

image of reality will remain to us ? But we need no image and no symbol.

The task of science is to establish the relations between realities—that is to

say, tangible and measurable magnitudes—in such fashion that, some being

given, the others are deduced from them. . . . Hereafter there is no need to

trouble ourselves about forces of which we cannot demonstrate the existence,

acting between atoms of which we are not cognizant, but only to concernourselves with the quantities of energy brought into play in the phenomena

under study. These we can measure. . . . All the equations which link together

two or more phenomena of

    diflFei-eut species are necessarily equations between quantities of energy.

There cannot be any other, for, besides time and space, energy is the only

magnitude which is common to all orders of phenomena."

  Nor did the classical mechanics bring matter into its equations, since it

only  dealt  with  its  effects,  but  it  did  not  deny  its  existence.  Energetic

mechanics, which finds it simpler to ignore it than to seek to explain it, will

never lead to any very high philosophical conception. Science would hardly

have progressed if it had declined to try to understand what at first seemed

above its reach. Tendencies of the same nature formerly existed in zoology, at

the time when it was purely descriptive, and refused to deal with the origin of

beings and their transformation. So long as such ideas prevailed, that science

made but trifling progress; but if this narrow conception had not reigned for a

long enough period, philosophical minds like Lamarck's and Darwin's would

not have found the materials for their syntheses. It would be impossible to

multiply too extensively the number of specialists whose lives are spent in

weighing or measuring something. From time to time an architect appears

who  raises  an  edifice  with  materials  which  have  been  patiently  brought

together by sleepless workmen. The disciples of energetic mechanics are to-

day  accumulating  documents  of  this  kind  against  the  day  when  superior

minds wall appear who will make good use of them.

  In treating matter as a negligible quantity, energetic mechanics has only

taken on its shoulders a metaphysical mheritance centuries old. For a long

time it was one of the regular recreations of philosophers to prove that matter

and even the universe

  THE ENERGETICAL EXPLANATION 55

  did  not  exist,  and  to  expatiate  at  length  on  tliese  negations.  These

inoffensive speculations lose all interest so soon as one enters a laboratory.

We are then indeed compelled to act as if matter were a very real thing with

Avhich the universe was built, and which is in consequence the substratum of

phenomena. We there have to distinguish very clearly also the matter which

can be weiglied, and the difi'erent forms of energy—light, heat, &c.—which

cannot be weighed, and are consequently added to bodies without increasing

their weight.

    Notwithstanding  therefore  all  the  equations  of  energetics,  the  greatdualit}^  between  matter  and  energy  continued  to  exist.  Matter  might  be

eliminated from calculations, but this elimination did not make it vanish from

reality.

  The readers of my last work knoAv how I endeavoured to make this

classical  dichotomy  vanish  by  showing  that  matter  was  nothing  else  than

energy in a form which had acquired fixity. We have taken from it none of

the special properties which allow us to athrm its existence as matter, but

have  simply  shown  that  it  constitutes  a  form  of  energy  capable  of

transforming itself into other forms, and that it is, through its dissociation, the

origin of most of the forces of the universe, notably solar heat and electricity.

Far, then, from deciding on its non-existence, we have been led to consider it

as the principal element of things.

    CHAPTER III

  THE DEGRADATION OF ENERGY AND POTENTIAL ENERGY

  § 1.— The Theory of tlce Degradation of Energy

  The dogma of the indestructibility of energy no longer rests on very safe

arguments, but it is supported by some very strong beliefs which put it above

discussion. Very scarce are the scholars who, following the example of the

illustrious mathematician Henri Poincare, have discovered its weakness and

pointed out its uncertainties.

  From the time of the earliest researches into the relations of heat and

work, it was recognized that if it were possible to transform a given quantity

of work into heat, we possess no means of effecting the converse operation

without loss. The best steam engines do not transform into work much more

than  one  tenth  of  the  heat  expended.  Observation  indeed  shows  that  the

disappearance of any form of energy is -always followed by the apparition of

a different energy; but this evolution is accompanied by a degradation of the

original energy, which becomes less utilizable. The sole exception to this is

perhaps gravific energy.

  The indestructibility of energy did not, then, imply its invariability. There

would have to be several qualities of energy, of which heat would be the

lowest. The different enercfios havinsr an invin-cible tendency to transform

themselves into this low

  form of energy, it followed that all those in the universG would finally

undergo  this  transformation.  As  differences  of  temperature  equalize

themselves by diffusion, and as heat is only utilizable as energy on condition

of its being able to act on bodies of lower temperature, it follows that whenall  particles  of  matter  contain  energy  at  the  same  degree  of  tension,  no

exchange  could  take  place  between  them.  This  would  be  the  end  of  our

universe. From a highly differentiated state, it would have passed gradually to

a  non-differentiated  state.  Its  energy  would  not  be  destroyed,  since  by

definition it is supposed to be immortal. It would become simply unutilizable,

and would remain unutilized until the day when our world Avould meet with

another  at  a  lower  level  of  energy,  with  which  it  could  in  consequence

exchange  something.  In  the  theory  which  we  shall  now  deduce  from  our

researches, things would happen a little differently.

  § 2.— Potential Energy

  The  concept  of  potential  energy  is  only  the  extension  of  facts  of

elementary  observation.  I  have  already  said  that  in  the  theory  of  the

conservation of energy this latter presents itself in two forms, kinetic energy

or energy of movement and potential energy. In an isolated system these two

forms  of  energy  may  vary  in  opposite  directions,  but  their  sum  remains

constant.  If  therefore  we  call  the  kinetic  energy  of  a  system  C,  and  the

potential energy P, we obtain C + P = constant.

    Evidently nothing is simpler, and the classic example of the weight of the

wound-up clock well illustrates this apparent simplicity. So long as the

  weight does not act, the kinetic energy employed in winding it up remains

stored up in the potential state. So soon as the weight commences to descend,

this potential energy passes into the kinetic state, and at any moment of its

course  the  sum  of  the  kinetic  energy  expended  and  that  of  the  potential

energy not yet used is equal to the total energy primarily employed to raise

the weight.

  In such elementary cases as this, there is no difficulty in distinguishing

the  kinetic  from  the  potential  energy;  but  once  we  go  beyond  these  very

simple examples, it becomes impossible, as M. Henri Poincare has shown, to

separate the two forms of energy, and, consequently, to ascertain the total

energy (chemical, electrical, &c.) of a system. The formulas end by including

such heterogeneous things, that energy can no longer be defined.

  " If we wish," he says, " to enunciate the principle of the conservation of

energy in all its generality, and to apply it to the universe, we see it, so to

speak, vanish, and there remains but this—there is something which remains

constant. But is there even any sense in this ? " ^

  Very fortunately for the progress of science, ^yhen the consequences of

the principle of the conservation of energy were developed, its champions didnot look so closely into the matter. Disdaining objections, they established a

principle which has rendered immense services by the researches of which it

was the origin. What it has especially shown is that the work expended to

produce a certain effect—a new chemical equilibrium, for instance—is not

lost, but is recovered when the body returns to its primitive

  ^ La Science ct I'Hypothese, p, 158.

  state. It is nearly thus, moreover, that the principle of the conservation of

energy  is  now  regarded.  It  brings  us  back,  then,  to  saying  that  the  work

yielded  by  a  spring  when  released  is  equal  to  the  power  absorbed  in

compressing it. And we thus stumble once more on one of those truths of

commonplace obviousness which often form the web of the greatest scientific

principles.

  However  this  may  be,  the  faculty  which  physicists  have  arrogated  to

themselves  of  considering  the  energy  which  appears  to  be  lost  as  having

passed  into  the  potential  state,  will  always  remove  the  principle  of  the

conservation of energy from experimental criticism. Latent potential energy

plays the part of those " hidden forces " by the intervention of which the early

mechanics  succeeded  in  fitting  into  its  equations  the  experiments  which

escaped them. The moment conservation of energy is admitted as a postulate,

we must suppose that that which appears lost is to be found somewhere else,

and the abyss of potential energy provides it with an inviolable shelter. But if

we start from the contrary postulate, that energy can be used and lost, we are

compelled to acknowledge that the second postulate would have in its favour

at least as many facts as the first.

  These are, moreover, barren discussions, since experiment is incapable of

throwing light on this question. We had, therefore, to retain the principle of

the conservation of energy until, after having penetrated further into the intra-

atomic universe, it had been clearly set forth in what way energy becomes

lost.  This  is  a  point  of  which  the  solution  can  be  dimly  seen,  and  I  will

presently examine it.

  It would be equally useless to dwell on facts which

  agree very badly or not at all with the principle of the permanence of

energy, since it is enough to imagine any hypothesis whatever to make them

fit in with this principle. Thus a way of explaining how the mass of a body

can immensely increase with its velocity, as has been proved by experiments

with  radio-active  particles,  will  certainly  be  found.  It  has  indeed  been

explained how a permanent magnet may be for an indefinite space of timetraversed  by  currents  without  its  becoming  heated  by  the  friction,  which

would lead to the loss of its magnetism. It was enough to suppose that ether

had no resistance—that is to say, to confer on it a property that the non-

instantaneous nature of the propagation of light proves not to exist.

  These unverifiable hypotheses have always allowed a theory to be saved

so long as it is a fertile one. Many hypotheses in physics, such as that of the

kinetic theory of gases, would probably quickly vanish if experiment could

throw light on them. These molecules unceasingly hustling against each other

with the velocity of a cannon ball, without becoming heated, thanks to an

elasticity  supposed  to  be  infinite,  have  perhaps  but  a  very  remote

resemblance  to  the  reality.  The  theory  is  rightly  retained  because  it  is  a

fruitful  one,  and  because  no  possible  experiment  enables  us  to  prove  its

inaccuracy.

  We  have  seen  how  the  theory  of  the  degradation  of  energy  and  its

transformation into inaccessible potential energy allows us to withdraw the

principle of the conservation of energy from the criticism of experiment. This

theory has satisfied the immense majority of physicists, but not all. We know

what M. Henri Poincare thinks of it. He is not the only

  one  to  have  stated  doubts.  Quite  recently,  M.  Sabatier,  Dean  of  the

Faculty of Sciences at Mont-pellier, propounded in an interesting inaugural

lecture  with  the  title,  "  Is  the  Material  Universe  Eternal  ?",  the  question

whether it was quite certain that there was not a real and progressive loss of

energy in the world: and more recently still, in a memoir on the degradation

of  energy,  one  of  our  most  far-seeing  physicists,  M.  Bernard  Brunhes,

expressed himself as follows:—

  " What is our warrant for the statement that the universe is a limited

system ? If it be not so, what signify these expressions: ' the total energy of

the universe,' or the utilizable energy of the universe ? To say that the total

energy  is  preserved  but  that  the  utilizable  energy  diminishes,  is  this  not

formulating meaningless propositions ? " . . .

  " It would not be absurd to imagine a universe where, after the example of

our solar system, the total internal energy might go on diminishing while the

fraction remaining would constantly pass into an unutilizable form, where

energy would be lost and at the same time degraded.

  " The law of the conservation of energy is only a definition: the proof of

this  is  that  when  a  new  phenomenon  comes  to  establish  a  discord  in  the

equation of energy, there is set up for it a new form of energy defined by thecondition of re-establishing the compromised inequality."

  And in answer to a letter in which I set forth my ideas on this point, the

same physicist wrote to me :—

  " The ' nothing is lost' should be deleted from the exposition of the laws

of physics, for the science of to-day teaches us that something is lost. It is

cer-

  tainly in the direction of the leakage, of the wearing-away of the worlds,

and not in the direction of their greater stability, that the science of to-morrow

will modify the reigning ideas."

  I have faithfully set forth, in this and the preceding chapters, the theories

which  rule  science  at  present.  My  criticisms  have  not  interfered  with  the

faithfulness  of  my  exposition.  Their  object  was  simply  to  show  that  the

current theories contain some very weak points, and that consequently it is

permissible to replace them, or at least to prepare for their replacement. No

longer fettered by the weight of early principles now sufficiently shaken, we

can proceed to examine whether, in place of being indestructible, energy does

not  vanish  without  return,  like  that  matter  of  which  it  is  only  the

transformation.

  BOOK IV THE NEW CONCEPTION OF FORCES

    CHAPTER I

  THE  INDIVIDUALIZATION  OF  FORCES  AND  THE  SUPPOSED

TRANSFORMATIONS OF ENERGY

  § 1.— The Transformations of Energy

  No  one  at  the  present  clay  is  unaware—and  the  first  savages  who

succeeded in obtaining fire by rubbing together two bits of wood might have

suspected the fact—that with a given form of energy other forms may be

produced.  Yet  the  theory  of  the  equivalence  of  forces  and  their

transformations was only clearly formulated at the date of the discoveries

relating to the conservation of energy.

  The most elementary text-books now teach that all the forces of nature are

interchangeably  transformable,  and  are  only  transformations  of  a  single

entity, viz.: energy.

  In  his  work  on  The  Evolution  of  Physics}  M.  Lucien  Poincare  has

summed up the existing ideas as follows:—

  " The physicists of the end of the nineteenth century were brought to

consider  that  in  all  physical  phenomena  there  occur  apparitions  and

disappear-  ^ See vol. xc. of this series, p. 65.— Ed. 63

  ances whicli are balanced by various energies. It is natural, however, to

suppose that these equivalent apparitions and disappearances correspond to

transformations, and not to simultaneous creations and destructions. We thus

represent energy to ourselves as taking different forms—mechanical, electric,

calorific, and chemical—capable of changing one into the other, but in such a

way that the quantitative value always remains the same."

  It is easy to comprehend the origin of this theory, but when we go deeper

into it we discover neither the necessity nor the exactness of it. All that can be

said in its favour is, that it escapes the test of experiment. It is certain that the

various forms of energy appear to transform themselves, or, better, that from

any form of energy others can be produced. But these are merely apparent

transformations like the turning of money into goods. For a five-franc piece

we obtain a metre of silk; but nobody thinks that the silver of which the coin

is made transforms itself into silk. Yet a like transformation is admitted when

we arc assured that the friction of a rod of resin with a strip of flannel has

been turned into heat and electricity. The modern theory of the equivalence

and the transformation of energies seems indeed to be only an illusion arising

from the fact that, in order to measure them, we have chosen the same unit,

viz. that of work estimated in kilogram-metres or in calories.

  Under its most dissimilar forms, energy is simply defined as equivalent to

a certain amount of mechanical work, and to the modern physicist energy and

work have always been synonymous, although they are in reality very distinct

things. We should have

  a very poor idea of the comparative value of a horse, a negro, and a white

man, if we confined ourselves to measuring the number of kilogrammetres

that  each  could  produce.  Little  can  be  Ivnown  of  things  from  simply

measuring one of their quantitative elements. We must indeed be satisfied

with such indications when others cannot be obtained; but in that case we

must resign ourselves to acknowledging the insufficiency of our knowledge.

    Movement, electricity, heat, &c., being evidently very different things, it

seems natural to say that the different forms of energy are too dissimilar to be

transformed  one  into  the  other,  but  that  the  same  effect  may  come  from

different causes. A motor is set in movement by various agents such as steam,

electricity, manual labour, and the force of the wind, which are not akin to

each other, although they produce identical effects. When movement or any

kind of force produces heat, does this signify anything else than that withdissimilar  means  we  obtain  the  variations  of  molecular  equilibrium  from

which heat results ? A transmutation such as that of movement into electricity

or light would assuredly be more marvellous than that of simple bodies—of,

for instance, lead into gold.

  I will not dwell further on this theory, which is little in conformity with

the  teachings  of  the  present  day.  I  should  even  have  judged  it  useless  to

formulate it if chance had not brought before my eyes a memoir by Professor

Ostwald, who arrives by other roads at the same conclusion as myself. These

are his words:—

  " As is well known, we distinguish since Hamilton's time two kinds of

physical magnitudes— scalars and

  E

    vectors. These two kinds of magnitudes are essentially different in their

nature, and the one can never be represented by the other. I am persuaded that

there exist a greater number of magnitudes of different kinds, and I believe I

am  justified  in  admitting  that  the  different  forms  of  energy  are  all

characterized  by  magnitudes  possessing  such  an  individuality.  Let  this  be

confirmed, and the fact that up to the present mechanics has been unable to

give a complete image of nature will appear as a necessity. Such a notion

would  be  as  precious  for  science  as  was,  in  its  time,  the  notion  of  the

individuality  of  chemical  elements;  and  the  modern  adepts  of  mechanical

theories, by claiming to reduce all forms of energy to mechanical energy,

would no more have done useful work than did the alchemists Avho sought

to  turn  lead  into  gold.  That,  in  the  course  of  such  labour,  all  kinds  of

discoveries, as interesting as they were unexpected were made, is only one

likeness the more to the often fertile activity of these obstinate gold-seekers."

  §  2.—  Under  ivhat  Forms  Energy  can  exist  in  Hatter  I  have  already

examined this question in my last work, and I arrived at the conclusion that

the energies manifested by matter are the consequences of the movements of

its elements. It must be thanks to their rapidity that matter contains a very

great  quantity  of  energy  in  a  very  small  volume.  It  is  known  that  the

liberation  of  1  gramme  of  hydrogen  in  the  decomposition  of  water

corresponds to a production of electricity equal to 96,000 coulombs—say, an

output of nearly 27 amperes an hour.

  It does not appear that chemists consider in this light the manifestations

of  energy  of  which  matter  may  be  the  seat.  While  careful  to  affirm  that

energy is in no way anything material, they treat it exactly as if it were a kindof fluid absorbed and restored by bodies as a sponge imbibes a liquid and

gives it out when squeezed. They constantly speak, in fact, • of heat being

absorbed or given out by a combination, and all thermochemistry is founded

on the measurement of these absorptions and liberations. In reality, bodies in

their  transformation  absorb  nothing  at  all.  When  we  are  told  that  a  body

absorbs heat to transform itself, this simply signifies that in order to compel

its elements to modify their equilibria they have had to expend energy. This

energy will be restored on their return to their primary equilibria, just as a

spring produces when released an amount of work equal to that expended in

its compression.

  This image of a spring, rude as it may be, makes us clearly understand

that the absorptions or liberations of heat by chemical compounds during

their transformation are only displacements of energy following on changes

of  equilibrium.  It  will  be  easily  recognized  that  a  spring  on  its  release

produces a power equal to that expended to set it. It is to this elementary fact

that  the  whole  science  of  thermochemistry  and  also  the  principle  of  the

conservation of energy may be referred. Carbon, the combustion of which—

that is to say, its combination with oxygen—generates a quantity of heat,

offers us the type of those bodies supposed to be capable of absorbing energy

and then of retaining it. Chemists tells us with regard to coal

  that "the heat of combustion represents stored-up solar energy." It would

thus seem that the coal has stored heat as a reservoir stores water.

  In reality, it has stored nothing during its formation ; but, being a body

with  a  strong  affinity  for  the  oxygen  of  the  air,  and  producing,  when  in

combination with it, equilibria which are accompanied by a great liberation of

heat, we utilize this last to produce water-vapour, the elastic force of which

sets in motion the pistons of our steam engines. If the air, instead of oxygen,

had contained only nitrogen, coal would never have been considered as a

storehouse of energy. It does not, in reality, contain it any more than a crowd

of other bodies more abundant in nature, such as aluminium and magnesium.

These metals, if not already engaged in certain combinations, would produce,

by uniting with oxygen, heat as utilizable as that generated by the oxidation

of carbon.

  The  reader  who  bears  in  mind  my  theory  of  intra-atomic  energy,

according to which all atoms are a colossal reservoir of energy, will no doubt

object  that,  apart  from  any  combination,  any  body  whatever  is  thus  a

reservoir of forces. But these forces have not been utilized up to the present.Only molecular and not intra-atomic reactions are recognized by chemistry

and commerce. They were thus the only ones we had to deal with in the

preceding remarks.

  THE CHANGES OF MATERIAL EQUILIBRIA 69

    CHAPTER II

  THE  CHANGES  OF  EQUILIBRIA  OF  MATTER  AND  OF  THE

ETHER AS THE ORIGIN OF FORCES

  I 1.— Alterations of Level as Generators of Energy

    Physicists measure forces and energy, but do not define them. For them

force is simply the cause of a movement, and they evaluate its magnitude by

the acceleration it produces. When a force displaces its point of application

over a certain length, it gives a determined amount of work. This mechanical

work being the unit with which all forms of energy are measured, the effect

has finally become confused with the cause, and for many physicists work

and energy have become, as has been said, synonymous. Forces form part of

the  irreducible  elements  of  the  universe.  Not  being,  like  time  and  space,

comparable to anything, we cannot define them. We shall here only attempt

to put in evidence a general condition of their manifestation.

  All the forces of nature are generated by disturbances of equilibrium in

either the ether or matter, and disappear when the disturbed equilibria are

restored. Light, for instance, which is born with the vibrations of the ether,

ceases with them.

  Two  bodies  charged  with  heat,  electricity,  movement,  &c.,  cannot,

whatever be the difference of magnitude of these bodies, act on each other

and produce energy, save when the elements with which they are charged are

out of equilibrium. From this

  defect of equilibrium results what is called tension, or, again, potential. In

heat, tension is represented by the difference of temperature; in electricity, by

the electro-motive force; in energy of movement, by the velocity; in gravity,

by the drop, &c.

  This break of equilibrium excites a sort of flow of energy. It takes place

from the point where the tension is highest towards that where it is lowest,

and continues till the equilibrium is re-established —that is to say, until there

is an equality of level between the bodies in question. We may therefore

consider as generators of energy a liquid passing from a higher to a lower

level; heat passing from a hot to a cold body; electricity flowing from a body

with a high potential to one with a low potential; movement transmitted froma body animated by velocity to another with less velocity, «&;c. Thus energy

depends on the state of the bodies in presence. There is only an exchange

between them if they are out of equilibrium—that is to say, if they possess

different tensions. One of the bodies present then loses something which it

yields to the other until their tensions are equahzed. In order that they may

then generate a new quantity of energy, they must be put in presence of a

third body, which is out of equilibrium with them.

  Generally speaking, that Avhich substances yield up to each other during

these exchanges are forms of movement. All the modes of energy are known

and measured by these movements.

    According to the media in which the disturbances of equilibrium manifest

themselves, and according to their form, they are termed heat, electricity,

light, &c.

  The disturbances of equilibrium which generate

  THE CHANGES OF MATERIAL EQUILIBRIA 71

  forces  are  themselves  the  consequence  of  other  disturbances.  They

follow, by substituting themselves for, one another, which is why a force only

appears at the expense of another force, which is at the same time annulled.

  Taking these facts as starting-point, we could formulate in the following

way  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy.  In  a  closed  system  an

equilibrium  cannot  be  destroyed  without  being  replaced  by  another

equivalent form of equilibrium. These things happen as if all the elements of

the universe were related to each other in such a way as to constitute a sort of

articulate system. Nothing, however, indicates that the universe is a closed

system, and the fact that energy is always degraded when transformed—that

is to say, becomes less and less utilizable —seems to show that the springs of

our supposed articulate system cannot work without losing something.

  This essential notion of the disturbance of equilibrium as the origin of

energy may be put in evidence by a few examples. Let us place on the same

level  two  receptacles  full  of  water  and  connected  by  a  tube.  Being  in

equilibrium they cannot produce any energy. Raise one of the receptacles

above the other, and the equilibrium of their contents is at once disturbed, and

part  of  the  liquid  flows  from  the  higher  to  the  lower  receptacle  until  the

equilibrium is again established. During this interruption, and only while it

lasts, will the water be able to do work—to lift a piston, for example.

  It is exactly the same with heat, electricity, or any other energy. Two

bodies heated to the same temperature represent two reservoirs on the samelevel.

  or two equal weights on the scale-pans of a balance, and there results

from this no manifestation of energy. If, on the contrary, the temperature of

one of the bodies is lower than that of the other, there will be a disturbance of

equilibrium and a production of energy until the two bodies arrive at the same

calorific level.

  It is the same with electricity. There can be no production of electrical

energy  without  an  interruption  of  equilibrium.  Whatever  the  quantity  of

electricity with which Ave charge a body, it will produce no energy if it be in

relation  with  another  at  the  same  potential—that  is  to  say,  at  the  same

electrical level.

  Our  instruments  of  measurement—thermometers,  galvanometers,

manometers,  &c.,  simply  indicate  energetic  differences  of  level,  to  which

Ave give the names of temperature, pressure, voltage, &c., existing between

some source of energy and an arbitrary zero taken as point of reference. If the

bulb of a thermometer Avere at the temperature of the source to be measured

—that is to say, in equilibrium Avith it—it is evident that the column of

mercury Avould remain motionless. What a voltmeter measures is likcAvise

the  difference  of  level  betAveen  a  source  of  electricity  and  itself.  Our

instruments, like our senses, are only sensitive to differences.

  Thus, then, Avithout an alteration of level of the ether or of matter there

can be no possible manifestation of energy. If the sun possesses throughout

its mass a uniform temperature of 6000 degrees, and there could exist in it

beings capable of supporting that heat, it would represent to them no energy.

Having no cold bodies at their disposal, they could produce no fall of heat, a

condition indispensable for the production of thermal energy.

  Let us suppose noAv that, instead of finding them-

  THE CHANGES OF MATERIAL EQUILIBRIA 73

  selves at a uniform temperature of 6000 degrees, these imaginary beings

live in a world of ice at the uniform temperature of zero, but possess in a

corner of their world still colder an unlimited provision of liquid air. Contrary

to those plunged in a medium at 6000 degrees, they would find in the blocks

of ice around them a considerable source of energy. By plunging these latter,

in  fact,  into  the  liquid  air  at  —180°,  they  would  obtain  a  considerable

alteration of temperature. At the contact of the ice, which is to liquid air a

very hot body, this latter would immediately boil, and its vapour could be

employed to put motors in operation. The inhabitants of that world wouldtherefore replace the coal of our steam engines by blocks of ice, which they

would consider, certainly with more reason than we do coal, reservoirs of

energy.

  With  this  ice  and  this  liquid  air,  it  vv'ould  be  very  easy  for  them  to

produce the highest temperatures. The tension of the vapour obtained could

be employed, in fact, to drive dynamos, by means of which can be obtained

electric  currents  capable  of  producing  temperatures  sufficient  to  fuse  and

volatilize all metals.

  That which has just been said concerning interruptions of equilibrium as

the condition of the production of energy, applies to all its forms, including

that possessed by bodies in motion. It can only be born from the encounter of

bodies not having the same tension—^that is to say, the same velocity—and

which cannot therefore be put in equilibrium. If the hunter's bullet kills the

animal flying before him, it is because the velocities of the two are different.

If these were equal, the bullet would evidently have

  no effect. Equalities of velocity render manifestations of kinetic energy

impossible.

  The locomotive, notwithstanding its mass, can do nothing to the fly which

hovers in front of it at the same rate of speed. The effects of masses, endowed

with kinetic energy, on the bodies they meet, result solely from the inertia of

matter,  which  prevents  its  instantaneously  adopting  the  velocity  of  the

elements which act upon it. If bodies were not possessed of inertia—that is to

say, of resistance to movement— they would simply take the velocity of the

masses striking them, and would not be destroyed by them.

    Kinetic energy therefore, on final analysis, represents movement which

passes or tends to pass from one body to another. It is the same, moreover,

with  thermal  energy.  It  manifests  itself  by  molecular  movements  from  a

heated body to the elements of a cold body, the movements of which have

less velocity. It is always movement which is transmitted in order to make

itself equal with another movement, and to be in equilibrium with it.

  Into the disturbances of equilibrium which I have invoked in order to

explain  the  origin  of  energy,  the  notion  of  quantity  has  not  entered.  The

quantity of heat, electricity, movement, or gravity possessed by the bodies

put  in  presence  matters  little.  They  will  only  act  on  each  other  if  the

movement, the electricity, or the heat, with which they are charged, have

different tensions. Whether one or one hundred kilogrammes are placed in

the two pans of a balance, it will remain motionless so long as there is nodiftcrence  between  the  two  weights.  All  the  manifestations  of  energy  are

subject to the same law. Bodies in the presence of each other can, I repeat,

  THE CHANGES OF MATERIAL EQUILIBRIA 75

  only yield something to one another if they are at different tensions.

    Differences  of  tension—that  is  to  say,  of  equilibrium  —are  the  first

condition  of  all  productions  of  energy,  but  the  magnitude  of  this  energy

results evidently from the masses brought into play by the differences of

tension. It is evident that a weight of 100 kilogrammes falling a distance of

100 metres will produce more energy than 1 kilogramme falling from the

same height. The magnitude of the energy is therefore necessarily represented

by the product of two factors,—quantity and tension. Tension represents a

difference of level. Whether applied to very great or very small masses, it is

the fundamental condition of the production of energy.

  We see, finally, that all the forms of energy are transitory effects resulting

from the interruption of equilibrium between several magnitudes— weight,

heat, electricity, or velocity. It is therefore quite erroneous to speak of energy

as a kind of entity having a real existence analogous to that of matter. The

considerations just set forth allow us to imagine a world the physicists of

which  would  accept  the  second  principle  of  thermodynamics,  but  would

reject  the  first—that  is  to  say,  that  of  the  conservation  of  energy.  Let  us

suppose a universe with an invariable temperature where the sole source of

energy known is that of the waterfalls coming from immense lakes situate on

mountain-tops, such as one sometimes meets with in different regions of the

earth. The learned men of such a world would no doubt have discovered

pretty quickly the possibility of converting into heat, light, and electricity the

energy of these waterfalls, but they would also have

    established by experiment that they could not without enormous leakage

restore the Avater to its original level with the forces produced by its own

flow. They would thus be led to believe that energy is a thing which is used

up and lost, and that the energy of their world would bo exhausted when all

the water of the lakes should have descended to the plains.

  § 2.— Of ivhat Elements the Entity called Energy are Composed

  It may be objected to the preceding remarks, that it is not because a thing

does not produce any effect that it does not exist. A weight held up by a

thread is still a weight. Heat not in action is still heat; a force annulled by the

action of another force does not on that account lose its existence. But when

we  reflect  on  the  phenomena  called  heat,  gravity,  electricity,  &c.,  werecognise  that  they  are  only  known  and  measured  as  disturbances  of

equilibrium, and have, outside these disturbances, no existence verifiable by

our senses or instruments. Heat produces calorific energy when it falls from a

certain height, just as a tile from the roof of a house generates kinetic energy

by its fall; but heat which does not change its level is no more energy than the

tile fixed on a roof. No doubt the sun warms us, and there we see an energy

which seems to be quite independent and to have an existence of its own.

And  yet  all  the  energy  produced  results  solely  from  a  difl'erence  of

temperature—that is to say, of equilibrium—between the calorific effects of

the rays emitted by the star which warms us and the bodies which receive

them. Let any body at the same

  THE CHANGES OF MATERIAL EQUILIBRIA 77

  heat as itself be brought as near as you please to the sun, and there will be

no possible exchange of what we call calorific energy.

    Physicists argue, moreover, exactly as if they admitted all this. They are

fully aware that there must be alterations of level to effect work, and that no

work can be manifested when the alteration of level has ceased. But as it

would be possible to produce a flow of energy with a fresh alteration of level,

they assert that this energy which is not manifested exists in a potential state.

.

  All  these  concepts  of  potential  energy,  unutilizable  energy,  degraded

energy, &c., are the consequences of a confusion of ideas, according to which

energy is a sort of substance of which the existence is as real as that of

matter.  This  invisible  entity,  the  secret  mover  of  things,  is  supposed  to

circulate unceasingly through the universe by constantly transforming itself.

This hypothesis was, moreover, necessary when matter was believed to be an

aggregate of inert elements only able to restore the energy it received, and

incapable of creating any. Something was indeed necessary to animate it, and

it was that something which constituted energy.

  If this mysterious entity was necessary for the epoch when a superior

cause had to be imagined for the animation of inert matter, its existence has

no  object  at  the  present  day.  Instead  of  imagining  an  unexplained  power

perpetually circulating through the world without ever being exhausted, I say:

—

  At the origin of things there was condensed in matter, under the form of

movement of its elements, an enormous but yet limited quantity of energy.

This phase of concentration was followed by a period  of  expenditure  of  the  accumulated  energies,  on  which  the  sun  and

analogous stars have now entered. The disintegration of their atoms is the

origin of all the natural forces now utilized. These atoms form an immense

reservoir, but one which must inevitably exhaust itself. Then that which we

call energy will, like matter, have disappeared for ever.

  By  thus  reasoning  we  only  appeal  to  conceivable  phenomena.  Our

explanation brings us to the brief enunciation of a limited provision of forces

stored up in matter at the time of its formation, which produce, when this last

disaggregates, different energies having only a momentary existence. This is

very simple, whereas the entity, supposed to be immortal, termed energy is

completely  incomprehensible.  Science  has  not  driven  forth  the  gods  from

their ancient empire to replace them by metaphysical processes still more

unintelligible than they.

    CHAPTER III

  THE EVOLUTION OF THE COSMOS—ORIGIN OF MATTER AND

OF THE FORCES OF THE UNIVERSE

  § 1.— The Origin of Matter

  The  origin  of  things  and  their  end  are  the  two  great  mysteries  of  the

universe  which  have  cost  religions,  philosophies,  and  science  the  most

meditation  and  thought.  As  these  mysteries  appear  unfathomable,  many

thinkers turn away from them. But the human mind has never resigned itself

to ignorance. It invents chimeras when it is refused explanations, and these

chimeras soon become its masters.

  Science has not yet lighted torches capable of illuminating the darkness

which envelops our past and veils the future. It is able, however, to project

some beams into this deep night.

  If everything proceeds from the ether and afterwards returns to it, we are

forced to inquire first of all how a substance so immaterial can transform

itself into heavy and rigid bodies, such as a rock or a block of metal.

  The ideas I have set forth on the structure of matter allow us in some

degree to understand this and to deduce from them the following theory:—

    Bodies are constituted by a collection of atoms, each composed of an

aggregate  of  rotating  particles,  probably  formed  by  vortices  of  ether.  By

reason of their velocity these particles possess an enormous kinetic energy.

According to the way in which their equilibria are disturbed they generate

different forces ■—light, heat, electricity, &c.

  It is probable that matter owes its rigidity only to the rapidity of the rotarymotion  of  its  elements,  and  that  if  this  movement  stopped  it  would

instantaneously vanish into ether without leaving a trace behind. Gaseous

vortices, animated by a rapidity of rotation of the order of that of the cathode

rays, would in all probability become as hard as steel. This experiment is not

realizable, but we can imaoine its results by noting the considerable rigidity

which is acquired by a fluid animated by great velocity.

    Experiments made in hydro-electric factories have shown that a liquid

column only 2 centimetres in diameter, falling through a tube of the height of

500 metres, cannot be broken into by a violent blow from a sabre. The arm is

stopped as if by a wall when it

  arrives  at  the  surface  of  the  liquid.  Professor  Bernard  Brunhes,  who

witnessed  this  experiment,  is  persuaded  that  if  the  velocity  of  the  liquid

column were sufficient a cannon ball would not go through it. A layer of

water a few centimetres thick, animated by a sufficient velocity, would be as

impenetrable to shells as the steel plates of an ironclad.

  Let us give to the above column of water the form of a vortex-ring, and

we shall get an image of the particles of matter and the explanation of its

rigidity.

  This  enables  us  to  understand  how  the  immaterial  ether,  when

transformed  into  small  vortex-rings  animated  by  sufficient  velocity,  may

become  very  material.  It  Avill  be  also  understood  that,  if  these  whirling

movements were stopped, matter would instantaneously vanish by return to

the ether.

  Matter, which seems to give us the image of stability and repose, only

exists, then, by reason of the rapidity of the rotary movement of its particles.

Matter is velocity, and, as a substance animated by velocity is also energy,

matter may be considered a particular form of energy.

  Velocity being the fundamental condition of the existence of matter, we

may say that this last is born so soon as the vortex-rings of the ether have

acquired, by reason of their increasing condensation, a rapidity sufficient to

give them rigidity. Matter grows old when the speed of its elements slackens.

It will cease to exist so soon as its particles lose their movement.

  We  are  therefore  brought  to  this  first  essential  notion  :  Particles  of  a

substance, however minute Ave may imagine them to be, may, by the sole

fact of their velocity, acquire a very great rigidity and become

    transformed  into  matter.  Let  us  now  examine  how,  with  these  two

elements,  particles  of  ether  and  velocity,  it  is  possible  to  understand  thegenesis of a universe.

  § 2.— The Formation of a Solar System,

  The first scientific theory on the origin of the world was, as we know,

formulated by Kant and developed by Laplace. According to this last, our

solar system with its retinue of planets must be derived from a primal nebula

similar  to  those  observed  in  space.  Agglomerated  under  the  influence  of

gravitation, which would thus be the primitive force, it formed a central globe

animated with a movement of rotation, whose particles by constant attraction

have drawn closer and closer togfether.

  By  reason  of  the  increasing  rapidity  of  its  rotation,  following  on  its

condensation, this first nucleus of the sun became flattened, and at a certain

moment  there  were  detached  from  it  by  centrifugal  force  rings  similar  to

those existing round Saturn.

  Continuing their movement of rotation, these rings finally, still under the

influence of centrifugal force, broke into fragments. From these fragments,

projected into space, were born the planets which revolve round the sun.

Incandescent at first like this last, but cooling relatively quickly by reason of

their small volume, they at length became habitable by living beings.

  Laplace stopped his investigations at the cooled planet, and did not busy

himself either with the elements which formed it nor with those which might

enter into the constitution of other solar systems.

  F

  It is now possible to go further, and to apply to atoms the laws which

seem to have presided at the birth and formation of our universe.

  It is now admitted that atoms are formed of numerous particles revolving

round one or several central masses with a velocity of the order of light. The

atom  may  therefore  be  compared  to  a  sun  surrounded  by  its  retinue  of

planets. Its small size does not prevent such a comparison. In an immensity

without  limits  extreme  littleness  does  not  sensibly  differ  from  extreme

greatness.  Beings  sufficiently  small  would  consider  the  planetary  system

formed by the elements of an atom as important as are to us the gigantic stars

of which astronomy observes the march.

  In the study of the evolution of worlds it is to-day easy to go, as has been

said  above,  far  beyond  Laplace.  No  one  could  suspect  in  his  time  that

spectrum analysis would make known the composition of the sun, and would

reveal therein elements identical with those of our globe—an evident proof

that the terrestrial elements are derived from those of the sun.  Spectrum analysis has, moreover, enabled us to follow the genesis of the

elements which compose the various worlds. The variation of the spectra of

the stars in the red and the ultra-violet regions indicates their temperature,

and consequently their relative age; while the other spectral rays make known

their composition. Wc have thus determined the bodies appearing in the stars

with  the  variations  of  temperature  corresponding  to  different  phases  of

evolution. In the youngest stars—that is to say, the hottest— there hardly

exists anything but a few gases, princi-

  THE EVOLUTION OF THE COSMOS 83

  pally  hydrogen;  then,  as  these  stars  become  cooler,  there  successively

appear the simple bodies we know, beginning with those of the lowest atomic

weight.

  Since astronomy has learnt to fix by photography the image of the stars, it

has established that their number is much larger than it once thought. It now

estimates at more than four hundred millions the number of luminous stars,

planets, and nebulae existing in the firmament, without speaking, naturally,

of  those  that  are  invisible  and  consequently  unknown.  Spectrum  analysis

shows that they are at very difterent stages of evolution. Their past must be of

fearful length, since geologists estimate the existence of our planet at several

hundred million years.

  During these accumulations of ages unknown to history, the millions of

stars  with  which  space  is  peopled  must  have  begun  or  ended  cycles  of

evolution analogous to that now pursued by our globe. Worlds peopled like

ours, covered with flourishing cities filled with the marvels of science and the

arts,  must  have  emerged  from  eternal  night  and  returned  thereto  without

leaving a trace behind them. The pale nebulae with shadowy forms represent

perhaps the last vestiges of worlds about to vanish into nothing or to become

the nuclei of a new universe.

  How  can  the  worlds  undergo  the  phase  of  descending  evolution

succeeding that of ascending evolution briefly pointed out in this chapter?

This we shall soon study.

  We  will  especially  bear  in  mind  from  what  has  been  said  that  the

transformations revealed by observation of the stars point out the general

march of the evolution of worlds. It is always enclosed in that

  fatal cycle of things — birth, growth, decline, and death.

  Whether it is the transformation of worlds or that of the beings living on

their surface that is in question, slowness is always the law of evolution. Inorder  to  succeed  in  forming  beings  gifted  with  the  small  amount  of

intelligence possessed by man, nature has caused to evolve through thousands

of centuries the animal forms which preceded him. Her transformations are

only realized at the cost of very slow efforts. She cannot create a world in

seven days like the gods of the early legends. If mighty divinities reign in

some distant region, they are not sovereign divinities, for Time dominates

them, and they can do nothing without him.

  § 3.— Molecular and Intra-Atomic Energies

  In order to avoid all confusion in what is to follow, we must first clearly

separate  molecular  from  intra-atomic  energies.  There  are  probably  close

relations between them.

  Molecular energies are the only ones hitherto known to science. They

generate cohesion, affinity, and chemical combinations and decompositions.

The manifestations of intra-atomic energy sometimes accompany them, as in

the phenomena of incandescence, but they formerly escaped all investigation.

  It is solely to molecular energies that the laws of thermodynamics and of

thermochemistry  have  been  applied.  They  always  come  back  to  this:  A

material body can emit no other energy but that which it has first received.

  The forces manifested in all chemical and industrial operations represent

simply restitutions or

    displacements of energy; and it is conceived that, under such conditions,

the quantity of this last remains invariable. These operations are identical

with those effected by the introduction into reservoirs of various shapes of a

certain  quantity  of  water  contained  in  another  reservoir.  This  substitution

naturally does not change the weight of the liquid.

    Science,  then,  has  only  examined  those  intra-mole-cular  energies  with

which bodies can be charged. This study has led to matter being considered

as entirely distinct from energy, and simply serving as its support. Matter,

when heated or electrified, could indeed absorb energy; but it restored this

borrowed energy afterwards, as a sponge does the water it has absorbed,,

without ever increasing its quantity.

  Matter being only the support of energy, we seemed perfectly justified in

establishing a difference profound and, as it was thought, irreducible between

matter and energy.

  § 4.— Intra-Ato'lnic Energy as the Source of the Forces of the Universe

  The  readers  of  my  last  work  know  how  I  sought  to  cause  this  great

dichotomy to disappear by showing that matter, far from only being able torestore the energy borrowed by it from without, is, on the contrary, a colossal

reservoir of forces. It is itself only a particular form of energy characterized

by its relative fixity and its concentration in immense quantity but in small

volume. The energy accumulated in 1 gramme of any matter represents as

much as about 3,000,000,000 kilogrammes of coal of the market value of

nearly 70,000 francs. I showed finally that this

    intra-atomic energy was the source of solar heat, of electricity, and of

most of the forces of the universe.

    Intra-atomic energy is, moreover, very stable or the world would long ago

have vanished. It is even so stable that chemists considered the aggregation of

energy called matter to be absolutely indestructible. We have now learnt to

dissociate matter, but only in extremely feeble quantities. It may, however, be

hoped that the science of the future will find means to disaggregate it more

thoroughly. It will then have at its disposal an immense source of forces. I

have shown in my former work that by artificial means very stable bodies can

be  rendered  —surface  for  surface—forty  times  more  radio-active  than

substances spontaneously dissociable, such as uranium.

  The  study  of  intra-atomic  energy,  which  is  now  only  beginning,  has

enabled us to penetrate into an entirely new world where the ancient laws of

chemistry and of physics are no longer applicable. One of the most important

of these differences is the following:—

  In handling intra-molecular energies we can only draw from an isolated

material system a quantity of energy at the most equal and never superior to

the  amount  primarily  supplied  to  it.  In  the  manifestations  of  intra-atomic

energy, we observe just the contrary. Matter is able to liberate spontaneously

large quantities of energy either without any aid from without, as is seen in

highly radio-active bodies such as uranium and radium, or under such feeble

influences as a ray of light. With a very minute quantity of energy we can

therefore produce a very

  large quantity, which fact is contrary to principles formerly considered

indestructible.

  Wlien seeking, in my previous work, for the causes of solar heat and of

the incandescence of the nocturnal stars, I showed that intra-atomic energy

greater than that which exists on the cooled globes ouo-ht to suffice for the

maintenance of these stars' temperature. Studying subsequently the properties

of the emissions from the insulated poles of an electrical machine, I showed

their  identity  with  the  products  of  dissociation  of  radio-active  bodies.Electricity might, then, be considered as one of the manifestations of intra-

atomic  energy.  And  it  is  thus  that  its  part  in  natural  phenomena,  so

unsuspected a few years ago, appeared to me entirely preponderant. Our sun,

in the phase of the world into which it has entered, only expends the energies

accumulated by its atoms during an earlier phase of concentration.  This dissociation of the provision of intra-atomic energy accumulated in

matter at the commencement of things explains the origin of the forces of the

universe. At those far-off epochs of the chaos of our solar system of which

the  nebulai  show  a  confused  image,  the  ether  slowly  condensed.  The

localized vortices of ether, forming probably the primitive elements of matter,

accumulated  by  the  increasing  velocity  of  their  rotation  the  intra-atomic

energy  of  which  we  note  the  existence.  To  the  phase  of  concentration

succeeded, later on, a phase of dissociation. Our universe has entered upon a

new cycle and the energy slowly accumulated in the atom has commenced to

liberate itself by reason of its dissociation. The solar heat, whence is derived

the greater part of the energies of which we make use,

    represents the most important manifestations of this dissociation.

    Although  this  provision  of  intra-atomic  energy  is  immense,  it  is  not

infinite,  and  its  emission,  consequently,  cannot  last  for  ever.  The  planets

surrounding  the  incandescent  stars  have  cooled  because  this  energy  is

reduced. The sun itself must be subject to the same law. When its intra-

atomic energy has been dissipated, it will cease to light the planets around it,

and the earth will become uninhabitable, unless science discovers the means

of  easily  liberating  the  immense  quantity  of  intra-atomic  energy  still

contained in matter. But even should it succeed in this, it will but retard the

repose, since the provision of intra-atomic energy is limited.

  Thus, then, the sun, the generator of most of the terrestrial energies, only

expends the forces slowly accumulated in matter at the epoch when within

the primordial clouds of the ether the atoms stored up the energies they were

one day to restore.

  How can this intra-atomic energy, the source of solar heat, electricity, and

most of the forces of the universe, be dissociated and lost ? We will now

examine this point.

  THE VANISHING OF ENERGY

    CHAPTER IV

  THE VANISHING OF ENERGY AND THE END OF OUR UNIVERSE

  § 1.— Tlie Old Age of Energy and the Vanishing of Forces

  We have just seen that intra-atomic energy is a limited magnitude, which

is  reduced  day  by  day.  How  can  it  be  lost  ?  Having  already  treated  this

question in my last Avork, I Avill only summarize what I have already there

explained.

  To say how matter finally vanishes is to explain how forces vanish, sincematter is a special form of energy, only differing from others by its relative

fixity and its very great concentration in very feeble volume.

  I have shown that one of the most constant products of the dissociation of

matter was the so-called particle of electricity, deprived, according to the last

researches, of all material support, and considered as constituted solely by a

vortex-ring of ether.

  The  experiments  previously  described  have  shown  that  these  particles

emit  lines  of  forces,  and  are  always  accompanied  in  their  various

manifestations by those vibrations of the ether called Hertzian waves, radiant

heat, visible light, invisible ultra-violet light, &c. These vibrations represent

for us the vanishing phase of the elements of the atom and the energies of

which they are the seat.

  How can the vortex-rings of ether and the energies generated by them

lose their individiiahty and vanish into the ether ? The question reduces itself

to this : How can a vortex formed in a fluid disappear into this fluid by

causing vibrations in it ?

  Stated in this form the solution of the problem is fairly simple. It can be

easily seen, in fact, how a vortex generated at the expense of a liquid can,

when its equilibrium is disturbed, vanish in spite of its theoretical rigidity by

radiating away the energy it contains under the form of vibrations of the

medium  in  which  it  is  plunged.  It  is  in  this  way,  for  instance,  that  a

waterspout formed by a whirl of liquid loses its existence and disappears in

the ocean.

  In  the  same  manner,  doubtless,  the  whirls  of  ether  constituting  the

elements  of  atoms  can  transform  themselves  into  vibrations  of  the  ether.

These last represent the final stage of the dematerialization of matter and of

its transformation into energy before its final disappearance.

  Thus, then, when the atoms have radiated all their energy in the form of

luminous, calorific, or other vibrations, they return, by the very fact of these

radiations following on their dissociation, to the primitive ether whence they

came. Matter and energy have returned to the nothingness of things, like the

wave into the ocean.

  The  defenders  of  the  postulate  of  the  conservation  of  energy  will

evidently answer to the above, that energy being, by the hypothesis, supposed

to be indestructible, by vanishing into the ether is not lost, and remains in the

potential state, drowned in its immensity. Thus regarded, the theory of the

conservation of energy evidently represents nothing but  THE VANISHING OF ENERGY gr

  an unverifiable conception, especially created by our desire to believe that

there exists in the universe something immortal. Not wishing to consent to be

only a flash in the infinite, Ave dream of a movement that shall last for ever.

  But even if, in accordance with the preceding hypothesis, energy should

continue to circulate in some form or other in space,yet,cast forth from the

sphere of our universe, it would no longer form part of it, and in one way or

another the energy of the universe would have vanished. It is to this point,

which is moreover fundamental, that we limit our demonstration.

  It does not seem at first sight very comprehensible that worlds which

appear more and more stable as they cool could become so unstable as to

afterwards dissociate entirely. To explain this phenomenon we will inquire

whether  astronomical  observations  do  not  allow  us  to  witness  this

dissociation.

  We know that the stability of a body in motion, such as a top or a bicycle,

ceases to be possible when its velocity of rotation descends below a certain

limit. Once this limit is reached it loses its stability and falls to the ground.

Prof. J. J. Thomson even interprets radio-activity in this manner, and points

out that when the speed of rotation of the elements composing the atoms

descends below a certain limit they become unstable and tend to lose their

equilibria. There would result from this a commencement of dissociation with

diminution of their potential energy, and a corresponding increase of their

kinetic energy sufficient to launch into space the products of intra-atomic

disintegration.

  It must not be forgotten that the atom beinor an enormous reservoir of

energy is by this very fact

    comparable with explosive bodies. These last remain inert so long as their

internal equilibria are undisturbed. So soon as some cause or other modifies

these, they explode and smash everything around them after being themselves

broken to pieces.

  Atoms therefore which grow old in consequence of the diminution of a

part of their intra-atomic energy gradually lose their stability. A moment then

arrives when this stability is so weak that the matter disappears by a sort of

explosion more or less rapid. The bodies of the radium group offer an image

of this phenomenon—a rather faint image, however, because the atoms of

this body have only reached a period of instability when the dissociation is

rather  slow.  It  probably  precedes  another  and  more  rapid  period  ofdissociation  capable  of  producing  their  final  explosion.  Bodies  such  as

radium,  thorium,  &c.,  represent  no  doubt  a  state  of  old  age  at  which  all

bodies must some day arrive, and which they already begin to manifest in our

universe,  since  all  matter  is  slightly  radio-active.  It  would  suffice  for  the

dissociation to be fairly general and fairly rapid for an explosion to occur in

the world where it was manifested.

  These  theoretical  considerations  find  a  solid  support  in  the  sudden

appearances and disappearances of stars. The explosions of a world which

produces them reveal to us, perhaps, how the universes perish Avhen they

become old.

  As astronomical observations show the relative frequency of these rapid

destructions, we may ask ourselves whether the end of a universe by a sudden

explosion after a long period of old age does not represent its most general

ending. These abrupt

    annihilations manifest themselves as the sudden apparition in the heavens

of an incandescent star, wliich pales and vanishes sometimes in a few days,

leaving generally no trace behind it, or at most a faint nebula.

  When the new star first appears, its spectrum, at tirst analogous to that of

the sun, proves that it contains metals similar to those of our solar system.

Then, in a short time, the spectrum is transformed, and becomes finally that

of  the  planetary  nebulse  —that  is,  it  only  contains  rays  of  a  few  simple

elements, some of which are unknown. It is therefore evident that the atoms

of the temporary star have been rapidly and profoundly transformed. This

downward evolution is the converse of that indicated in the upward evolution

of stars. These contain, when very hot, simple elements which become more

and more complicated and numerous as they continue to cool.

  These transitory stars, resulting no doubt from the sudden explosion of a

Avorld accompanied by the disintegration of its atoms, are not rare. Hardly a

year passes without some being observed either directly or by the study of

photographic  plates.  One  of  the  most  remarkable  was  the  one  recently

observed in the constellation of Perseus. In a few days it attained a brilliancy

which made it the most brilliant star in the sky ; but twenty-four hours later it

began to pale, its spectrum was slowly transformed, and became, as before

said, that of the planetary nebulse —an evident proof, I repeat, of atomic

dissociation. At the very moment when this transformation was taking place,

photographs  of  long  exposure  showed  nebulous  masses  round  the  star,

produced no doubt  by atomic dissociation, which rapidly left it behind at a speed of the order

of Ught—that is to say, analogous to that of the Beta particles emitted by

radio-active bodies when dissociating. The astronomers were, then, enabled

to be present at the rapid destruction of a world.

  §  2.—  Sumnnary  of  the  Doctrine  of  the  Vanishing  of  Forces  and

Discussion of Objections

  The account of the general evolution of worlds to which this and the

preceding  chapter  have  been  devoted,  includes  facts  of  experiment  or  of

observation which I have endeavoured to connect by hypotheses. I will sum

up this account by a recapitulation showing the different phases of evolution

of a system analogous to ours and to those which continue to be born and

transformed in the firmament.

  § 3.— The Periods of Evolution of a World

  1. Please of Chaos or of the Birth of Energy. — Formation, by the action

of gravitation or of unknown causes, of clouds of ether. Under their influence

inequalities are established whence result differences cf potential. The ether

condenses into scattered particles which assume the form of vortex-rings.

Animated  at  first  by  rather  slow  movements,  they  contain  but  very  little

energy.

  2. Phase of Nebulce or of Concentration of Energy. —The whirls of ether

accelerate  their  movements.  Thence  attractions  result  which  agglomerate

them into nuclei, the future germs of matter. A general concentration of the

mass is established. A nebula

  is formed, vague at tirst in shape, which ends by becoming spherical, and

will eventually be the origin of a solar system. In proportion as the particles

of  this  mass  condense,  the  ether-whirls  precipitate  their  movements,

agglomerate and form the nuclei of atoms which, by reason of the increasing

rapidity of their rotation, become more and more saturated with energy.

  3. Phase of Stellar Inca/ndescence or of Expenditure of Energy. —This

phase is that of the formation of a sun and analogous stars. By continuous

condensation,  the  atoms  have  finally  acquired  a  quantity  of  intra-atomic

energy, which they can no longer contain and therefore radiate in the form of

heat, light, or various forms of electricity, of which heat is perhaps only a

secondary manifestation. The temperature of the orb is excessive. The future

atoms are not yet individualized.

  4.  Phase  of  the  Coinmencement  of  Stellar  Refrigeration  and  of  the

Individualization of Matter. —By reason of the continuity of its radiation, thetemperature of the orb becomes lower, although it still remains incandescent.

The elements of the atoms form new equilibria, and give birth to the various

simple bodies which differentiate and multiply in proportion as the cooling of

the star increases.

  5. Phase of Planets, or of Refrigeration and of the Equilibrium of Intra-

Atomic  Energy.  —The  planets,  detached  by  the  centrifugal  force  of  the

central sun round which they continue to revolve, become cooler by reason of

the relative smallness of their volume, and finally reach a temperature low

enough for life to be possible on their surface. The energies accumulated in

the form of matter have attained a

  phase of stable equilibrium. Fixity succeeds to mobility. The worlds are

about to become inhabitable for long series of ages.

  6. Phase of final Dissociation of Intra-Atomic Energy and Return of the

World to the Etlier. —While maintaining themselves in equilibrium for long

centuries, the atoms have not ceased to radiate slightly, and in consequence

of this radiation and of the reduction of the speed of rotation of their elements

which ensues, they lose some of their stability. Then commences a period of

disaggregation, which increases very quickly in proportion as the stability of

the  intra-atomic  elements  decreases.  Progressive  at  first,  it  afterwards

becomes instantaneous ; at a certain period of old age, the elements return to

the ether whence they came.

  To this period of final destruction succeeds, perhaps, in the course of

ages, a new cycle of birth and of evolution, without its being possible to

assign a term to these destructions and recommencements, probably eternal.^

  The  above  account,  deduced  from  researches  related  in  my  preceding

volume, may be summarized in a few lines. I borrow these from one of the

scholars who have had the kindness to analyze my doctrine:—

  "We imagine the world to be formed at first of diffuse atoms of ether

which,  under  the  action  of  unknown  forces,  have  stored  up  energy.  This

energy, one of the forms of which is matter, dissociates and

  ^ The above rather reminds one of the " Retour eteruel" of Nietzsche ; it

is  an  hypothesis,  moreover,  void  of  importance,  which  I  formulated  long

before that author, as Professor Lichten-berger recalls in a book devoted to

the doctrines of the philosopher.

  appears  in  various  forms—electricity,  heat,  &c.,  so  as  to  bring  matter

back to ether. ' Nothing is created' signifies that we cannot create matter. '

Everything is lost' means that matter disappears entirely, as does matter by itsreturn to the ether. The cycle is therefore complete. There are two phases in

the history of the world : 1, Condensation of energy under the form of matter;

2, Expenditure of this energy."

  This conception of the concentration of energy at the origin of a Avorld

and  of  its  expenditure  in  a  subsequent  phase  of  its  existence  has  been

disputed  by  a  distinguished  physicist,  M.  Bernard  Brunhes,  in  a  recent

memoir.^ The following is the objection he makes to it:—

  " The concentration of cosmic matter and the dissociation of matter are

two phenomena which appeared opposed to each other, but which possess a

common characteristic. Both liberate heat and correspond to a degradation of

energy. Be therefore assured that if any radio-active body whatever has been

produced which has stored up an enormous provision of reserve energy, it is

by  favour  of  a  still  greater  degradation  of  energy.  .  .  .  Matter  which

dissociates at the end of transformations which seem to bring it back to the

starting-point will have undergone a definite loss of utilizable energy."

  The  above  objection  is  supported  by  the  principle  of  Carnot;  but  a

principle applicable to the downward phase of evolution of the world is not

necessarily applicable to its earlier upward phase.

  The illustrious mathematician Maxwell had already shown by a much

bolder hypothesis than mine—since

  ■* La Portee du Principe de la Degradation de I'iEnergie, 1906.

  G

  it  implies  the  existence  of  very  subtle  demons—how  the  principle  of

Carnot might be violated and the course of things retraced. We must wait till

we are better acquainted with the laws of nature before supposing that she has

not found the means of bringing out of the gloomy void of the ether the

forces condensed in the atom. If hypotheses analogous to mine are rejected,

we must return to that of a creator drawing forth worlds from his will—that is

to say, from a nothing much more mysterious still than the substratum from

which I have endeavoured to raise them. The gods having been eliminated

from nature, where our ignorance alone had placed them, we must try to

explain things without them. Evidently since the dawn of geological times,

phenomena seem to have always evolved in accordance with the second law

of thermodynamics; but this law is, I repeat, one of the period of the wearing

out of a universe and not of the ages during which the energies now expended

were  condensed,—since  we  must  admit  that  our  solar  system  has  had  a

beginning like all the analogous systems of which astronomy has noted theevolution. It is likewise necessary to admit that a concentration of energy was

first formed. M. Bernard Brunhes, moreover, himself recognizes this in a

passage of his memoir, which constitutes the best ansAver I can make to him:

—

  "  There  is  no  inconsequence  in  imagining  that  the  present  period  of

degradation has been preceded and may be followed by periods in which the

energy utiKzable may increase instead of diminishing,"

  It is, moreover, as the same author points out, at a similar conclusion that

Boltzmann arrived in his

  great work on the theory of gases. The march of the world m the direction

opposed to the present evolution no longer appears to him as an absolute

impossibility, but simply as a very faint probability which may nevertheless

have been realized during the succession of ages.

  It is to these brief and uncertain notions that all we can say regarding the

evolution of the worlds in the infinite duration of time is reduced. We will

now leave these mysterious regions to return to those in which experiments

can serve as a guide. The study of the actions of light on a fragment of metal,

which was the origin of my researches, led me into very different fields of

physics, I will now conduct the reader into these, and examine a few new

problems.

  As the general conclusion of this first part of my work, I shall formulate

the following proposition :—

  Energy is not indestructible. It is unceasingly consumed, and tends to

vanish like the matter which represents one of its forms.

  PART II

  THE PROBLEMS OF PHYSICS

  BOOK I

  THE DEMATERIALIZATION OF MATTER AND THE PROBLEMS

OF ELECTRICITY

    CHAPTER I

  GENESIS  OF  THE  CURRENT  IDEAS  ON  THE  RELATIONS  OF

ELECTRICITY WITH MATTER

  The first part of this work was devoted to the development of the theories

deduced from my earlier experiments. This second part will be especially

experimental. My observations on the dissociation of matter led me into very

varied  researches.  Notwithstanding  their  fragmentary  nature,  they  may,  I

think, interest the reader; and the account of them will be given in such a wayas not to interfere with the general plan of this work.

  § 1.— The Part Played hy Electricity in the Trans-forrtiation of Cheraical

Compounds

  The  laws  of  physical  phenomena  may  be  determined,  but,  as  we  are

ignorant of their underlying causes, their interpretation necessarily varies. If

the facts do not change, the explanation of them is frequently modified. A

great theory once accepted is immediately applied to the interpretation of

known

  facts.  The  doctrine  of  the  conservation  of  energy  has  for  fifty  years

seemed able to furnish the key to all phenomena. It is now the theory of

electrons  for  which  this  role  appears  to  be  reserved.  By  reason  of  the

importance  now  given  to  the  prevailing  ideas  on  the  atomic  structure  of

electricity, it may be interesting to point out their genesis.

  New  dogmas  are  spontaneous  only  in  appearance.  Those  who  are

attracted by a new belief especially appreciate its novelty, while it is in reality

very old. Its history, generally forgotten by the textbooks, shows how certain

ideas grow up and the slow progress of their evolution.

  It is to the illustrious Davy, about the beginning of the last century, that

the  origin  of  the  present  ideas  on  electrical  dissociation,  now  termed

ionization, goes back. Having passed a current through a solution of potash,

and  having  noticed  that  the  potassium  went  to  one  of  the  poles  and  the

oxygen to the other, he concluded, rightly but much in advance of his time,

that the two elements of a compound are charged with difterent electricities,

which are neutralized by combination. The affinity which draws together and

associates the elements of bodies must have its origin in the attraction of

contrary electricities. We do not state the matter otherwise at the present day.

  It was on the hypothesis of Davy that Berze-lius founded the dualistic

theory  which  governed  chemistry  for  thirty  years.  The  compounds  called

binary,  such  as  acids  and  oxides,  were  formed  from  an  electro-negative

united  to  an  electro-positive  element  by  the  attraction  of  their  contrary

electricities. The compounds called tertiary—that is to say, salts

  GENESIS OF CURRENT IDEAS 105

  —came from the combination of an electro-positive base and an electro-

negative acid.

  The  dualistic  theory  vanished  when  Dumas,  Laurent,  and  Gerhard

discovered the phenomenon of substitutions, and showed that in a compound

an electro-negative element could be replaced by an electro-positive withoutsensibly changing its properties. Trichloracetic acid, for example, is acetic

acid  in  which  three  atoms  of  chlorine  (an  electro-negative  element)  have

replaced three atoms of hydrogen (an electropositive one). The conceptions

of  Davy  and  Berzelius,  correct  as  they  were,  were  abandoned  for  a  long

period.

  Their re-adoption was the consequence of the researches of the illustrious

Faraday. Towards 1830, he discovered the laws of electrolysis, and measured

the electric charge given up by bodies at the poles of the battery when they

are  decomposed  by  the  electric  current.  He  noted  that  when  an  electric

current is passed through the solution of a salt, the latter is decomposed into

two elements charged with contrary electricities, which are found at the two

poles. This operation, the result of which is to resolve compound bodies into

their elements, is called, as we know, electrolysis. The bodies capable of

undergoing  such  an  operation  are  called  electrolytes.  The  products  of  the

decomposition  constitute  ions.  Simple  bodies,  considered  as  such  to  be

indecomposable,  evidently  could  not  be  electrolytes  and  consequently

produce ions. This last was a fundamental point.

  After  having  verified  the  enormous  charge  of  electricity—96,000

coulombs  for  a  gramme  of  hydrogen  —which  is  borne  by  the  elements

separated by

    electrolysis, and the equality of this charge for all bodies of equal atomic

weight,  Faraday  recognized,  thus  confirming  the  idea  of  Davy  and  of

Berzelius, that chemical phenomena are only electrical phenomena—that is to

say, displacements of electricity. " The numbers representing the equivalent

weights of bodies," he says, " represent simply the quantities of these bodies

which contain equal quantities of electricity. The electricity determines the

equivalent  number  because  it  determines  the  forces  of  combination.  By

adopting the atomic theory, we say that the atoms of bodies equivalent to one

another in their chemical combination bear the same charges of electricity. ...

It  is  the  quantity  of  electricity  associated  with  the  different  atoms  which

constitutes electrical affinity." ^

  The most recent ideas simply represent the adoption and extension of

Faraday's views. At the present day, the theory of ionization reigns without a

rival.  It  has  given  birth  to  a  new  chemical  nomenclature  in  which  the

properties of bodies are expressed as a function of their electric charges, and

no longer, as Berthelot wished, as a function of their thermal properties.

    Thermochemistry is now looked upon almost as a doctrine in course ofdisappearance.  We  now  consider  the  study  of  the  electrical  reactions  of

bodies as far more important than that of their thermal relations. Charges of

electricity  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are  distributed  generate  all  the

properties of bodies and the reactions which their combinations exhibit.

  The actual theory of ionization may be summed

  ' Cf. Sir W. Crookes {Proc. Roy. Soc, March 1902).

  up in the following statement, whicli does but repeat exactly the ideas of

Faraday:  Bodies  are  composed  of  elements  or  ions  charged,  some  with

positive, others with negative electricity, and united at first in the neutral

state.  Under  the  influence  of  the  battery  current,  the  neutral  molecule

dissociates  into  positive  and  negative  elements,  which  go  to  the  poles  of

contrary names. The decomposition of a neutral salt may be represented by

such an equation as the following : N03K = nO^ + K-

  When an ion leaves a solution in order to precipitate itself at an electrode

charged  with  electricity  of  contrary  sign—by  reason  of  the  attraction

exercised  between  two  opposite  electric  charges—it  then  becomes

neutralized, which means that it receives from the electrode a charge exactly

equal but of contrary sign to that which it before possessed. To ascertain this

quantity—to  know,  for  example,  the  electric  charge  of  the  atoms  of  1

gramme of hydrogen —we need only measure with suitable instruments the

expenditure of electricity necessary to neutralize the ions set at liberty.

  At the period of the history of ionization just briefly sketched, it was

admitted that the dissociation of the elements of bodies into ions charged

with  electricity  could  only  be  effected  under  the  influence  of  an  electric

current, but soon we had to go much further.

    Adopting  the  theoretical  ideas  put  forward  by  Clausius,  Arrhenius

recognized that an electric current was in no way necessary to produce the

dissociation of compounds into ions. In dilute solutions, the bodies dissolved

must be separated into ions by the mere fact of solution. When the

    electrodes of a battery are plunged into such a solution, the ions must

simply be attracted by them— the positive ions by the negative pole, and the

negative ions by the positive pole.

    According to this theory, which is evidently very hypothetical, but which

has been admitted because it much facilitates explanations, the dilute solution

of a metallic salt would contain something quite other than the salt itself. A

dilute solution of sea salt, for example, would in no way contain the chloride

of sodium we are acquainted with. It would contain chlorine ions and sodiumions in a free state.

  This chlorine and this sodium in the state of ions must differ much from

the substances generally known by those names, since the sodium of our

laboratories cannot be introduced into water without decomposing it. The

difference must be due to the fact that in the ion chlorine and the ion sodium

the electricities are separated, while in the substances known by the same

names they are neutralized.

  All these theories and the experiments whence they are derived show us

that electricity is every day more and more considered as the essential factor

in the properties of bodies. It must be solely from their electrical charge that

these properties are derived. The chemical activity of an acid and of a base

must be the simple consequence of the proportion of ions they contain. A

strong acid such as sulphuric acid must contain a great number of free ions,

and a feeble one like acetic acid very few. Chemical reactions are now more

and more regarded as simple reactions of ions. Atomicity or valency— that is

to say, the aptitude of atoms to unite with a greater or less number of other

atoms of various

    bodies—must depend on their capacity for saturation with electricity. It is

thus, for example, that in a salt like chloride of zinc (ZnCP) the atom zinc, by

reason of the greatness of its positive charge, can hold in equilibrium two

negative ions of chlorine.

  Such is the current theory. It is very probable that things happen in a less

simple, perhaps even in a very different manner; but when an explanation tits

in fairly well with known facts, it is wise'to be satisfied with it.

  The theory of electrons, according to which the electric fluid is composed

of an aggregate of particles of definite magnitude, is a direct consequence of

the preceding views, and could only give them further precision. This theory,

which goes back to Helm-holtz, and has been developed by Lorentz, also

explains chemical compounds and decompositions by the aptitude of atoms

for  acquiring  and  losing  electrons.  Their  degree  of  valency  would  thus

depend on the number of electrons they might lose or capture. Those which,

like the atoms of helium or of argon, must be too stable to acquire or lose

any, would be unable to form any combination. All chemical forces would

have  an  electrical  origin.  Afiinity  would  recognize  no  other  cause.  This,

again, is exactly what Faraday said and Davy maintained.

  §  2.—  The  Part  Played  by  Electricity  in  the  Dissociation  of  Simple

Bodies  The idea that we might separate particles of electricity from their material

support  was  not  imaginable  before  the  recent  discoveries.  It  was  even  so

contrary to the early experiments, which seem to show

  no THE KVOLITU^N i>F FORCES

  that elect rioity could not be transported ^vithout material support, that

for  a  long  time  the  cathode  rays  were  considered  to  be  formed  by  the

projection of material particles.

  This  separation  of  a  charge  o{  electricity  from  its  support  seemed

impossible. Still more impossible did it appear that a simple body could be

subjected to ionization—that is to say. to a separation of elements such as hiis

just been described above. A simple body, being by detinition incapable of

decomposition, evidently could not be dissociated. To separate the chlorine

from the potassium in chloride of potassium was easy; but how could we

suppose  it  possible  to  extract  from  chlorine  something  which  was  not

chlorine and from potassium anything other than potassium ?

  In less than ten years, however, that which was considered impossible has

ceased to be so. The study of the cathode rays, of the conductivity of gases,

of radio-active emissions, aiui. tinally. my demonstration of the universality

of the dissociation of matter, have proved that from simple bodies something

quite ditierent from them can be extracted. This something, identical in the

most  various  subjects,  being  endowed  with  electrical  properties,  we  will

consider as constituted of those particles to which the name of electrons has

been given.

    Whatever this interpretation be worth, it was certain that simple bodies

could also be dissociated ; but as this was an idea directly contrary to the

doctrines  then  ruling,  and  as  it  was  nevertheless  necessary  to  find  some

theory  to  explain  the  observed  facts,  the  old  doctrine  of  ionization  was

adopted. It was therefore admitted that the electritied particles

    observed in gases or in dissociated simple bodies were the result of their

ionization. The expression, having been accepted long since, could shock no

one, while the idea of the dissociation of a simple body would have seemed

disquieting. Yet the two words signify exactly the same thing. When we look

only at the facts, it is evident that when from the atoms of a simple body

something quite different from it has been taken, the atoms of which it is

composed have necessarily been dissociated.

  It is, moreover, this conclusion which, after many hesitations, has been

finally reached. It was the study of radium which carried conviction with it.This body presents in an eminent degree properties which all bodies possess

in a very slight degree. It emits in abundant quantity the products of the di.s-

sociation of its atoms. By studying these products I recognized their analogy,

first  with  the  emissions  of  particles  in  Crookes'  tubes,  and  then  with  the

effluves  emitted  by  all  bodies  under  the  action  of  light  or  of  various

influences. Finally, it had to be acknowledged that the dissociation of matter

is, as I long ago proved, a universal phenomenon.

  All these experiments, many of which showed us particles of electricity

freed  from  their  material  support,  have  naturally  given  great  force  to  the

theory of atomic electricity, otherwise called the electronic theory. Having

sufficiently set out this in my former work, it would be useless to go back to

it  here.  No  objection  can  be  taken  to  it  when  it  is  confined  to  regarding

electricity as composed of discontinuous particles; but there does not seem to

be any necessity whatever for considering matter as composed of electrons.

Electricity is, like heat and

  the other forces, one of the forms of intra-atomic energy. From all matter

we can extract electricity and heat; but there is no more reason to say that

matter is composed of particles of electricity than to assert that it is composed

of particles of heat.

  It would be as useless, however, to combat the electronic theory at the

present day, as it Avas in Newton's time to contest the emission hypothesis in

optics. Those who attempted it were not even listened to, although the future

has shown how right they were. I shall therefore not try to dispute its worth.

This task is the less necessary, that it is very easy to express the phenomena

in  current  language.  I  shall  therefore  continue  to  use  it  for  clearness  of

demonstration.

  " The electron," M. Lucien Poincare says rightly, "has conquered physics,

and many adore the new idol rather blindly." ^ The idol, in reality of long

standing, has only changed its name. To attempt to reduce matter to a single

element is indeed an old idea. It translates into fact a mental aspiration and a

craving for simplicity with which nature is doubtless not acquainted. One

ought not to speak evil of such cravings, for they are the begetters of effort.

Thus provisional doctrines and beneficent chimeras stimulate our labours.

We unceasingly pursue the Sisyphus task of explanation, but always with the

hope that it is for the last time.

  1 Vol. xc. of this series, p. 324.— Ed.

    CHAPTER II  THE TRANSFORMATIOX OF MATTER INTO ELECTRICITY

  § 1.— Transforniation of Matter into Energy

  Several claapters of my last work were devoted to showing how matter

can,  by  dissociation,  return  to  the  ether  by  a  series  of  successive  stages.

Among the most constant products of this dissociation electricity is found. It

is  one  of  the  important  manifestations  of  that  liberation  of  intra-atomic

energy which always accompanies the dematerializa-tion of matter.

  Since  electricity  in  motion  represents  energy,  it  may  be  said  that  the

transformation  of  a  body  into  electricity  realizes  a  change  of  matter  into

energy. Such a phenomenon being absolutely contrary to the fundamental

principles of modern science, my theory will not be acceptable until after a

radical conversion of current ideas. It will not therefore be useless to return to

so important a subject, and to add new experimental proofs in support of

those already set forth. It is equally necessary to show that this doctrine gives

the key to phenomena for which either the most insufficient explanations or

no explanations at all have hitherto been furnished.

  § 2.— Electrification by Influence

    Electrification by influence, by virtue of which a stick of sealing-wax

which has been rubbed attracts light bodies such as a suspended ball of pith,

is the

  H

  most simple of electrical phenomena, and the earliest observed. The usual

explanation given of it is too" well known for it to be necessary to reproduce

it here. It is, moreover, the same as that of the phenomena of the same order

which we shall shortly have to deal with, when showing how unacceptable is

the classic theory.

  This experiment of the attraction of light bodies is in reality one of the

most  remarkable  in  physics,  and  it  would  have  only  been  necessary  to

observe it attentively in order to discover the proof of the dissociation of

matter and of the existence of intra-atomic energy—that is to say, of two

important principles of modern science.

  In the old theories, the various experiments in electricity by influence

implied  this  very  singular  consequence,  that  with  the  limited  quantity  of

electricity  existing  on  a  body,  we  could  extract  from  another  body  an

unlimited quantity of electricity.

  Let me recall, to put this essential point clearly in evidence, the classic

experiment demonstrating electrification by influence.  A metallic sphere (Fig. 1) placed on an insulated support is electrified in

one way or another, and thus receives a definite quantity of electricity, the

magnitude of which is easily measurable. Let us bring near to this sphere at a

little  distance  a  conductor—for  example,  a  long  cylinder  of  metal  B,  C,

placed on an insulator D. We immediately recognize by the ordinary means

that the cylinder is charged with electricity. If the ball has in the first instance

received positive electricity, it will be observed that the part of the cylinder

next to it is charged with negative and its other extremity with

  THE TRANSFORMATION OF MATTER

  "5

  positive electricity. If, then, this latter is touched so as to connect it with

the earth, the whole cylinder remains charged with negative electricity. This

may now be transferred to some other body by moving the cylinder by its

insulated support.

  After having discharged the cylinder we have only, in order to recharge it,

to  bring  it  again  near  the  ball  and  to  act  as  before.  As  these  successive

operations,—charge and discharge of the cylinder,—

 




 


  Fig.  1.—Classic  experiment  of  electrification  by  influence  (apparently

indefinite production of electricity by a body charged with a limited quantity

of electricity).

  can be repeated an unlimited number of times, it necessarily follows that,

with  the  limited  charge  of  electricity  on  an  electrified  ball,  there  can  be

generated on another body an unlimited quantity of electricity.

    Physicists, moreover, recognize this clearly. Jamin says in his Cours de

Physique  de  VEcole  Polytechnique  (4th  ed.  vol.  iv.  fasc.  i.  p.  137):  "

Influence enables us to obtain, by means of a limited quantity of positive

electricity, an indefinite quantity of negative

  THE EVOLUTION OF FORCES

  


  6r cAL.

  B

  Fig. 2.—Constant emission of electricity by

    electricity." We explain this apparent creation of energy by saying that, to

charge a body several times by influence it A must be displaced—that is to

say, an amount of work must be expended representing the equivalent of the

electricity generated at each new operation.

  Feeble as is this explanation of the transformation into electricity of the

simple movement of translation of a body, it seemed useful to take away

every appearance of probability from it by producing an indefinitely extended

electrification without any trace of displacement of the body electrified. This

is realized in the following experiment, which shows a body isolated in space

becoming, by influence, a continuous source of electricity.

  A  (Fig.  2)  is  the  influencing  electrified  body.  It  is  kept  charged  with

positive  electricity  by  any  means  we  please.^  Below  we  see  a  piece  of

aluminium or gold leaf half a centimetre wide and two centimetres higfh. B is

  ^ If the ball is charged with negative a metal arrow kept by instead of

positive electricity, the alu-electncal equilibria minium leaf will attach itsel'f

to it and motionless in space. ^jn qq^, remain motionless in space.

  a metal rod placed on a table or held in the hand. After a few trials a

position  is  easily  found  in  which  the  strip  of  metal  remains  wholly  and

indefinitely motionless in space. In spite of its slight consistence it remains

fixed and rigid as if held by springs, and its point throws out little sparks

visible in the dark. Its various parts take charges, the direction of which is

shown in the figure.

  This experiment has always impressed those physicists to whom I have

shown it, because the equihbrium observed is difficult of explanation. It must

not be supposed that the metal arrow is simply immobihzed by the electric

attractions exercised in contrary directions on its extremities. It would be

impossible to maintain in space a block of iron between the poles of magnets

acting on it in opposite directions. It is only in oriental legends that we see

Mahomet's iron coffin immobilized in space by the action of magnets placed

in its neighbourhood.

  The aluminium arrow in the above experiment only remains motionless

because it is the seat of a constant emission of particles. It is, moreover, not aquestion  of  equilibrium  we  have  to  examine  here,  but  the  continuous

emission of electricity by the metal under the influence of the electrified ball.

This emission is made plain by the little sparks, easily seen in the dark, which

issue from the point of the metal.

  In the experiment thus arranged, the electricity produced can only issue

from the elements composing the strip of aluminium. How can we explain the

fact that from an isolated fragment of metal we can extract an apparently

infinite quantity of electricity ?

  Readers  conversant  with  my  previous  researches  will  certainly  have

guessed the explanation. It is wholly contained in the enunciation of the three

following principles: (1) Matter contains an enormous reservoir of energy ;

(2) it can be dissociated; (3) in dissociation it liberates, in various forms, but

especially as electricity, a part of the intra-atomic energy accumulated within

it at the moment of its formation.

  The metal arrow in the preceding experiment is in every way comparable

to a fragment of radium. The only difference is that, instead of dissociating

itself  spontaneously  like  the  radium,  the  fragment  of  aluminium  is  only

dematerialized under the influence of electric action.

  When  we  rub  a  body,  when  we  place  it  under  the  influence  of  an

electrified source, or when we subject it to any sort of disturbance of the

ether,  such  as  a  luminous  ray,  we  are  doing  quite  a  different  thing  to

transforming (as the text-books teach) movement or any other energy into

electricity. We do not thus effect a transformation, but a liberation of forces.

We simply dissociate matter by bringing suitable reagents to bear upon it.

Electricity is one of the manifestations of this dissociation.

  The magnitude of intra-atomic energy being, as I have shown, immense,

it will be understood that from a very infinitesimal portion of matter there

may issue a very large quantity of electricity. This emission is considerable,

but  is  not  infinite;  and  it  is  probable  that  if  the  above  experiment  were

continued  for  several  centuries,  wo  should  see  the  aluminium  become

gradually less by its conversion into electricity, and finally disappear. We

should then

  have witnessed the complete transformation of matter into energy.

  The experiment on electrification by influence described in this chapter

realizes this evolution exactly. We might have read it in the elementary facts

which have been before the eyes of physicists for several centuries without

their understanding their import.  It further results from this experiment that electricity, which is one of the

products of the dissociation of matter, is at the same tiine one of the m,ost

active agents of this dissociation. It constitutes by its special attractions for

the  elements  of  matter  one  of  those  appropriate  reagents  of  which  the

importance has been shown in a chapter of my earlier work. It is one of those

against which matter is defenceless, while it is able to strive against very

energetic but not appropriate reactions.

  The  irresistible  power  of  attraction  of  a  minute  particle  of  electricity

dissociates  matter  which  the  impact  of  a  shell  might  pulverize  and  even

volatilize, but could not dematerialize.

  § 3.— The Different Forms of Electric Influence

  In  the  last  experiment,  that  of'  the  strip  of  aluminium  immobilized  in

space, we have seen influence manifest itself by the projection of luminous

particles, while in the classical experiment previously related this projection

is not visibly produced.

  I  was  thus  led  to  suspect  that  the  phenomenon  of  electrification  by

influence might take place through different mechanisms. Researches made

to verify

  this hypothesis have enabled me to recognize its correctness.

  Let us first of all note that by the theory of electrons, electrification by

influence would obtain a very simple explanation, since it would be enough

to  admit  that,  from  bodies  subjected  to  influence  there  pass  visible  or

invisible electrons, w^hich are immediately transformed into ions by their

passage in the air, according to the well-known mechanism.

  M. de Heen has opposed to this interpretation a very grave objection: If

electrification by influence were due to projections of particles proceeding

from the influencing body, it would be arrested by the interposition of a thick

sheet  of  glass,  which  is  not  at  all  the  case.  This  is  plainly  seen  in  the

experiments given later on, which show the action of influence upon a body

entirely  protected  by  three  concentric  metallic  enclosures.  The  theory  of

electrons is therefore quite powerless to explain electrification by influence.

It  may  result  from  somewhat  different  mechanisms,  as  shown  in  the

followinfr  experiments,  which  prove  that  bodies  subjected  to  the  same

electric  influence  may,  according  to  circumstances,  acquire  charges  of

contrary sign.

  No  one  is  unaware—for  this,  again,  is  one  of  the  most  elementary

experiments in physics—that if an electrified substance—a stick of ebonite orsflass, for instance—excited by friction is brought close to the ball of an

electroscope, the leaves are charged by influence and immediately diverge.

They fall as soon as the electrified body is withdrawn, because the charges of

contrary sign produced on the ball and on the leaves re-combine as soon as

the influence ceases.

    Generations of physicists and tlieir pupils have repeated this experiment.

Had they thought of prolonging the presence of the rod above the ball of the

electroscope for a few minutes instead of a few seconds, they would have

observed^—not  without  some  astonishment  perhaps—that  the  gold  leaves

remain separated after the rod has been withdrawn, and that the sign of the

charge of the ball has changed—that is to say, that it has become negative

from positive, as it was at first. The effects produced depend, moreover, on

the form given to the body influenced, as shown in the subjoined figures

(Figs.  0  to  5).  Here  we  see  modes  of  influence  succeeding,  but  not

superposed on, each other. It is impossible to confuse them, for to each of

them there corresponds a different charge of electricity.

  In the case of Fig. 5 the plate-like form of the influenced body is the

cause that the sign of the charge does not change, and that the leaves fall

when the electrified rod is withdrawn.

  In  the  case  of  Figs.  4  and  3  it  is  quite  otherwise;  the  leaves  remain

charged when we take away the rod. With the electroscope of Fig. 4 the

experiment is effected in a few seconds, while it is necessary to continue the

presence of the ebonite rod for some twelve minutes for it to succeed with the

ball electroscope of Fig. 3.

  The explanation of the maintenance of the charge or of its reversal after

the rod of ebonite has been withdrawn is very simple.

  Take, for example, the case of Fig. 3. The charge of the ball under the

influence  of  the  action  of  the  negatively  electrified  ebonite  rod  is,  as  we

know, at

  THE EVOLUTION OF FORCES

  first positive, and that of tlie

 




 


  leaves negative. If the ball is touched with the finger, as when we chargean electroscope by influence, the negative charge passes into the earth, while

the positive charge, kept back by the negative electricity of the rod, remains

on the ball and flows into the leaves as soon as the finsfer and the electric rod

are withdrawn. Finally, the leaves are charged positively.

  If the ebonite rod bo left a sufficient time near the ball, we note, on the

contrary,  that  when  it  is  withdrawn  without  touching  the  ball  of  the

electroscope

  with  the  finger,  tlie  leaves  remain  negatively  charged  instead  of

positively. Why ?

  As soon as the ebonite rod is brought close to the ball of the electroscope

it becomes positively charged by influence—as in the experiment with the

cylinder related in another paragraph — and the negative electricity is drawn

into the leaves. If, instead of withdrawing the ebonite rod, its presence is

prolonged, it strongly attracts the particles of positive electricity from the

ball, and when it is withdrawn the gold leaves keep the negative electricity

they took at first, which is then spread over the ball. Therefore this latter,

which was first charged positively, now becomes charged negatively. Finally,

the whole instrument possesses a charge of negative electricity.

  In  Fig.  4  this  transformation  of  the  positive  charge  of  the  ball  into  a

negative charge takes place much more quickly than in Fig. 3 by reason of

the  pointed  form  given  to  the  rod  of  the  electroscope.  In  Fig.  5  the

transformation  of  the  sign  of  the  charge  does  not  take  place  at  all  in

consequence  of  the  plate-like  form  of  the  apparatus,  which  gives  the

electricity far too slight a density per unit of surface for it to escape.

  The theory of the charge of an electroscope by influence is exactly the

same as that of the electrification by means of an electrified sphere placed

close  to  a  cylinder,  which  we  discussed  in  a  previous  paragraph.  The

electrified sphere represents the ebonite rod, the cyhnder the gold leaves and

the ball of the electroscope to which they are fixed.

  But if these two instruments are the same, the theory of the origin of the

electricity given for the one is valid for the other. We have seen that an

    electrified sphere placed in the vicinity of an insulated metallic cylinder

dissociates the matter of this last and transforms it into electricity. When an

electrified rod is brought close to the ball of an electroscope, the metal of this

ball  is  likewise  dissociated,  and  the  electricity  manifested  therein  is  the

product of this dissociation.

  § 4.— MeclianisTn of the Leak of Electrical Charges from InsulatingBodies

  Electricity is able to diffuse itself in conducting bodies by conduction,

convection,  and  influence.  How  does  its  diffusion  take  place  in  non-

conducting bodies?

  Maxwell's theory is well known. According to him, electricity does not

circulate  in  dielectrics  because  it  would  have  to  overcome  an  elastic

resistance which goes on increasing, and soon opposes its propagation.

  It is true that a dielectric may for a very long time retain a part of its

charge. I have electrified blocks of paraffin which at the end of eighteen

months retained a weak residual electrification. But it is evident also that

dielectrics very quickly lose a great part of their electricity, because a rod of

ebonite excited by friction, of which the potential may exceed 1500 volts,

loses the greater part of its charge in a few minutes. It is even astonishing that

it should not disappear quicker, if we admit that the quantity of electricity

retained by a body is kept on its surface by the pressure of the insulating gas

and of the equally insulating ether which surround it. When there is no longer

equilibrium between these antagonistic actions, the electricity partly escapes.

  My researches prove that this loss of electricity by

  an insulating body is effected in two ways: (1) by convection—that is to

say, by the emission of particles; and (2) by conduction—tbat is to say, by

propagation along an electrified body to one of its extremities, as in the case

of conductors.

  This last mode of propagation, evidently contrary to the reigning theories,

can be put in evidence by the following experiment:—

  Procure some rods of ebonite or of paraffin about 1 metre long. After

having electrified them at one of their extremities by rubbing them for a

length of only 2 centimetres, the unelectrified end is placed in contact with a

conducting body connected with the ball of an electroscope. No displacement

of the gold leaves is noticed at first, but by prolonging the contact for a few

minutes the instrument becomes slowly charged. The electricity is therefore

propagated along the unelectrified part.

  This  experiment  shows  that,  in  reality,  electricity  is  able  to  propagate

itself in insulators as well as in conductors, but much more slowly in the first-

named case than in the second. When we speak of the velocity of electricity,

therefore, it must be said that, according to the body employed, it circulates

with a rapidity varying from a few centimetres to 300,000 kilometres per

second.  §  5.—  Causes  of  the  Differences  of  Tension  observed  in  Electricity

proceeding  from  Chemical  Decompositions  and  from  those  produced  by

Influence or Friction

  We know that the electricity obtained by the chemical reactions which

take place in a battery of

  any kind is emitted in quantities varying with the size of the battery, but

at a tension independent of its dimensions. Whether the battery be the size of

a thimble or of a house, the tension is always the same and always very weak,

since it hardly exceeds two volts per cell.

  It  is  quite  different  with  electricity  drawn  from  matter  without  the

intervention of any chemical reagent—that is to say, by friction or influence.

The quantity of electricity then produced is extremely weak, but its tension

extremely great. It may exceed 1500 volts from the friction of a simple rod of

ebonite,  and  may  easily  attain  50,000  volts  from  the  very  smallest  static

machine  used  in  a  laboratory.  In  order  to  obtain  the  same  voltage  with

batteries,  it  would  be  necessary—the  tensions  being  added  together—to

collect about 25,000 cells.

  These differences between the electricity from batteries and those from

friction  machines  show  themselves  by  very  striking  effects.  With  the  last

named we observe loud sparks which are not produced by the first.

  This phenomenon greatly impressed the old physicists, and was the origin

of the division set up between static and dynamic electricity—so-called —

which  weighed  down  science  for  over  fifty  years.  Notwithstanding  the

apparent dissimilarities resulting from differences of tension, the electricity

generated by a battery is identical with that produced by a static machine. The

battery and the static machine both produce, when their poles are connected

by a wire, an electric current surrounded by a magnetic field and able to

deviate the needle of a galvanometer.

  A battery of which the poles are separated is in every way comparable to

a static machine just charged, the poles of which are far apart. Alike l)etween

the poles of the machine and those of the battery, a certain difference of

potential exists. When they are connected by a wire, the electricity flows

from one pole to the other, and it is this How which constitutes the electric

current.  Since  the  electricity  generated  by  chemical  decomposition  as  in

batteries, and that produced by simple friction in machines, do not differ, why

has the electricity of a battery produced by chemical decompositions only a

tension of one or two volts, while that obtained by simple friction attains atension twenty or thirty thousand times as much ? The text-books are silent

on this question.

  As none of the chemical decompositions known to us intervene in the

friction or influence machine, the production of electricity in these latter has

probably  another  origin  than  that  of  molecular  reactions.  It  proceeds,  as

previously shown, from the dissociation of the atoms. When electricity is

drawn from a simple body, whether by influence or by friction, it is simply

intra-atomic energy Avhich is liberated. Now, as this latter exists in matter in

a state of extreme condensation, it is not astonishing that electricity should go

forth from it at high tension. It has, on the contrary, a very low potential

when it results not from the dissociation of the atom, but from changes of

molecular equilibria. Compared with intra-atomic energies, intra-molecular

energies are extremely weak.

  I have noted in several experiments, the most important of which has

already been mentioned

  above,  the  ease  with  which  intra-atomic  energy  transforms  itself  into

electricity at a high potential.

    Electrification by friction has always been obtained hitherto by rubbing

insulating bodies—rosin, glass, &c. It is preferable, in order to justify the

preceding thesis, to use conducting bodies. By employing simple bodies, such

as pure metals, we avoid all foreign factors capable of coming in when such

complex substances as glass or rosin are used.

  To  easily  effect  the  following  experiments  strips  of  various  metals—

copper,  aluminium,  &c.,  in  the  form  of  a  rectangle  about  10  centimetres

square—must  be  firmly  fixed  in  ebonite  handles.  If,  holding  the  ebonite

handle in one hand, the strip of metal be slightly rubbed with a catskin held in

the other, it will be seen, on bringing the metal close to the electroscope, that

it is charged with electricity of a potential of from 1000 to 1500 volts. The

gold leaves sometimes stand out horizontally, and may even be torn.

  The experiment only succeeds when the atmosphere is very dry. If, to dry

the metal, it is heated to about 100° or more, it can no longer, after cooling,

be  electrified  by  friction  otherwise  than  vei'y  slightly.  It  then  regains  the

property of being electrified at a high potential only after a certain lapse of

time, which varies with the metal.

    Temperature exercises little influence on certain metals, such as copper;

but a great deal on others, such as aluminium. This latter does not regain the

property of being strongly electrified for a quarter of an hour after havingbeen heated.

  When the metal is in conditions in whicii it can be easily electrified, it

sufiices  to  pass  a  catskin  once  lightly  over  it  for  it  to  be  electrified  to  a

potential of a few hundred volts. It is therefore quite correct, as I have said

elsewhere, that matter need only be touched in order to draw electricity from

it.  So  rapid  a  transformation  by  so  simple  a  means  always  appears

extraordinary when one reflects upon it. It is all the more striking that, in

elec-

    ti'ification  by  the  simple  contact  of  two  heterogeneous  metals,  the

potential obtained is only a few volts—that is to say, so feeble that it cannot

be  observed  with  an  ordinary  electroscope.  Yolta,  who  discovered

electrification by contact, only succeeded in demonstrating this by means of

his condensing electroscope.

  If the electrification of metals by friction or by influence did not depend

on  so  many  very  variable  atmospheric  conditions,  there  might  be  an

advantage  in  replacing  the  insulating  glass  or  ebonite  plates  of  static

machines by metal plates properly insulated.

  Very often in the course of this long study we have recorded the ease with

which  matter  can  be  dissociated  notwithstanding  its  apparent  stabihty,  as

soon as one brings into action reagents to which it is sensi-tive. The most

powerful forces seem to have no hold upon it; we may pulverize, calcine, and

volatilize it Fig. 6-Metai plate

  1 , .' ... held by an in-

  without its weight being in any way suiating handle altered. And yet it

suffices to touch °^ ebonite, it

  •^ . _ can be brought

  it lightly, to let fall on its surface a to a potential of feeble ray of solar

light, for instability ^^^^. ^«^.f ^^

  •^ ° ,. , "^ rubbing it very

  to take the place ot stability and for slightly. its disaggregation to begin. It

is from this instability that forces are derived. Electricity, heat, and all the

energies of the universe represent unstable forms of matter.

  What further strikes us in this study are the colossal energies contained in

the smallest particle of matter. These energies play perhaps a preponderant

part in

  I

  


    biological  phenomena.  We  already  obtain  a  glimpse  of  this  from  the

importance of the role of substances such as toxins, diastases, and colloidal

bodies, containing only imponderable traces of matter, which is, however,

doubtless in a form where its energies can be liberated. We evidently find

ourselves here in presence of a new world, the thorough study of which will

modify all our present conceptions of the universe.

    CHAPTER III

  THE  PROBLEMS  OF  MAGNETISM,  MAGNETIC  INDUCTION,.

AND LINES OF FORCE

  § 1.— The Problem of Magnetism

  The problem which offers itself to us in the case of electrification by

influence likewise presents itself as regards the phenomena of magnetism and

of magnetic induction.

  We know that a permanent magnet can magnetize an indefinite number of

iron bars. A limited quantity of magnetism would therefore seem to produce

an unlimited quantit3\

  To say that the magnetism of a magnet only serves to orient the molecules

of iron subjected to its action is no explanation at all, for, if it were so, this

orientation would necessitate an expenditure of power which would exhaust

the magnetism of tlie magnetizing body.

  The interpretation of magnetism being evidently

    (lifEcult, we still keep to the old hypothesis of the particular currents of

Ampere notwithstanding all the objections aroused by it. That of Lorentz—on

which, however, he does not greatly insist—is not nuich more satisfactory. "

It may be supposed," he says, " that there exists in a magnet electrons which

turn or whirl."

    Observation teaches us that there issues from a loadstone lines of force of

which  the  existence  and  the  direction  are  rendered  plain  by  the  classic

experiment of the magnetic spectrum. Collectively they constitute what is

termed the magnetic field.

  Let  us  keep,  then,  to  this  experimental  fact,  that  magnetism  is

accompanied by the emission of things of unknown structure called lines or

tubes of force. Taken together, they form a pencil of which the size dependson certain conditions, such as the section of the magnet. It would suffice, in

order to explain the phenomena of the magnetizing of all the bars of iron

successively introduced into the field of a magnet, if we admitted that its lines

of force are immediately appropriated by the bars of iron they meet, and as

immediately  replaced  by  others  issuing  from  the  magnet  and  equal  in

number.

  But  we  thus  only  put  the  difficulty  a  stage  further  liack.  How  can  a

magnet indefinitely replace the lines of force it loses by magnetizing another

body ?

  We can only explain this apparently infinite production by recurring to

my theory of the dissociation of matter and of the liberation in immense

quantities of the intra-atomic energy it contains. The manifestations of intra-

atomic energy are numerous. Heat and electricity are two of them, to which

must, no doubt, be added magnetism.

  A loadstone can generate an almost unlimited number of lines of force,

exactly as a fragment of radium can generate an almost unlimited quantity of

heat and of certain radiations. These radiations, again, are capable of being

seized upon by neighbouring bodies, and of giving to them the properties of

radium itself. This is the phenomenon which is termed induced radio-activity,

and  presents  great  analogies  with  the  magnetism  induced  by  the

neighbourhood of a magnetized body.

  I shall not dwell on the preceding interpretation, because it is impossible

to verify its validity by experiment.

    Physicists, moreover, have almost renounced the attempt to explain the

phenomena  relating  to  magnetization.  M.  Lucien  Poincare  has  very  well

shown in the following passage how wretched is the explanation generally

admitted:—

  " A magnet attracts a current; here, then, is mechanical work produced,

but whence does it come ? There still remains to us, in order not to avow our

embarrassment, the resource of a merely verbal explanation, and of saying

that the work reaped comes from a diminution of the potential energy of the

system. It is indeed in this fashion that the manner in which two permanent

magnets act on one another is interpreted—it cannot be said explained.

  " But when we see a current displacing itself under the action of electro-

magnetic  forces,  and  we  ascertain  that  we  can  thus  obtain  continuous

rotations, it seems very improbable that the work obtained can come in this

case from a corresponding loss in the potential energy of the system. Onemust, in fact, suppose that this energy has, so to speak, an infinite

  value; and this supposition is rather repugnant to common sense."

  § 2.— Tlte Problem of Induction

  The same problem is equally present in the case of uiagnetic induction.

How, with a definite quantity of magnetism, can we produce an apparently

unlimited quantity of induced electricity ?

  By cutting the lines of force of a magnet by a metallic wire forming a

loop,  of  which  the  extremities  are  connected  with  the  terminals  of  a

galvanometer, we verify during the passage of the wire through the lines of

force the appearance of a so-(■alled induction current. The operation may be

repeated indefinitely. It suffices to continuously displace the metallic wire in

the magnetic field, to obtain induction currents, so long as the displacements

are repeated.

  On this fundamental fact of the production of a current by a conductor

cutting  the  lines  of  force  are  based  our  magneto-electric  machines,  from

which dynamos only differ because here an electro-magnet takes the place of

the fixed magnet. We will only consider here the first-named, which will

enable me to make our demonstrations clearer.

  In these magneto-electric machines, the single wire referred to above is

wound on a drum revolving between the poles of a fixed magnet, so as to cut

again and again its lines of force. So long as the coil continues its movement,

the  magnetism  of  the  magnet  will  be  transformed  into  electricity.  With  a

finite quantity of magnetism, we therefore produce uu unlimited quantity of

electricity.

  By  the  current  theories,  this  indefinite  generation  of  electricity  at  the

expense of a Hmited quantity of magnetism is explained by saying that it is

the rotational movement of the coil which is transformed with electricity, or,

if you will, that the power expended against the electro-motive forces is again

met with under the form of electrical energy. Such a metamorphosis would be

as marvellous, in reality, as the transmutation of lead into gold by simply

shaking it in a bottle. It is very unlikely that kinetic energy should undergo

such  a  transformation,  and  another  interpretation  must  be  sought  for  the

phenomenon.

  The  explanation  propounded,  which  is  the  one  given  above  for

phenomena of the same order, rests on no transmutation. Matter being easily

dissociated and constituting an immense reservoir of intra-atomic energy, it is

enough to admit that the lines of force seized upon by the conducting bodywhich cuts them and causes them to flow in the form of an electric current,

are constantly replaced at the expense of the intra-atomic energy. This last

being relatively almost inexhaustible, a single magnet can furnish an almost

infinite number of lines of force.

  The displacement of the conducting body in the magnetic field serves

solely to put it in the condition necessary for absorbing the lines of force and

giving  them  the  form  of  an  electric  current.  A  determinate  quantity  of

movement and consequently of work is, then, required to generate a certain

quantity of electricity; but we are in no way justified in deducing from this

the transformation into electricity of the simple movement of a body.

    Therefore, when we see at work these gigantic dynamos whence torrents

of  electric  fluid  flow,  we  should  not  say  that  they  represent  movement

transformed  into  electricity.  It  is  simply  the  intra-atomic  energy  of

dissociated matter which appears under the form of electricity.

  Here, again, we perceive the fertility of the principles I have propounded

on the dissociation of matter and the magnitude of intra-atomic energy. The

immense  reservoir  of  forces  contained  in  matter  allows  us  to  explain  the

majority of phenomena, from the electricity which lights our street to the

solar heat whence life is derived.

  § 3.— The Problem of the Origin of the Lines of Force

  Into most of the phenomena we have just examined the lines of force

enter. They seem to be the fundamental elements of electricity.

    Faraday, starting from the idea, which contravened, however, that of most

physicists of his time, that matter cannot act at a distance—that is to say,

where  it  is  not—deduced  therefrom  the  existence  of  an  intermediary

connecting electrified bodies. He was thus led to recognize that these last are

surrounded by lines of force throughout the whole space or so-called electric

field in which their action is produced.

  The illustrious physicist attributed to these lines a very real existence, and

by  no  means  considered  them  as  a  simple  mathematical  expression.  He

regarded them as a kind of elastic springs, repelling each other mutually, and

connecting  bodies  charged  with  electricities  of  contrary  sign.  Their

extremities,

  affixed to these bodies, constituted the electric charge.

  Faraday put in evidence the lines of force which surround magnets by the

classic experiment of iron filings powdered on a card under which are placed

the two poles of a magnet. These filings spread themselves over the card inthe direction of the lines of force.

  It was by an extension of this theory that Faraday supposed electrified

bodies to be surrounded by lines of force analogous to those round the poles

of a magnet. At the present day we possess several means of rendering their

existence plain.^ They may even be photographed, by using the luminous

ions which, during electric discharges, follow their direction. Fig. 7 shows the

lines of force radiating round an insulated electrified body. Fig. 8 shows the

repulsion of the lines of force between two bodies bearing electric charges of

the same sign.

  Of what are the lines of force composed ? Maxwell considered them to be

formed of ether cells, whirling round lines serving as axes. Between them

would exist the particles which constitute electricity. No experiment allows

us to verify this theory. We must confine ourselves to noting the action of

lines of force without being able to say anything regarding their structure.

They possess properties showing that they are produced in the ether rather

than in the matter whence they appear to issue.

  1-  That  lines  of  force  also  appear  between  conductors  carrying  an

electrostatic charge can be shown by interposing between them a glass vessel

filled  with  oil  of  turpentine  and  crystals  of  quinine  sulphate.  See  Kolbe's

Introduction to the Science of Electricity, English edition, 1908, pp. 125 ct.

seq. — Ed.

 




 


  Fig. 7.

    Photograph of lines of force surrounding an insulated electrified hody.

  i

 




 


  Fig. 8.

    Photograph of mutual repulsions of lines of force beliveen two bodies

charged icith electricity of the same sign.  One of the most fundamental of these properties, although it is hardly

mentioned in the text-books, is that of passing through, or behaving as if they

passed  through,  all  material  substances,  whether  conductors  or  insulators.

This the X-rays and the particles emitted by radium do to only a slight extent.

It  is  precisely  because  this  property  had  been  almost  unperceived  by

physicists  that  they  were  so  impressed  at  the  time  by  the  discovery  of

radiations passing through matter. Bodies can, however, be transpierced by

lines of force much more easily than by the X-rays. If the lines of force had

been capable of acting on the photographic plate, the X-rays would never

have caused the excitement we all remember. The imperfect passage of these

last through bodies, alone permitted the celebrated photography of the bones

of the hand which has been so much talked about.

  The experiment of Faraday's cage, showing that bodies surrounded by a

metallic screen connected with the earth cannot receive an electric charge,

makes  us  forget  the  ease  with  which  metals  allow  themselves  to  be

transpierced by lines of force. By doing away with the earth-wire, a metal

opposes no obstacle to their passage.

  The  apparatus  shown  in  Fig.  9,  which  I  have  constructed  in  order  to

render evident this passage of the lines of force through both metals and

insulators,  proves  that  an  electroscope  protected  by  three  concentric

cylinders, whether of metal or of ebonite, can be instantaneously charged.

Naturally the metallic cylinders are placed on an insulating support.

  The transparency of bodies to magnetic lines of force is as complete as to

electric lines of force, but is

  THE EVOLUTION OF FORCES

  too well known to require demonstration. Every one knows that a magnet

can act on a compass through a door or a non-magnetic metallic body.

 




 


  Fig.  9.—Passage  of  lines  of  force  through  three  concentric  metallic

screens of varying thickness surrounding the ball of an electroscope. Under

the  influence  of  a  glass  or  resin  rod  rubbed  and  brought  close  to  the

instrument, the gold leaves immediately diverge.

  Nothing, moreover, is easier than to verify this. A compass is placed at ashort distance from a

  magnet. The deviation of the needle is noticed, then a thick plate of non-

magnetic  metal  is  interposed  between  the  compass  and  the  magnet.  The

needle of the compass is not displaced. Therefore the lines of force have

passed through the metal without undergoing any trace of absorption, and act

on the compass. But if the interposed body were capable of magnetization, it

would seize upon the lines of force of the magnet, and would then constitute

what is called a magnetic screen. It is just, as before said, this capture of the

lines  of  force  which  produces  magnetization  and  also  magnetic  induction

when we displace a conductor in a magnetic field.

  These lines of force, the properties of which have just been demonstrated,

have no analogy with material substances, and yet it is evident they come

from matter. The neighbourhood of an electrified rod of glass or resin draws

them forth from it, and it suffices to withdraw the latter for them to return to

it.

  Without even bringing an electrified body near to matter, we can draw

from  it  lines  of  force.  It  is  enough  to  put  in  contact  two  heterogeneous

substances. We then observe that, if the surfaces of the two bodies are drawn

apart, they are connected by lines of force which lengthen or shorten as the

surfaces are farther apart or nearer. They are real elastic threads, as Faraday

recognized, but of what are they formed? If they are composed solely of

ether, their property of lengthening indefinitely and of shortening down to

molecular dimensions is not easy to interpret.

  It is hardly possible at the present day to dispute the very real existence of

lines of force. A magnetic

  field formed by them is a sort of viscous medium, dragging with it the

bodies plunged therein when we put it in motion. Masses of metal introduced

into  a  magnetic  field  follow  it  in  its  rotation.  Industrial  electricity  at  the

present day utilizes these " rotating fields " to put bodies in motion without

any material mechanism.

  These facts, as yet little capable of explanation, especially tend to put in

evidence the close rehitions of matter with the ether, on which I have so

much  insisted,  and  which  the  science  of  to-da}^  makes  into  two  widely

distinct domains. When their extreme form— for instance, a sun ray and a

block of metal—are alone studied, they seem, in fact, very different. But by

the  examination  of  the  intermediate  elements  linking  up  these  forms  so

dissimilar in appearance, we demonstrate that the ether and matter are nottwo separate worlds, but one and the same world.

    CHAPTER IV

  THE ELECTRIC WAVES ^

  § 1.— Properties of the Electric Waves

  In 1888 the physicist Hertz discovered that oscillating electric discharges

generate in the ether a series of undulations analogous to those produced by

the  fall  of  a  body  into  water.  He  demonstrated  that  these  waves  are

propagated, refracted, and polarized like light, and circulate with the same

velocity, only differing from light waves by their dimensions. The

  smallest  electric  waves  are  5  millimetres  long,  while  the  largest  light

waves are 50 microns. The latter are therefore 100 times smaller than the

former.

  Electric waves produce induction currents in the conductors they meet

with. It was by noticing the sparks generated by these currents that Hertz

revealed the existence of the waves which to-day bear his name; and it is on

the propagation of these waves in space that wireless telegraphy is based. To

reveal their presence at a distance we had only to find a reagent analogous to

the ear for sound, or to the photographic plate for light.

  The  only  characteristics  common  to  electric  waves  and  light  are  their

speed  of  propagation,  and  their  capability  for  reflection,  refraction,  and

polarization. But it must be remarked that any periodical disturbance of the

ether, whatever be its cause, must necessarily possess similar properties. It is

therefore  perhaps  going  too  far  to  deduce  from  this  the  identity  of  the

Hertzian and the light waves. This could only be properly admitted if these

last also possessed electro-magnetic properties, and consequently were able

to produce induction currents in conductors. Now, we have never been able

to obtain with light waves any electric or magnetic phenomenon, nor to verify

their propagation along a wire, as in the case of electric waves.

  There could be no interest in dwelling on these differences, as the electro-

magnetic theory of light — now generally admitted — corresponds to that

yearning for simplification and unification so general in physics at the present

time. Time alone can stem such currents of opinion.

    Abandoning, then, the idea of disputing the value

  of analogies now universally accepted, we will confine ourselves to the

remark in passing that Hertzian waves are to electricity what radiant heat is to

that  circulating  in  matter.  A  heated  body  radiates  into  the  ether  what  are

called waves of radiant heat, which raise the temperature of the substances onwhich they fall. An electrified body suddenly discharged radiates so-called

electric waves which charge with electricity the bodies that they meet. There

is in this a parallel which, however, in no way leads to identification. The

causes  which  determine  the  production  of  waves  of  radiant  heat  seem  to

possess only distant analogies with those of electric waves.

  § 2.— Sensitiveness of Matter to the Electric Waves

  The more we study matter, the more we are struck by its extraordinary

sensitiveness.  Under  its  apparent  rigidity  it  possesses  a  very  complicated

structure and an intense life. Fragments of metal can be so acted upon at a

distance of several hundred kilometres by simple vibrations of the ether, that

they become conductors of electric currents, the passage of which they at first

prevent. This capacity for impression is another hint of the relations which

connect the ether with matter.

  The reagent for electric waves employed by Hertz was not very sensitive.

It simply consisted of a Avire bent into a circle, terminating at its extremities

in two balls brought very close together. Moving this receiver about in space,

he saw break forth between the balls, on the passage of the waves, small

induction sparks produced by their action. Receiving these waves in a large

cylindro-parabolic metal mirror, he recognized

 




 


  Fig. 10.

  Apparatus employed to discover Hertzian leaves.

    (Branly's filings tube and bell in circuit with single cell).

  that  it  was  in  its  focus  that  the  greatest  production  of  sparks  was

manifested.  CompeUing  them  to  pass  through  a  prism  of  bitumen,  he

observed that ihey were deviated. Thus their reflection and their refraction

were demonstrated.

  Hertz' receiver was not very sensitive, since it did not reveal the existence

of electric waves at more than a few metres from their point of emission. This

was fortunate ; for if Hertz had made use of the receivers now employed for

wireless telegraphy, the phenomena of reflection, refraction, and polarization

could only have been discovered with great difficulty. I have often noted, in

fact, that sensitive receivers placed in the focus of the Hertz mirror, or by theside of or even behind it, give identical indications, and I shall have occasion

to explain why. As has often been the case in the history of science, the rude

instrument has rendered more service than a delicate one.

  With  the  receivers  of  slight  sensitiveness  employed  by  Hertz,  the

apparatus producing the waves had to be very powerful and consequently

very  bulky.  Thanks  to  the  receiver  discovered  by  Branly,  the  most

insigniflcant sparks suffice, on the contrary, to make an impression (c/. Fig.

10).

  In  spite  of  its  marvellous  sensitiveness,  the  receiver  called  the  radio-

conductor or filings-tube is so simple that any one can easily make it. It

consists merely of a small glass tube containing two rods of metal two or

three millimetres apart, between which is interposed a small quantity of metal

filings. Thus constituted, the tube insulates; but on being struck by electric

waves sent by a radiator, which may be placed hundreds of kilometres away,

it becomes a

  conductor and allows the current of the battery to pass into the circuit,

which also contains an electromagnet designed to operate an ordinary Morse

telegraph. A slight blow on the tube, automatically given by another electro-

magnet thrown into circuit by a relay, serves to bring it back to its original

state and allows a fresh signal to be given.

  As  has  just  been  said,  these  receivers  are  so  sensitive  that  the  very

weakest source of electricity is sufficient to act on them. The difficulty is not

to be able to produce electric waves, but rather to manage not to do so when

it  is  desirable  to  avoid  it.  Any  sudden  discharge  of  an  electrified  body,

however  small  the  spark  may  be,  produces  electric  waves.  They  can  be

obtained by rubbing a rod of resin, by sounding an electric bell, by opening

or closing the circuit of a battery, &c. I have caused a receiver to act at a

distance of fifty centimetres away by the spark from a simple ebonite rod

rubbed with a catskin and afterwards touched by a metallic object of fairly

large capacity, such as a key or a coin.

  The discovery by M. Branly of the variation in conductivity of metal

filings under the influence of the Hertzian rays, although it passed unnoticed

when  first  published,  certainly  constitutes  one  of  the  most  remarkable

discoveries  of  modern  physics,  especially  because  it  opens  up  unforeseen

horizons on phenomena still very mysterious, and on which the sagacity of

physicists will no doubt have to exercise itself for a long time.

  We have here a very general fact which is in no way limited to the case ofmetal filings. This is that frao'ments of metal in contact with one another and

presenting considerable resistance—30,000 ohms, for

  THE ELECTEIC WAVES

  145

    example—to  the  passage  of  electricity,  become  conductors  under  tlie

influence of very weak electric waves, and lose this conductivity by a simple

shock.  These  variations  indicate  a  great  variability  in  the  aggregation  of

atoms under the influence of infinitely weak but appropriate forces.

  Most  discontinuous  conductors  can  exhibit  these  variations.  Now  we

hardly  handle  any  other  than  discontinuous  conductors.  A  continuous

conductor,  such  as  a  metal  wire,  becomes  discontinuous  immediately  we

connect it to the terminals of a battery. And as we have just seen that in a

discontinuous  conductor  the  resistance  is  not  at  all—  at  least  for  a  great

number of metals—a constant magnitude depending on the section and the

length of the wire according to Ohm's law, it follows that the conductivity of

certain metallic bodies may vary in immense proportions according to the

pressure of the wires by the binding-screws and the circumstances in which

they are used. Even with a constant pressure this resistance may still vary

considerably,  since  it  suffices  to  cause  an  electric  spark  in  their

neighbourhood  in  order  to  modify  the  resistance  of  the  contact.  Now  the

simple fact of opening or closing a current produces such sparks. A filings-

tube with a variable resistance is only an exaggeration of these effects.

  It is easy to illustrate what has just been said by a curious experiment due

to M. Branly. A column of metal of thirty to forty centimetres in height is

formed by placing one upon the other a series of polished discs of bismuth,

aluminium, &c., of the dimensions of a five franc piece. The column may

even be made merely of polished steel balls placed

  K

  in a test tube. The resistance of this cohimn to the passage of an electric

current is still considerable. If we make a small electric spark near it, the

resistance becomes almost nil. To cause it to reappear, it suffices to give a tap

to the upper part of the column.

  These variations are still more exaggerated if the column, instead of being

formed of discs of the same metal, is composed of discs of different metals.

With a column of alternate discs of lead and aluminium, a few taps will

suffice to raise the resistance to about 30,000 ohms, and very slight electric

waves sent from a distance reduce this enormous resistance to 3 ohms.  This variability of resistance is not observed in all metals in contact, for

copper is a notable exception, and it is fortunate it is so. The law of Ohm F

  I = j5 naturally implies the knowledge of R. Now, if

  the physicists who established it had used wires of different metals other

than copper, it could not have been discovered. They would have noted, in

fact, by using any measuring apparatus Avhatever—the Wheatstone bridge,

for instance—that the resistance constantly varies in large proportions for a

given length of wire, and that the variations of pressure in the binding-screws

did not explain this phenomenon. Even had they noticed the influence of a

spark emitted close by—and the opening or the closure of the battery current

employed  always  produces  one—they  could  not  have  deduced  any

measurement  from  it,  since  the  effects  of  these  sparks  vary  greatly  from

experiment to experiment. The final conclusion would no doubt have been

that

  a wire of constant dimensions may in apparently identical circumstances

allow very different quantities of electricity to pass, which is directly contrary

to Ohm's law. This law, which is the basis of all our practical knowledge of

electricity, would no doubt have been discovered, but much later and by very

roundabout ways.

  The  property  peculiar  to  a  small  number  of  metals  of  remaining

uninfluenced  by  electric  waves  seems  able  to  communicate  itself  to

neighbouring  bodies,  as  if  these  metals  possessed  a  kind  of  metallic

atmosphere.  Let  us  take  a  column  of  copper  discs,  which  metal  has  an

invariable  conductivity.  The  resistance  of  this  column  will  be  a  constant

magnitude  depending  on  the  height  and  diameter  of  the  discs,  and  will

consequently obey Ohm's law. Take a second column of aluminium discs, a

metal of variable conductivity, and their resistance will vary in considerable

proportions  according  to  the  conditions,  such  as  shock,  conveyance  of

electric waves, &c., enumerated above. Let us now mix the discs of the two

columns in such a way that a disc of copper follows one of aluminium. The

copper  communicates  its  properties  to  the  aluminium,  and  the  column

behaves as if it Avere composed solely of copper. Its resistance has become

invariable; it now obeys Ohm's law.

  I 3.— The Propagation of Electric Waves at a Distance and their future

utilization.

  We have seen that Hertzian waves propagate themselves in space to a

distance of hundreds of kilometres, and produce on the metallic bodies theymeet electrical induction currents capable of manifesting themselves in the

form of sparks.

  This  production  of  electricity  at  a  distance  is  very  slight,  because  the

electric waves disperse'their energy to all directions of the horizon.^ But it

would  be  quite  otherwise  if  we  could  concentrate  them  on  one  point  by

means of mirrors or reflectors, as we do with light. Such reflectors (cylindro-

parabolic mirrors) were indeed used by Hertz in his experiments, since it was

owing to them that he demonstrated the reflection of the electric waves; but

unfortunately,  by  reason  of  the  size  of  these  waves,  and  the  consequent

phenomena  of  diffraction,  the  greater  part  of  the  energy  is  lost.  To

concentrate it, mirrors of gigantic dimensions would be necessary.

    However, I do not believe the solution of the problem is impossible, and

if I have not carried out the plan of the researches on this subject which I

intended to effect, it is solely on account of the expense they would have

necessitated. I intended to place side by side, and in contact with each other, a

large number of cjdindro-parabolic mirrors. These need not have been very

high,  for  we  can  easily  induce  the  waves  to  form  in  a  plane  of  slight

thickness.  I  should  then  have  tried  to  produce  extremely  intense  electric

fields, such as we can obtain with divers instruments—the Oudin resonator

notably. When this apparatus works with a coil having a 60 centimetre spark,

all the metallic objects in a room 10 metres long are charged by induction to

such a high degree that they spontaneously

  ^  But  not  equally.  Dr.  Marcoiii's  experiments  have  shown  that  the

Hertzian  waves  emitted  from  the  antenna  of  a  Marconi  apparatus,  for

instance, are projected farther in one direction than another, the curve of their

activity taking the form of a pear, of which the antenna represents the stalk.

Cf. Proc. Roy. 8oc. (A) Vol. xxvii. 1906, pp. 413-421.— Ed.

  emit  thousands  of  sparks.  They  once  produced  in  my  presence,  at  a

distance of several metres, short circuits in a switch-board containing volt-

metres  and  amperemetres,  &c.,  connected  by  metal  wires  with  a  double

coating of insulating material. In the result, these short circuits caused the

wires to melt, and the experiment had to be immediately stopped for fear of

fire.

  The problem of sending a pencil of parallel Hertzian waves to a distance

possesses  more  than  a  theoretical  interest.  It  is  allowable  to  say  that  its

solution  would  change  the  course  of  our  civilization  by  rendering  war

impossible. The first physicist who realizes this discovery will be able toavail himself of the presence of an enemy's ironclads gathered together in a

harbour  to  blow  them  up  in  a  few  minutes,  from  a  distance  of  several

kilometres, simply by directing on them a sheaf of electric radiations. On

reaching  the  metal  wires  with  which  these  vessels  are  nowadays

honeycombed, this will excite an atmosphere of sparks which will at once

explode the shells and torpedoes stored in their holds.

  With the same reflector, giving a pencil of parallel radiations, it would not

be much more difficult to cause the explosion of the stores of powder and

shells contained in a fortress, or in the artillery parks of an army corps, and

finally the metal cartridges of the soldiers. Science, which at first rendered

wars so deadly, would then at length have rendered them impossible, and the

relations between nations would have to be established on new bases.

  It must not be supposed that by any means whatever a ship or a fortress

could  be  protected  from  the  action  of  the  Hertzian  waves.  No  doubt  our

experi-

  ments have proved, as we shall see in a later chapter, that a sheet of metal

y^o^h of a millimetre thick completely stops the electric waves, but the same

experiments  have  also  proved  that  this  theoretical  protection  is  entirely

illusory. The slightest crack between the joints of an enclosure permits the

Hertzian waves to pass without difficulty.

  There would be no interest in dwelling further on this subject. I have

more  than  once  in  my  researches  come  across  problems  the  solutions  of

which would modify the march of civilization more profoundly than all the

changes of constitutions and reforms. It is only in the progress of science that

great social transformations can be looked for.

    CHAPTER V

  , TRANSPARENCY OF MATTER TO ELECTRIC WAVES

  § 1.— History of tlte Ideas relating to the Transparency of Bodies to the

Hertzian Waves

  The ideas current on the transparency of bodies to the Hertzian waves

were very erroneous when I published my researches in 1899. Experiment

seemed to indicate that all metals of slight thickness and insulating bodies of

any  thickness  could  be  transpierced  by  them;  but  both  these  views  were

inexact.  At  the  beginning  of  his  researches,  Hertz  recognized  that  metals

reflected the electric waves and consequently presented a certain opacity; but

was this opacity total or partial ? This was the point left unascertained.

  In the minds of most authors transparency appeared probable in the caseof sUght thicknesses. " M. Joubert discovered that a wall of zinc 2-5 mm.

thick,  4  metres  high,  and  8  metres  long,  weakened  the  sparks  without

completely destroying them, and that they could still be observed on the other

side of this wall." 1

  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  who  has  made  numerous  experiments  on  Hertzian

waves,  likewise  thought  he  had  noticed  the  transparency  of  metals,  but

supposes that at a " reasonable " thickness they must be opaque.^ We are

ignorant as to the value to be attached to what this author understands by "

reasonable thickness."

    Professor  Bose,  to  whom  we  owe  a  very  complete  memoir  on  the

Hertzian  waves,  and  who  has  invented  some  very  ingenious  apparatus  to

measure  their  length,  has  likewise  arrived,  by  precise  and  apparently

demonstrative experiments, at the conclusion that metals are transparent to

Hertzian waves. I here give the translation of the passage of the memoir in

which he narrates how he was led to this conclusion. After explaining all the

precautions taken to enclose his instruments in a perfectly closed metal box,

the learned physicist adds:—

  " Notwithstanding all these precautions, I was baffled for more than six

months by an unknown cause of error which I could not discover for a long

time.  It  was  only  recently,  when  almost  convinced  of  the  uselessness  of

continuing my researches, that

  ^ Quoted by H. Poincare, Electricity ct Optique, 1st edition, vol. ii. p.

256.  M.  Poincare,  referring  to  this  experiment,  points  out  that  it  might

x^erhaps be explained by diffraction, which is indeed the correct explanation,

as we shall see later.

  * Lodge, The Work of Hertz and some of his Successors, p. 32. London,

1894.

  I discovered that I was mistaken in supposing that the tinplate sides of the

case were perfectly opaque to electric radiations. The metal box containing

the radiator seems to transmit a few radiations through its walls, and if the

receiver is sensitive it indicates this slight transmission. I then had a second

metal envelope made, and found this precaution to be efficacious so long as

the receiver was not placed too close to the radiator. Notwithstanding these

two metallic envelopes, the receiver is still affected if placed imimediately

above the radiator." ^

  More recently still, M. Henri Veillon made some analogous experiments

in the Physical Laboratory of the University of Bale. They had as object thediscovery  of  "  the  part  played  by  conducting  bodies  placed  between  the

receiver  and  the  transmitter  from  which  come  the  oscillations."  After

acknowledging the difficulty of the subject the author declares that he only

ascribes to- his experiments " the character of a simple contribution to a study

offering  great  difficulties."  The  most  important  of  his  experiments  is  the

following:—The receiver was placed in a zinc case 1 millimetre thick closed

by a lid sliding in a OToove, with the radiator outside. Under these con-

ditions  the  experiment  demonstrated  to  him  that  the  action  of  the  waves

transmitted by the radiator " passed through the metal envelope, but only

when the sparks did not pass at too great a distance (about 1-50 m,)." ^ This

conclusion, we see, is the same as that of Professor Bose.

  1 Cbunder Bose, " On the Detei'iniuation of the Wave-Length of Electric

Kadiations by a Diffraction Gvsiiing" {Procccdhvjs of the Royal Society,

Oct. 16, IS'JO).

  '^ Archives des Sciences Physiijucs et Naturelles de <jenh-e (May 1898).

  It results clearly from the above extracts that the most exact researches

seemed to prove the transparency of metals to Hertzian waves. They appeared

very conclusive. They were not so, as we shall presently see.

  As regards the transparency of conducting bodies it was considered as

absolute. At the outset of his researches, Hertz noticed the transparency of

dielectrics—sulphur,  wood,  glass,  &c.  It  is  even  by  their  means  that  he

succeeded  in  demonstrating  the  phenomenon  of  the  refraction  of  electric

waves by large prisms of bitumen.

  Since then, dielectrics have always been considered very transparent to

electric waves, and it has even been inquired whether they might not give a

trace of absorption. Righi, in his researches, arrived at this conclusion: " That

it can be considered demonstrated that the diminution of intensity to which

the radiations passing through plates of certain dielectrics are subject, are

really due to absorption."

    Wireless  telegraphy  experiments  seemed  to  confirm  this  hypothesis

absolutely. The maj ority of observers have noted, in fact, that walls, and

even  hills,  were  traversed  by  electric  waves,  and  this  observation  is  still

reproduced in several works which have become classic.

  I therefore found myself in presence of two problems :—

  (1) Can metals of slight thickness be traversed by Hertzian waves ? (2)

Are non-conducting bodies of any thickness transparent to them ?

  These problems had for me a very great theoretical importance. Theirsolution was very delicate, and as they necessitated a laboratory of larger

dimensions

  than  I  possessed,  1  asked  Professor  Branly  to  be  kind  enough  to

participate in these researches. We together published the results obtained in

the Comptes Rendiis de I'AcadSmie des Sciences}

  The difficulties of all kinds we had to overcome before reaching a definite

result  thoroughly  explain  the  erroneous  conclusions  to  which  very  skilful

physicists had been previously led.

  I 2.— Opaqueness of Metcds to the Electric Waves

  In order to ascertain whether metals in thin or thick plates allowed the

electric waves to pass through them, M. Branly and I had some cubical boxes

about  50  centimetres  square  constructed  of  different  metals,  and  between

0*02 mm. and 2 mm. thick, in which the receiving apparatus was placed. The

apertures of these cases were closed by a most carefully-fitting door. The

radiator  producing  the  waves  was  placed  a  few  inches  away  from  the

apparatus, and the receiver was of course put inside the box. It revealed the

passage of the electric waves through the walls by causing a bell to ring

(Figs. 11 and 12).

  The first experiments seemed to confirm absolutely the researches above

quoted. Like Mr. Bose and other experimenters, we noticed that the electric

waves seemed to pass through the metal. The moment the radiator began to

act, the bell inside the metal box could be heard.

    Although these experiments agreed with those of the authors quoted, we

would  not  be  satisfied  with  them.  We  had  the  metal  doors  readjusted  by

fitting to each of them half-a-dozen screws in such a way

  1 Comptes Rendus dc la Seance, April 1, ]8l)9, pp. 87i) ct sqq.

 




 


  Fig. 11.

 




   Fig. 12. Apparatus for study of opacity of metallic bodies to Hertzian

waves.

  that  we  could  close  them  hermetically.  When  these  precautions  were

taken, we noticed that as soon as the screws were tightened, the bell remained

silent. The radiations therefore did not pass through the metal; they simply

passed  through  the  very  narrow  gaps  left  by  the  metal  doors.  The

transparency observed by former observers was due solely to the imperfect

closing  of  the  metal  boxes  in  which  they  enclosed  their  apparatus.  The

precautions  taken  by  photographers  to  protect  their  laborator}^  and  their

plate-carriers from the entry of light would be quite insufficient to protect

them from the entry of the electric waves.

  These experiments were repeated many hundreds of times with the same

results—tightening of the screws, silence of the bell; loosening of the screws,

ringing of the bell.

  We then tried with several metals, the effect produced by the thickness of

the envelope, and it proved absolutely nil. A case of thin wood, lined with tin

and only looth of a millimetre thick, proved to be as opaque as boxes of metal

of 2 millimetres.

  The protection exercised by a metal envelope is quite remarkable. In the

metal door which closes the case let us solder, perpendicularly to its centre, a

brass rod projecting 30 centimetres inside the box, and protruding as much

outside.^ Let us connect the circuit of the filiugs-tube to the inside portion of

this rod, and place its outside part in contact with the radiator. It would seem

that under these conditions the receiver ought to act. Now, it does nothing of

the kind. .Though the electric waves are

  1 This rod is showu iu the door of the case represented in Ei^s. 11 and 12.

    propagated, as we know, along wires, that part of the rod which is inside

the metal box entirely ceases to conduct. As the walls of the case form a

screen, the electric waves take the shortest road, which is, evidently, the outer

surface of the metal cage. By touching the latter with the finger during the

experiment we can draw from it numerous sparks.

  The above experiments, and notably that which consists in causing or

arresting the passage of the electric waves by tightening or loosening the

screws closing the door of the metal case, prove that the tiniest slits alloAv

the passage of the electric waves. Beinsf thus led to examine the influence of

these slits, we noted that if we replaced a slit intentionally made in the metal

door by a series of holes the total area of which greatly exceeded that of theslit, the passage of the electric waves took place through these holes much

less easily than through the slit. The radiator only needed to be placed a few

metres  farther  off,  and  the  bell  remained  silent.  Thus  one  hundred  round

holes of 1 cm. diameter do not give passage to the electric waves so long as

the  radiator  is  more  than  50  centimetres  distant,  while  with  a  crack  1

millimetre wide by 20 centimetres lonof, the receiver in the box was affected

at all the distances at our disposal, and even when the radiator was placed in

an adjacent room. With a slit made by simply passing the edge of a razor

across the metal, the outer box was still transpierced by the waves, but at one-

sixth of the distance employed with the slit of 1 millimetre.

  If the slit is perpendicular to the axis of the four balls of the radiator, the

box is transpierced from

  a distance six to eight times greater than when the slit is parallel to that

axis.

  These experiments led to the presumption that a wire gauze of fine mesh

would  act  exactly  like  a  solid  sheet,  and  this  was  easily  verified  by

observation. An envelope of wire gauze, with meshes 1 millimetre square, is

opaque, save when the radiator is only a few centimetres away.

  From what precedes, it results that metal envelopes act with regard to the

electric  waves  much  as  Faraday's  cage  does  with  regard  to  electrostatic

induction. It will be remarked, however, in the case of electric waves, that the

slits  exercise  an  influence  which  is  not  produced  in  the  case  of  static

electricity. There must be likewise observed in electric waves the facility with

which  they  pass  through  very  narrow  slits  while  square  openings  large

enough for the insertion of a finger will not allow them to pass. Electric

waves appear to behave as if they were rigid and similar to a metal disc

which passes without difficulty through a sufficiently large slit, but is stopped

by an orifice smaller than its diameter.

  We  often  indeed  had  occasion,  in  the  course  of  our  experiments,  to

observe the facility with which the electric waves travel round obstacles. This

is evidently a diffraction phenomenon depending on the size of the waves

produced by the radiator employed. Whether, in the preceding experiments,

the radiator be placed before, behind, or at the side of the face of the box

containing the receiver, with an imperfectly fitting metal door the bell will act

equally well. It is precisely for this reason that, with apparatus as sensitive as

ours, it would have been very difficult,

  as  has  been  said,  for  Hertz  to  effect  his  researches  on  the  refraction,reflection,  and  polarization  of  the  waves  of  which  he  discovered  the

existence. If Lodge was able to repeat them with filings-tubes it is because,

from  the  very  nature  of  their  construction,  they  possessed  no  greater

sensitiveness than the receivers of Hertz.

  It is the passing round obstacles through the effects of diffraction which

has  above  all  contributed  to  deceive  observers  as  to  the  transparency  of

voluminous bodies to electric waves. Whether it be a liquid, an electric, or an

acoustic wave which is in question, an obstacle is all the more effectively

passed round the greater the wave length relatively to the dimensions of the

obstacle. The sound of a flute played behind a house is less perceptible than

that  of  a  trombone,  precisely  because  the  sound  waves  produced  by  the

trombone are longer than those produced by the flute, and consequently pass

more easily round the house. Electric waves, being very large, easily pass

round large obstacles; while light rays, being very small, can only pass round

obstacles of the dimension of a hair. It is for this reason that the phenomenon

of diffraction, so easy of observation in sound and electric waves, has been so

difficult to establish in the case of light. It is solely because he could not

observe it, that Newton contested the wave theory of undulations. If light,

said he, were constituted of waves, bodies would have no shadows, because

the waves would turn round their edges as sound turns a corner and liquid

waves a rock.

  From what has been said, we may conclude that rigidly closed metallic

screens, however slight the

    thickness of the metal, offer an absolute obstacle to the passage of electric

waves.

  It will not be without its use to point out that in practice the protection

afforded  by  metallic  envelopes  will  always  be  illusory,  because  it  is

extremely difficult to make hermetically closed envelopes.

  Our researches prove that metals are opaque to electric waves, but their

transparency,  which  seemed,  moreover,  demonstrated  by  all  the  early

experiments, offered nothing improbable. This transparency, no doubt, did

not agree with Maxwell's equations, but as one can never get anything out of

an equation which has not been previously put into it, it would have sufficed

to put in something else to have drawn out quite different conclusions. Metals

are very transparent, as we saw in another chapter, to electric and magnetic

lines of force, and nothing proved absolutely that they were not so to electric

waves.  It  was,  therefore,  experiment  alone  that  allowed  the  question  to  be

decided.

  § 3.— Transparency of Non-Conducting Bodies to Electric Waves

  The transparency of non-conducting bodies to the Hertzian waves, which

has been known since the first researches of Hertz, is confirmed by all the

experiments of wireless telegraphy. But is this transparency complete ? Do

the Hertzian waves really pass through hills and houses, as we have been

taught ?

  One may ask—(1) If the transparency of non-metallic bodies does not

vary with the bodies and

  also with their thickness ? (2) If the transparency of very vokiminous

bodies Uke hills is not merely an appearance resulting from the fact that the

electric waves, resembling in this sound waves, pass round obstacles ?

  To  resolve  these  questions  definitely,  the  following  experiments  were

effected in conjunction with M. Branly :—

  We  first  had  constructed  a  box  of  Portland  cement  with  sides  10

centimetres thick, of which the side left open could be closed by a metal door

carefully adjusted and capable of being hermetically closed by screws. The

instruments designed to reveal the passage of the waves—that is to say, a

needle galvanometer, a battery, an electric bell, and the filings-tube which

becomes a conductor as soon as it is struck by the electric waves—were

placed in this box before it was closed.

  After hermetically closing the case, and placing close to it a radiator with

balls  operated  by  a  15  centimetre  spark  coil,  the  apparatus  was  put  in

operation. From the first spark we knew by the ringing that the sides of the

box were perfectly transpierced.

  The experiment was repeated by moving the radiator gradually farther

and farther off, and we verified, by the silence of the bell, that from more

than 7 metres away no electric wave passed through the case. It then sufiiced

to loosen the screws of the door to hear the bell ring, which showed clearly

that the walls of the case constituted the sole obstacle to the passage of the

electric waves. After drying for several days, the case became a little more

transparent, but still the radiator ceased to act at a greater distance than 12

metres

  These first experiments proved that if an enclosure surrounded by a wall

of  mortar  12  centimetres  thick  allows  the  electric  waves  to  pass,  it  still

exercises a notable absorption, and becomes quite opaque at a little distance.  To confirm this apparent influence of the thickness of the surrounding

wall, we caused to be constructed a second box of cement, similar to the first,

and only differing in that its walls were 30 centimetres thick. Twelve hours

after  it  was  finished,  and  while  it  was  yet  quite  damp,  it  showed  itself

absolutely opaque to the Hertzian waves, even when we placed the radiator a

few centimetres from its sides. As it dried, it allowed a few waves to pass

through, but only when the radiator was not farther off than about 1 metre.

Beyond that distance, it remained opaque.

  These experiments confirmed the first, and showed that the absorption

increased, as might have been supposed, with the thickness. They seemed to

indicate also that water possessed noticeably absorbent properties.

  To verify this last fact, we had a wooden box constructed with walls 30

centimetres thick and filled with dry sand. In the middle was left a cavity

closed by a metal door, arranged to receive the apparatus revealing the waves.

    Everything being thus ready, the radiator was put in operation, and we

found that the sand behaved like an absolutely transparent body, exercising

no absorption, perceptibly at least, at the distance of 40 metres, which was all

that was at our disposal.

  We then poured into the case as much water as the sand would absorb,

and, on repeating the experiment,

  L

  a considerable diminution in the transparency was observed.

  The ease with which the dry sand allowed itself to be traversed, led us to

suppose that coarse-grained bodies, such as stone, might be much more easily

traversed than cement.

  To verify this we had cut a block of building stone of 1 metre cube, in the

interior of which, as before, was left the little cavity to contain the receiver of

the waves. This cavity was closed by a metal door carefully adjusted.

  The thickness of stone which the electric waves had to cross to reach the

receiver was 40 centimetres. This thickness was, however, traversed without

difficulty, even when we placed the radiator at the extreme limit of the garden

where we were working—that is to say, about 40 metres from the receiver.

Stone was therefore much more transparent than cement.

  The stone was then wetted for several days, and at once its transparency

diminished. It was no longer traversed except when the radiator was placed

within 25 metres distance.

  In the preceding experiments, the dry sand and the dry stone seemed quitetransparent, but this Avas only in appearance, and resulted from the fact that

we had not space enough at our disposal to put the radiator far enough off to

verify the absorption. To convince oneself of this, it is sufficient to reduce the

intensity of the waves emitted by the radiator by using a smaller induction

coil—which  comes  to  exactly  the  same  thing  as  if  the  distance  were  m-

creased with a higher source of radiation. It is then easily verified that the

sand and the stone exercise an

    important  power  of  absorption,  and  are  by  no  means  completely

transparent. With a radiator operated by a coil giving sparks of 2 centimetres

only, the block of dry sand of 30 centimetres thick is no longer traversed at a

greater distance than 16 metres, nor the block of dry stone beyond 13 metres.

  The above figures have, evidently, nothing absolute about them. They

simply prove that the transparency of bodies to electric waves is by no means

complete, as has been supposed. It is evident that according to the intensity of

the source, differences of absorption will be noticed. Waves of 100 metres in

length  pass  through  bodies  better  than  waves  of  20  centimetres,  but  it  is

equally  certain  that  there  must  always  be  some  absorption,  and  that,

consequently,  mountains  and  houses  are  not  traversed  as  was  formerly

supposed.

  I  will  sum  up  all  that  concerns  the  transparency  of  dielectrics  to  the

Hertzian waves in the following propositions:—

  (1) The transparency of non-metallic bodies to Hertzian waves depends

on their nature, and varies considerably from one body to another; (2) this

transparency is always much greater than that of these same bodies to light;

(3) absorption increases in proportion as the thickness of the body in question

increases; (4) humidity greatly increases the absorption ; (5) when the electric

waves meet great obstacles, such as hills, these obstacles are passed round

and not transpierced.

  Though the practical deductions which may be drawn from our researches

do not here concern us, it may not be without interest to point out that the

  preceding  observations  may  find  applications  in  the  establishing  of

wireless telegraphy stations. The electric waves being in part absorbed and

consequently weakened by the small obstacles they meet, and obliged to pass

round the large obstacles, which likewise weakens them, it will always be

useful to place the emitting and receiving stations on elevated points. The

crossing of arms of the sea and the communication of continents with islands,

constitute for the above reasons the best conditions of transmission.    CHAPTER VI

  THE DIFFERENT FORMS OF ELECTRICITY AND THEIR ORIGIN

  § 1.— Does the Electricity Derived from Matter Exist in Matter ?

    According to a theory which in the last few years has become a dogma

for many physicists, matter is composed entirely of electric particles called

electrons, and its most fundamental property, inertia, is of electro-magnetic

origin.

  My Avork on L'Evolution de la Matiere has already shown how little

foundation there is for this hypothesis. But in order not to complicate an

already difficult statement of novel things, I have kept to the almost classic

terms derived from this theory. It can, moreover, in no way interfere with my

statement,  since  things  happen  in  appearance  as  if  electricity  existed

completely formed in matter.

  THE DIFFERENT FORMS OF ELECTRICITY 165

  instead of being, as I maintain, a secondary transformation of intra-atomic

energy.

  The theory of electrons is now popular. The proof of this will be found in

the following passage of a speech made by Mr. Balfour, then Prime Minister

of England, at one of the recent meetings of the British Association for the

Advancement of Science. The speaker defends in it the new ideas with all the

ardour of a neophyte:—

  " Learned men," he said, " have come to look on brute matter as a simple

appearance, of which electricity is, physically, the real basis, and to think that

the  elementary  atom  of  the  chemist  is  nothing  more  than  a  systematic

grouping of electric monads or electrons—which are not electrified matter,

but electricity itself."

  This theory, which everywhere confounds cause and effect, is not derived

from mathematical arguments alone. It is also based on the interpretation of

certain observations, such as the composition of the emissions of radio-active

bodies, the phenomenon of Zeeman, &c. But the fact which—unconsciously

at least—has perhaps most influenced the ideas of the learned is certainly the

facility with which electricity is drawn from matter. It may be said, without

too much exaggeration, that it is impossible to touch matter without causing

electricity to come forth from it. It might also be said, and this time without

any exaggeration at all, that a body cannot be touched without heat coming

forth from it. No one, however, dreams of asserting that matter is composed

of calorific particles.  If the fluid called electricity existed complete in matter, it would be in an

utterly inexplicable state of

    condensation. We know, in fact, that it is easy to extract from a small

particle of matter a quantity of electricity out of all proportion to that which

we  can  retain  upon  bodies  of  great  volume.  A  small  part  of  the  96,000

coulombs  drawn  from  the  decomposition  of  9  grammes  of  water  would

charge with electricity to a potential of 7000 volts a globe as large as the

earth.

  It must therefore be admitted that if electricity exists in matter, it is found

there in a form which we cannot conceive. It is impossible to imagine a kind

of  condensation  by  the  drawing  together  of  the  electrons  supposed  to

compose the electric fluid, for they would exercise with regard to one another

such immense repulsions that matter could not exist for a single instant. In

my last book we saw that, if a charge of 1 coulomb could be concentrated on

a small sphere and brought within 1 centimetre of another sphere bearing a

similar charge, the work produced by its displacement at a velocity of 10

centimetres  per  second  would  be  equal  to  eighty-two  thousand  million

kilogram metres, or over one thousand million horse-power in the same space

of time.

  But if electricity does not exist in matter, how can it be explained that it is

so  easy  to  draw  the  first-named  from  the  second  ?  When  matter  was

considered as an inert thing only restoring the energy with which it had been

at first supplied, no answer could be given to this question. Since I have

shown that, contrary to the old belief, matter constitutes a colossal reservoir

of a special energy— intra-atomic energy —it has become easy to explain

how it is possible, at the expense of this energy, to obtain heat,

  THE DIFFERENT FORMS OF ELECTRtCtTY 167

    electricity,  or  any  other  force.  Without  invoking  any  unknown

phenomenon, I have shown how a tiny atom contains an immense quantity of

energy. By calculations needless to reproduce, I have shown that a sphere the

size of a pin's head, revolving on its own axis with the speed of projection of

the cathode particles, represents an amount of kinetic energy equal to that

produced in an hour by fifteen hundred steam-engines of 500 horse-power

each.

  The rotary movements attributed to the elements of matter alone explain

how  the  particles  of  radio-active  bodies  are  projected  into  space  with  a

velocity of the same order as that of light.  These  velocities  of  rotation  are  necessary  not  only  to  explain  the

projections just mentioned, but also the equilibrium of the elements of which

the atoms are formed. In the same way as the top falls to the CTOund the

moment it ceases to turn, the elements of matter only keep themselves in

equilibrium  by  their  movements.  If  these  last  were  stopped  for  a  single

instant, all bodies would be reduced to an invisible dust of ether, and would

no longer be anything.

  This is why it has been possible to compare the atom to a small solar

system composed of particles ofravitatino^ round one or several centres at an

im-mense velocity. So soon as, from some cause or another, the centrifugal

force  resulting  from  the  rotation  of  these  elements  exceeds  the  force  of

attraction  which  keeps  them  in  their  orbits,  the  particles  of  the  periphery

escape into space by following the tangent of the curve they pursue, like a

stone hurled from a sling.

  In my last book we considered electricity as an intermediary substance

between matter and the ether,

  resulting from certain disturbances of equilibrium of the ether following

upon the partial disaggregation of the atoms. According to the nature of these

disturbances,  light,  heat,  electricity,  &c.,  result;  but  the  elements  which

produce these effects have in themselves nothing electrical nor calorific.

  If, therefore, matter can, by dissociating itself, produce various energies

—light,  heat,  electricity,  &c,  —this  does  not  in  any  way  say  that  it  is

composed of light, heat, or electricity. The conception of electrons, a near

relative to the old phlogiston, is, as has been well shown by Professor de

Heen, one of the most unfortunate metaphysical ideas recently formulated.

  § 2.— The Various Forms of Electricity.

  The notion of a disturbance of equilibrium as the origin of any kind of

force, is fundamental, and must always be present in the mind in order to

understand  the  various  forms  of  energy.  Particles  at  rest  are  no  more

electricity than the ether at rest is light. When the equilibrium of this ether is

disturbed, it experiences certain vibrations which we call light. As soon as

these  vibrations  cease,  the  ether  regains  its  equilibrium,  and  the  light

disappears.  It  is  the  same  with  electricity.  As  soon  as  the  particles

constituting the fluid termed electric are no longer in equilibrium, then, and

only  then,  appear  the  phenomena  called  electricity.  They  disappear  when

these  particles  regain  their  equilibrium.  One  ought  no  more  to  speak  of

neutral electricity than of neutral movement, neutral heat, or neutral light.  All forms of energy being produced by disturbances of equilibrium, it

results  from  this  that  by  varying  these  disturbances  we  generate  different

forces. To

  THE DIFFERENT FORMS OF ELECTRICITY 169

  find new means of modifying the equilibria of matter and of the ether, is

to discover new energies. So long as the equilibrium of the ether could only

be modified in one single fashion, we only observed light. When we learned

how to create new forms of equilibrium, we obtained the action of induction,

Hertzian waves, the X-rays, &c.

  It is entirely because the means of modifying the equilibria of the ether

and of matter are now becoming multiplied that Ave witness the discovery of

new manifestations of energy. Science classifies them with much difficulty,

not being able to connect them with things already known. The confusion

which results from this will be easily made plain by the examination of the

various  phenomena  which  are  still  classed  at  present  under  the  name  of

electricity.

  The following enumeration comprises forms of energy, very dissimilar,

but possessing the common characteristic of being able, directly or indirectly,

to produce what is called an electric charge. This is the only reason which

permits things so different to be classed under the head of electricity. If we

adopted in a general way this very summary process of classification, we

should have to call heat all the causes which always produce it—for example,

friction and movement.

  1. The Electric Fluid. —We suppose it to be constituted by the union of

the electric particles to which reference will be made later on. After having

admitted the existence of two fluids—the one positive, the other negative—

the tendency now is to recognize only one, formed of negative elements. The

positive fluid would thus be composed of material particles deprived of some

of their negative corpuscles.

  2. Static Electricity. —Formed by tlie accumulation of the electric fluid

on  a  body.  Is  characterized  by  the  power  of  producing  attractions  and

repulsions but exercises no action on a magnet.

  3. Dynamic Electricity. —When a body charged with static electricity is

connected by a conducting wire to an unelectrified body, it flows into this

wire with a velocity which may reach that of light, and produces an electric

current by the sole fact that the electric fluid is in motion ; the wire which

conducts it is itself surrounded by a field called magnetic, because it enjoysall the properties of a magnet.

  4.  Magnetism.  —  Particular  forms  of  electricity  characterized  b}^

equilibria of unknown nature. Magnetism can in certain conditions generate

an electric current, in the same Avay that the electric current can generate

magnetism.

  5.  The  Electric  AtoTns  or  Electrons.  —  Particles  called  electric,  of

definite magnitude, supposed to be constituted by vortices of the ether. May

exist  without  material  support  in  Crookes'  tubes,  and  in  the  emissions  of

radio-active  bodies.  Can  pass  through  metal  plates  when  their  velocity  is

sufiicient.

  6. Cathode Rays. —Formed by the projection of electric particles in a

tube through which a current passes after a vacuum has been created in it.

  7.  X-Rays.  —Constituted  by  disturbances  in  the  ether  of  a  form  still

unknown, and taking birth when the cathode rays strike an obstacle. Pass

through thick plates of metal. Possess no magnetic or electric property.

  8.  Negative  Ions.  —Supposed  to  be  formed  of  electric  particles

surrounded by attraction with material elements.

  THE DIFFERENT FORMS OF ELECTRICITY 171

  9. Positive Ions. —Must bo constituted by material atoms having lost

their negative particles. Have never been isolated.^

  10. The Ionic Fluid. — Formed of positive or negative ions mixed with

gaseous particles. Can circulate through a metal worm before the elements of

which it is formed rc-combine.

  11. Neutral Electricity. —Form of electricity totally unknown of which

no reagent can reveal the presence, and supposed to be constituted by the

union  of  the  positive  and  negative  fluids.  It  is  more  and  more  generally

admitted that it can have no existence.

  12. Electricity Condensed in Chemical Compounds. —Form of electricity

which is believed to exist in the neutral state in chemical compounds. Only

appears in the state of positive or negative fluid. Must exist in bodies in a

state of extreme condensation, since there can be taken from one gramme of

water  a  quantity  of  electricity  much  exceeding  that  which  it  would  be

possible to keep on a globe the size of the earth.

  13.  Electric  Waves.  —Disturbances  of  the  ether  which  accompany

electric  discharges  and  are  propagated  by  vibrations  in  the  ether  with  a

velocity which can attain that of light. They are to ordinary electricity what

radiant heat is to the calorific phenomena of which matter may be the seat.By induction, the electric waves may generate at a dis-

  ^ It seems to me that the author here loses sight of the significance of his

own experiment described in V^volution de la Matiere (p. 385 and Fig. 62).

The " elements coming from the dematerialization of matter" which he there

shows as passing through sheets of dielectric substances can be nothing but

"positive ions," that is to saj^ sub-atomic particles of matter associated with a

positive charge. It is difficult to see any distinction between these and the

"Ionic Fluid" next mentioned.— Ed.

  tance  on  the  bodies  they  strike  currents  of  electricity  capable  of

manifesting themselves in the form of sparks.

  Thus,  then,  by  the  sole  fact  of  producing  in  the  ether  or  in  matter

dissimilar disturbances of equilibrium, we create very different forces. It is

only  our  need  of  simplification  which  leads  us  to  put  them  together.  We

might evidently even further simplify them by saying that these energies only

represent transformations of movement, but a definition of this kind would

apply to all phenomena, including those of life. Such generalizations only

translate our imorance into other words.

  BOOK II

  THE PROBLEMS OF HEAT AND OF LIGHT

    CHAPTER I

  THE PROBLEMS OF HEAT

  § 1.— Old and Neiv Ideas on the Causes of Heat

  Hardly any scientific subject has called forth so many researches as heat.

Thanks to them, thermodynamics and the energetic theory, which are derived

from it, have become precise and fertile sciences.

  But if we simply ask ourselves what these researches have revealed as to

the causes of heat, we are bound to acknowledge that we are hardly more

advanced than we were a century ago. We cannot find much to add to the

following lines written by the illustrious Humphry Davy, a hundred years

ago:—

  " Since all matter may be made to fill a smaller volume by cooling, it is

evident that the particles of matter must have ♦space between them; and since

every body can communicate the power of expansion to a body of a lower

temperature, that is, can give an expansive motion to its particles, it is a

probable inference that its own particles are possessed of motion; but as there

is no change in the position of

  its parts as long as its temperature is uniform, the motion, if it exist, mustbe a vibratory or undulating motion, or a motion of the particles round their

axes, or a motion of particles round each other.

  " It seems possible to account for all the phenomena of heat, if it be

supposed  that  in  solids  the  particles  are  in  a  constant  state  of  vibratory

motion, the particles of the hottest bodies moving with the greatest velocity,

and through the greatest space; that in fluids and elastic fluids, besides the

vibratory motion, which must be conceived greatest in the last, the particles

have a motion round their own axes, with different velocities, the particles of

elastic  fluids  moving  with  the  greatest  quickness;  and  that  in  etherial

substances the particles move round their own axes, and separate from each

other,  penetrating  in  right  lines  through  space.  Temperature  may  be

conceived  to  depend  upon  the  velocities  of  the  vibrations  ;  increase  of

capacity on the motion being performed in greater space; and the diminution

of temperature during the conversion of solids into' fluids or gases, may be

explained on the idea of the loss of vibratory motion, in consequence of the

revolution  of  particles  round  their  axes,  at  the  moment  when  the  body

becomes  fluid  or  aeriform,  or  from  the  loss  of  rapidity  of  vibration,  in

consequence of the motion of the particles through greater space."

  At the present day, as in the time of Davy, we suppose that heat must be

the consequence of the movements, vibratory, rotatory, &g., of the particles

of matter. All researches on the structure of atoms have justified the existence

of these move-

  ments.  Every  atom  is  now  compared  to  a  solar  system.  Naturally  we

never observe these movements, and mechanical considerations alone lead us

to suppose them identical with those of the planets round the sun.

  Every  component  particle  of  these  atoms  must  be  animated  by  two

movements: (1) Rotation of the particle on itself; (2) Revolution round a

centre. These movements may vary, as may the speed of translation, and also

the diameter of the orbit traversed. By compelling the molecules to move

nearer to or farther from each other, they explain the dilatation of bodies by

heat and their contraction by cold.

  The variations of equilibrium of these elements in motion should produce

magnetism, electricity, and heat, but we are entirely ignorant of the way these

forces are generated.

  We are able to measure heat without knowing anything of its essence.

The  expression  "  a  quantity  of  heat"  constitutes  an  arbitrary  notion

representing the measurement of an effect the cause of which is unknown. " Itis nothing else," writes M. Duhem, " than the measurement given by the

calorimeter,  and  is  not  otherwise  defined.  The  quantity  of  heat  which  is

disengaged in a modification is, by definition, a quantity proportional to the

weight of water which this modification would raise from the temperature of

zero to that of one degree." The insufficiency of such a conception is evident.

    Physicists have at length, however, laid aside this problem of the causes

of heat, and, Avithout inquiring how movements can be transformed into

heat,  they  have  confined  themselves  to  endeavouring  to  determine  their

nature. Although the problem has

  been taken in hand by such physicists as Clausius and Hehiiholtz, no

success  has  crowned  their  efforts.  Assimilating,  to  simj)lify  matters,  the

elements of bodies to material points in motion, they have admitted that the

average  force  of  this  movement  was  proportional  to  the  temperature,  and

have  endeavoured  to  deduce  from  it  the  laws  of  thermodynamics,  and,

notably, the principle of Carnot, by means of the theorems of mechanics. It is

pretty generally admitted nowadays that this attempt has completely failed. It

has  furnished,  moreover,  no  sort  of  hint  either  as  to  the  variations  of

trajectory described by the particles of bodies, according to their solid, liquid,

or gaseous state, nor on the results of their reciprocal actions.

  The early physicists regarded the problem in a much simpler way. For

them it was a fluid impregnating all bodies and disengaging itself by com-

l3Ustion. This theory, called the phlogistic, was much shaken when Lavoisier

proved that, far from losing weight by combustion, bodies on the contrary

trained it. Yet at the time of Carnot, heat was still considered to be a fluid that

bodies could part with or absorb, and only differing from the old phlogiston

by its imponderability.

  In the long run physicists gave up the idea of a calorific fluid; but after

taking infinite trouble, for more than fifty years, to substitute the mechanical

theory of heat produced by movement for that of the conception of a fluid,

they seem now—in a rather roundabout way, however—about to return to the

latter. As Professor de Heen has very justly remarked, " The old idea of

mixing the phlogistic fluid with matter is identical Avith the one currently

accepted,

  wliich consists in mixing with matter electric corpuscles." There is as

much reason for imagining atoms of heat as there is for imagining atoms of

electricity.

  The  ancient  idea  that  heat  was  a  kind  of  fluid  has  been  very  fertile.Without it Sadi Carnot would, perhaps, never have thought of comparing the

flow of heat to that of a liquid, and, no doubt, would never have discovered

the principle which bears his name and has so deeply modified the direction

of the sciences of physics and chemistry.

  It  must  be  fully  recognized,  moreover,  that  if  physicists  and  chemists

reject the idea of assimilating heat to a fluid, they nearly always treat it as if it

really were one. Chemists constantly speak of heat as absorbed or liberated

by a body. According to them, when a combination is formed it should keep

this  heat  indefinitely  until  it  is  destroyed.  It  then  gives  it  up  in  quantity

exactly equal to that absorbed. Physicists, for their part, tell us that when a

body is heated it absorbs heat and restores it as it cools. We should express

ourselves no otherwise if heat were really a fluid.

  The mathematicians themselves often employ similar language. All their

formulas have been framed as if heat were constituted by a fluid. Laplace,

Poisson,  Lame,  &c.,  assimilated  caloric  to  an  expansive  fluid,  and  the

temperature of the particles to the tension of the fluid in them. The variations

of  heat  were  explained  by  changes  between  these  particles  of  caloric

proportional to the difterence of their respective temperatures. At the present

day, when heat is considered to be a vibratory movement of the particles of

matter, we often still continue to

  M

  argue as if it were a fluid, of which it possesses, in fact, many of the

properties.

  " The analogy existing between the propagation of heat in athermanous

bodies and the filtration of fluids through porous masses is so close," writes

M. Bous-sinesq in his Theurie analytique de la Chaleur, " that we might seek

to obtain from it a mechanical theory of conductivity if there Avere such a

thing as a caloric fluid."

  We are not certain, moreover, that this fluid does not exist. Electrons are

beginning  to  be  made  to  play  a  great  part  in  calorific  phenomena.  After

having brought us back to the old electric fluid, they are perhaps going to

revive  the  caloric  fluid.  For  the  moment  our  ignorance  on  this  point  is

complete.

  §  2.—  Changes  of  State  of  Bodies  under  the  Influence  of  Heat  and

Variations of Energy resulting therefrom

  The  effects  of  heat  on  matter  are  of  daily  observation.  The  simple

examination of the movements of the thermometer column shows that bodiesdilate with heat and contract with cold. The sensitiveness of matter is such,

that a variation in temperature of the millionth of a degree suflices to modify

its electric resistance in a fashion appreciable by experiment. The slightest

oscillation  in  the  ether  causes  it  to  vibrate  and  radiate.  There  is  thus  a

continuous exchange of energy between matter and the ether.

  It  is  no  longer  possible  at  the  present  day  to  consider  matter

independently of its surroundings. The variations of the latter regulate its

equilibria and also its form, rendering it solid, liquid, or gaseous.

  Matter corresponds to a state of equilibrium between its internal energies

and the external ones which surround it.

  The movements of rotation and of revolution of the elements of the atoms

unceasingly vary under the action of heat. It modifies not only their speed of

rotation, but also the diameters of the orbits traversed. When these increase,

the  particles  of  bodies  move  farther  and  farther  apart,  the  molecular

attractions which constitute cohesion are overcome, and matter passes first

into the liquid, and then into the gaseous state. During these changes, bodies

absorb determinate proportions of heat which they restore in absolutely equal

quantity when they return to their primary state. The energy' absorbed by

matter being then exactly given back, we should be justified in believing that

matter has never either created or destroyed it.

  Heat  may,  from  the  physical  point  of  view,  be  defined  as  a  mode  of

energy  producing  the  change  of  volume  of  bodies,  and  therefore  their

dilatation. This dilatation represents an excellent means of measuring it, but

the thermometer, which is based on this property, can only indicate a small

part of the heat supplied to a body. When, for example, we heat matter to

make it change its state—that is, to liquefy it—we produce three different

effects, of which only one is revealed by the thermometer: (1) we increase its

temperature; (2) we change the internal disposition of its molecules—that is

to say, we effect an internal work which is not revealed by the thermometer;

(3) we change its volume—that is to say, we effect an external work against

external pressure, which, again, is not revealed by the ther-

  mometer. It is therefore only a part of the heat produced which has served

to change the temperature of the body.

  We  can,  on  the  other  hand,  cause  the  temperature  of  a  body  to  vary

without  supplying  or  abstracting  heat  from  it.  This  is  observed  in  the

operations  called  adiabatic,  for  instance,  when  a  gas  is  compressed  in  a

receptacle  impermeable  to  heat.  The  temperature  is  increased  by  thetransformation into heat of the work effected.

  The calorific energy necessary to compel bodies to change their state is

considerable. To transform ice at 0° C. into water at the same temperature, as

much heat must be given it as would raise by one degree 80 times its weight

of  water,  or  80  calories.  If  the  water  again  freezes,  it  restores  the  heat

absorbed. To transform water at 100° C. into steam of the same temperature,

the  necessary  work  is  more  considerable  still,  since  this  transformation

requires 537 times as much heat as would raise the same quantity of water

one degree.^ As before, these 537 calories are  ^ Here are, in kilogrammetres, the different quantities of energy which it

is possible to concentrate in 1 kilogramme of water. It would take too much

space to give the details of the calculation :—

    Kilogrammetres Energy liberated by decomposition under the influence

  of  the  electric  current,  of  1  kilogramuae  of  water  .  1,095,000  Of  1

kilogramme of water vapour at 100° C. condensed

  and frozen at 0° C. ..... 270,725

  Of 1 kilogramme of iron cooled from 1500° C. to 0° . 72,675

    Kinetic  energy  liberated  by  the  impact  of  a  mass  of  iron  weighing  1

kilogramme,  and  animated  by  a  velocity  of  1000  metres  per  second  .  .  .

51,000

  Energy liberated by the discharge of 1 kilogramme of accumulators in

lead, with storage capacity of 10 ampere-hours ..... 7,300

    Maximum of electric energy which can be accumulated in a Leyden jar of

about 1 cubic decimetre capacity . . . , . . 0"05

  exactly restored when the molecules draw together to pass again into the

liquid state—that is to say, when the steam at 100° C. condenses into water

likewise at 100° C.

  To show the magnitude of the energies thus displaced, Tyndall gives the

following  examples  :—The  heat  resulting  from  the  combination  of  1

kilogramme of hydrogen with 8 kilogrammes of oxygen would raise by 1° C.

the temperature of 34,000 kilogrammes of water which corresponds to more

than  14  million  kiloRrammetres.  The  condensation  in  water  of  the  9

kilogrammes of steam formed by this combination, represents a work of more

than 2 million kilo-grammetres. If, by continuing to run down this scale, we

bring the water to the solid state by lowering its temperature, it would still

produce more than 700,000 kilogrammetres.

  The figures representing the forces necessary to modify the molecular

states are evidently considerable when judged by our usual units of energy,

but  they  are  immensely  feeble  compared  with  the  intra-atomic  forces  of

which we have elsewhere studied the magnitude.

  We must bear in mind from what precedes the constancy of the figures

representing the calorific energy displaced in the different variations of the

state  of  matter.  That  which  it  absorbs  in  order  to  pass  from  one  state  to

another is always rigorously Sfiven back when it returns to its first state.

There  are,  then,  simple  displacements  of  energy  Avithout  destruction  or

creation.  This fact, so constantly observed, seemed a very solid argument in favour

not only of the conservation of energy, but also of the important notion

  that matter and energy are two very distinct things, the first coming as a

support to the second, but never creating it.

  My readers know how these principles have been overthrown. Practically,

however,  the  ancient  notions  retain  all  their  value.  For,  if  matter  is  an

enormous reservoir of energy, and is able to disappear by transforming itself

into energy, we do not yet know how to extract from it any but insignificant

quantities of this last.

  § o.— Can Heat serve as the Measure of all Fomns of Energy ?

  In all the changes of state of bodies, we have spoken solely of the heat

absorbed or liberated,without troubling ourselves about the other forms of

energy. Formerly these were ignored, but the deeper study of the laws of

electrolysis  having  shown  that  the  majority  of  chemical  changes  are

accompanied by the production of a rigidly constant quantity of electricity for

each reaction, it follows that these reactions can be expressed in units of

electricity quite as well as in units of heat. The tendency of the present day is

to measure reactions by the quantity of electricity displaced rather than by the

quantity  of  heat  brought  into  play.  The  generation  of  heat  and  electricity

proceeds by nearly parallel steps ; so that we may ask ourselves whether

these forces may not be secondary manifestations of unknown energies of

which we only perceive the transformations. Chemical energy, for example,

is perhaps as different from the electricity and the heat it generates as these

last are from friction, which can also generate them.

  Heat being very early known, and all forces appearing able to transform

themselves into heat, it was natural to take it as the unit of measurement.

When radiations are allowed to fall on an absorbent surface, we consider

those equivalent which produce the same amount of heating. In this way the

division of energy in the luminous spectrum has been studied. But it now

appears  that  some  very  active  energies  can  be  manifested  under  other

conditions than heat, and cannot, in consequence, be measured by it. The

temperature becomes less and less as we advance towards the extreme ultra-

violet  in  the  solar  spectrum,  and  ends  by  being  so  minute  that  it  is  only

perceptible  to  instruments  of  excessive  sensitiveness.  If  we  confined

ourselves to calorific measurements it might be said that energy is almost nil

at this end of the spectrum. Now, it is, on the contrary, extraordinarily active,

for it dissociates the most resisting bodies, and transforms them into a torrentof particles of the family of the cathode rays.

  There are therefore forms of energy which cannot be reduced to heat, and

which in consequence heat cannot help us to measure. This very important

point will certainly some day attract the attention of physicists.

  I 4.— The Conception of tlce Absolute Zero

  The movements of the particles of heated bodies are communicated to

substances in contact with them, and cause their volume to change. It is on

this fact that the thermometer is based. Plunged into a more or less heated

medium, it indicates the difference of temperature between this medium and

  that  of  the  melting  of  ice  taken  as  zero  during  the  graduation  of  the

instrument.

  This zero is evidently a very arbitrary one, since we might have taken as

the starting-point of the graduation the point of fusion of any body whatever.

All  our  zeros—such  as,  for  instance,  that  of  electric  tension—are  equally

conventional starting-points.

    Physicists, however, ha,ve for a long time been led to conceive for heat a

zero which does indeed deserve the name of absolute which is given to it,

since  the  bodies  brought  to  this  temperature  would  no  longer  retain  any

calorific  energy.  This  conception  was  formed  at  the  time  when  heat  was

considered a fluid. The temperature at which bodies would expel all their

provision of this fluid constituted the absolute zero.

  The theoretic discussions enabling it to be fixed have been numerous.

Laplace and Lavoisier placed the absolute zero between 1500° C. and 3000°

C.  below  melting  ice.  Dalton  fixed  it  at  1500°  C.  The  reasons  for  these

different conclusions were, however, very unconvincing.

    Although it has been abandoned, the theory of the materiality of heat has

continued to weigh on the minds of physicists. Considerations drawn from

the study of thermodynamics have led Lord Kelvin to adopt for the absolute

zero the figure of — 27o° C, already deduced from the consideration that, as

gases  contract  by  irfTjrd  of  their  volume  per  degree,  at  273°  below  the

ordinary zero they could contract no further.

    According to the conception of the absolute zero, bodies would at —273°

C. contain no more heat. If heat be only the consequence of the movements

of the particles of matter, as is generally admitted,

  these movements would cease at the absohite zero. With this cessation

would also disappear, no doubt, the other forces, such as cohesion. One does

not, then, very well see what would become of matter. Several physicists,however, at the present day consider the absolute zero as a theoretical and

unattainable limit which is merely a datum for calculations.

  This theory is much earlier than the date of the discovery of the existence

of intra-atomic energy. We may suppose, in strictness, that relatively weak

intra-molecular  energies  may  disappear  at  a  certain  temperature,  but  it  is

impossible to imagine the vanishing of intra-atomic energies. They are so

considerable, in fact, that to annul them would require force immeasurably

superior to any we have at our disposal. If by any means whatever, such as

lowering  of  the  temperature,  we  succeeded  in  profoundly  disturbing  the

internal equilibria of the elements always in vibration and rotation, of the

atoms of a fragment of matter, they would be disaggregated and would return

to the ether.

  In this chapter, devoted to the study of heat, we have not had to trouble

ourselves with the sensation designated by this term. " That which to our

sensations  is  heat,"  says  Locke,  "is  objectively  only  movement."  The

physicists  study  these  movements,  but  without  having  yet  succeeded  in

explaining them. Heat is a chapter of physics of which a few fragments are

precise, but which is chiefly composed of uncertainties. We shall see the

number of these increase when studying the relations of the movements of

matter produced by heat with those ethereal ones which these movements

generate.

    CHAPTER II

      TRANSFORMATION  OF  MOVEMENTS  OF  MATTER  INTO

VIBRATIONS OF THE ETHER—R.\DIANT HEAT

  I  1.—  Nature  of  Badiant  Heat  —  Absorption  and  Transformation  by

Matter of the Vibrations of the Ether

  The classic term of radiant heat is one of tlie most erroneous in phj^sics,

notwithstanding its apparent accuracy. If we draw near to a tire, it warms us:

it therefore radiates something. What can this sometliing be, if not heat ?

  It took a very long time to discover that a heated body does not radiate

anything resembling heat. It is now known that it produces vibrations of the

ether, which, in themselves, have no temperature, and that it warms us at a

distance because the vibrations of the ether generated by it being affected by

the molecules of the air or the bodies placed before it, generate heat. These

vibrations  are  not  heat,  but  simply  a  cause  of  heat,  as  is  any  movement

whatever.

  This confusion of radiant heat with the heat of bodies, which the text-books  still  perpetuate,  for  a  long  time  prevented  us  from  recognising  the

identity of radiant heat and light, formerly considered to be two different

things.

  That which we call by the very improper name of radiant heat has for its

sole origin the vibrations of the ether. These can produce heat when their

move-

      TRANSFORMATION OF MATERIAL MOVEMENTS 187

  inent is destroyed, as does a stone by its impact, but tbey do not possess, I

repeat, any temperature of their own. Tliis is easily proved by interposing a

lens of ice in the path of a pencil of radiant heat. However intense the pencil

may be, the lens is not melted, while a piece of metal placed in its focus will

become incandescent. The ether having no temperature, and the ice being

very transparent to its vibrations, they have passed through the ice without

melting it. As the metal, on the other hand, stops these vibrations, it becomes

incandescent by absorbing and immediately restoring them under the form of

other vibrations, becoming in its turn a source of that radiant heat without

temperature, the effects of which have just been pointed out.

  Since the vibrations of the ether, called by the name of radiant heat, can

only produce heat after their absorption by a body, it is evident that in the

celestial spaces, where an atmosphere like that surrounding the earth does not

exist, an absolute cold must reign in the neighbourhood of incandescent stars,

such as the sun. The thermometer dipped into these spaces would, however,

mark there a very high temperature, because it would intercept the vibrations

of the ether. The temperature recorded by it would not be that of the ambient

medium, but its own temperature. Ice would not melt, because it allows the

vibrations of the ether to pass without stopping them. Metal would become

incandescent, because it absorbs the same vibrations.

  Life is only possible on our globe by reason of the absorption of the

vibrations of the ether by the atmosphere and the earth; if these last were

trans-

  parent to them, a very intense cold would reign on the surface of our

planet.

  All the chemical reactions which take place in the interior of vegetables,

notably the transformation of carbonic acid into carbon, have their origin in

this absorption.^

  The vibrations of the ether when absorbed by a

  1 It was Robert Mayer, the immortal author of the theory of conservationof energy, who first had the idea of this correlation of natural forces.

  This obscure little doctor, so ignored by his contemporaries, so contested

after his death, was, writes Tyndall, "a man of genius, animated solely by

love for the subject adopted by him, who arrived at the most important results

long in advance of those whose life is wholly devoted to the study of the

physical  sciences."  If  the  importance  of  a  scholar  is  measured  by  the

consequences of his works, it might be said that Mayer was one of the five or

six greatest men of his century. Ry the simple application of his principle of

the  conservation  of  energy,  all  the  physico-chemical  sciences  have  been

deeply transformed. Darwin and Pasteur alone have exercised so profound an

influence.  Notwithstanding  his  independence,  Tyndall  did  not  dare  to

reproduce in the last edition of his work on Heat, the passage I have quoted

above. The official professors, who saw the principle of Mayer daily growing

in importance, could not accept the fact that so considerable a discovery had

not issued from their own laboratories, and united their efforts to try and

eft'ace  from  the  annals  of  science  the  great  name  cf  Mayer.  We  learn  a

curious example of this frame of mind by reading the string of abuse which

Dr.  Tait,  Professor  of  Physics  at  Edinburgh,  levels  at  Mayer  in  his  book

Recent Advance of Physical Sciences, published some thirty years ago. "

Mayer," he says, " by a lucky chance, came across a method which has turned

out a good one." It was a lucky chance, indeed, which allowed a discovery to

be  made  which  no  one  had  suspected,  and  the  numerical  value  of  the

mechanical  equivalent  of  heat  to  be  found  out,  the  simple  verification  of

which cost Joule ten years of researches with all the resources of a great

laboratory. This epithet of " lucky chance " is, however, freelj- applied to

those who discover anything. In a long polemic published in a great English

journal,  between  a  member  of  the  Royal  Institution  who  upheld  my

researches  and  a  Cambridge  pliysicist  who  attacked  them,  the  latter

recognised that the universal dissociation of matter which I had made known

was "• the most important theory of modern physics," but, he added, I had

only discovered it by a "lucky guess." All the merit was due to the specialists

who had taken steps to check its accuracy.

      TRANSFORMATION OF MATERIAL MOVEMENTS 189

  body  may  then  be  retained  by  it,  and  become  the  origin  of  various

chemical  transformations.  They  are  thus  fixed  until  the  time  when,  by

decomposing the body—that is to say, by bringing it back to its former state

—we make them reappear under the form of heat. We have here one proofthe  more  of  the  intimate  relations  of  the  ether  with  matter,  and  of  the

exchanges of energy of which it is the seat.

  If the vibrations of the ether absorbed by matter are.not used in chemical

transformations, they only raise the temperature of bodies, and disappear by

radiation with a rapidity dependent on the structure of these bodies or of the

substances with which they are covered. A vessel of polished metal loses its

heat by slow degrees, and this is why we employ it to keep liquids at a high

temperature. The same metal, if covered with lacquer, on the other hand,

rapidly parts with its heat. These are facts long known, which Lister in other

days put in evidence by his cube full of boiling water, the faces of which

were composed of different metals. Each face radiated different quantities of

heat.

  All  these  facts  find  a  rudimentary  explanation  in  the  phenomenon  of

acoustic resonance. A tuning-fork insensible to the most violent noise will

vibrate if struck by sound waves of suitable periods. It will even be able to

pick out these sound waves from a mixture of very dissimilar sounds. It is

therefore  sensitive  to  some  and  insensitive  to  others.  It  is  the  same  with

bodies struck by radiant heat. They only absorb certain vibrations and let

others pass by them. I shall return to this point in the next chapter.

  § 2.— Permanence of the Radiation of Matter

  Until the absolute zero is reached, matter unceasingly sends vibrations

into the ether. A block of ice may therefore be considered as much a source

of heat, and for the same reasons, as a. fragment of glowing charcoal. The

only difference between them is in the quantity radiated. The frozen plains of

the Pole are a source of radiant heat like the burning plains of the Equator,

and  if  the  sensitiveness  of  the  photographic  plate  were  not  so  limited,  it

w^ould  be  possible  in  the  very  darkest  night  to  reproduce  the  images  of

bodies by their own radiations, when refracted by the lenses of a camera

obscura.

    Naturally, these radiations, which all bodies constantly emit, only act on

the thermometer when it is plunged into a medium colder than itself. If the

instrument is first placed in a refrigerating mixture, capable of lowering the

column of liquid to a level corresponding to —50° C, and then placed in front

of a block of ice at 0" C, the heat radiated by this block will raise by 50°—

that is to say, will bring back to zero—the temperature of the instrument. But

if this last already marks zero—that is to say, is already at the temperature of

the  ice—evidently  no  movement  of  the  column  of  liquid  can  reveal  theradiation. The ice would continue radiating on to the thermometer and the

latter on to the ice, but they would only be exchanging their radiations. The

radiation  would  therefore  none  the  less  go  on,  though  marked  by  this

exchange.  When  we  say  that  a  body  becomes  cool  by  radiation,  we

necessarily imply that it is plunged into a medium with a lower temperature

than its own. Receiving from the latter

      TRANSFORMATION OF MATERIAL MOVEMENTS 191

  less heat than it imparts to it, its temperature is lowered until that of the

two bodies is equal.

  When we are obliged to keep at a low temperature a body which is to be

placed in a medium of higher temperature, we surround it with substances

impermeable to radiation, and thence called ather-manous. Wool and furs

possess this property. Pictet has shown that for temperatures below — 70° C.

the  majority  of  athermanous  bodies  lose  their  properties  and  become

diathermanous. We can only keep air liquid by enclosing it in double-walled

vessels, between the walls of which a vacuum is made, and the inner surface

of which is silvered. These vessels can also be used to keep liquids very hot,

since they prevent the absorption as well as the emission of radiations.

  § 3.— The Electric Emissions luhich accompany Heat

  We have just seen that matter is always absorbing and radiating. The

exchange between it and the ether never ceases. The vibrations of the ether

intercepted  by  matter  are  subjected  by  it  to  various  transformations  of  a

mechanism unknown to us, and of which we only perceive the extreme terms.

  I  have  never  ceased  to  insist  in  this  and  my  preceding  work  on  the

relations of the ether with matter. They again appear when we examine the

electric phenomena accompanying the calorific variations of bodies.

  - Physicists have had for a long time an inkling of the kinship between

heat and electricity, and recognize more and more that the production of the

one is accompanied by the simultaneous manifestation of

  the other. A body which is subjected to friction generates both heat and

electricity. The heat which is propagated throughout a wire by the simple

twisting of it on itself, generates electricity. A substance which liberates heat

when combining with another, liberates electricity at the same time.

  It is known also that the electric and calorific conductivities are sensibly

in the same ratios for all metals. Those which are good conductors of heat are

the same for electricity, and conversely. The chief difference lies in the speed

of propagation. Immense in the case of electricity, this is, on the contrary,very slow in that of heat.

  If heat easily transforms itself into electricity, the latter no less easily

transforms itself into heat. It suffices to pass a current through a metal wire to

see the latter become more or less red-hot according to its resistance. If a

current be sent through a conducting wire half platinum and the other half

silver, the platinum becomes white-hot, while the silver wire, a tenfold better

conductor—that  is  to  say,  offering  less  resistance  to  the  passage  of  the

electricity—remains dark.

  The  recent  researches  mentioned  in  my  last  book  make  it  possible  to

follow much further the course of this analysis. We now know that when, by

one means or the other, a body is made incandescent, it emits not only radiant

heat  and  light—which  are,  moreover,  exactly  the  same  thing—but,  in

addition, torrents of electric particles. We have even reached the point of

admitting—an hypothesis which the experiments of Zeeman seem to confirm

—that a flame consists only of electric particles in vibration. The movements

of these electrons, propagated

      TRANSFORMATION OF MATERIAL MOVEMENTS 193

  in the ether, would generate radiant heat and light. It is, however, very

possible  that  the  liberation  of  electric  particles  which  accompany

incandescence and many other chemical reactions, is only in many cases a

secondary phenomenon, a kind of unutilized excess of the energies employed

in modifying the equilibria of matter.

  A constant relation ought to exist between the intra-molecular and intra-

atomic energies. Atoms represent the stones of which the molecular edifices

are  built.  In  all  the  operations  of  ordinary  chemistry,  we  simply  displace

those stones, and this is, no doubt, why the quantities of heat or electricity

then brought into play are always met with again. When by various means,

very inadequate as yet, we touch the structure of the stones of the edifice—

that is, of the atoms—we liberate, in the form of heat, or electricity, quantities

of  intra-atomic  forces  of  which  the  magnitude  will  vary  according  to  the

disturbances of equilibrium produced, and may bear no relation to the causes

of such changes.

  The  whole  of  this  and  the  preceding  chapter  are,  if  looked  upon  as

explanations, evidently insufficient. Notwithstanding all the formulas with

which it, bristles, this region of physics is extremely obscure. The problem of

heat is one of the most difficult, because its solution demands the knowledge

of things which are as yet very difficult of access.    CHAPTER III

      TRANSFORMATION OF MATTER INTO LIGHT

  § 1,— The Emissio7i of Ligld by Matter

  Light is produced by vibrations of matter propagated under tbe form of

waves  in  the  ether.  When  these  waves  possess  a  length  suitable  for

impressing the eye, we give them the name of visible light. We call them

invisible when the retina, which is only impressed by a small part of the

whole extent of the solar spectrum, remains insensitive to their action.

  Whether it is the vibrations producing the sensation of blue or red, or

those which are without action on the eye, such as the infra-red or the ultra-

violet, that are in question, they are all of the same species, only differ by

their  frequency,  and  all  deserve  the  name  of  light.  From  this  general

definition there -springs a first consequence. We ought to give the name of

light to the visible or invisible radiations emitted by matter at all temperatures

down to the absolute zero, as we have seen when studying radiant heat.

  Matter, then, is incessantly transformed into light at all temperatures. An

eye with a retina sensitive enough would see in the dark all objects as if

surrounded by a luminous halo, and darkness would be unknown to it. Such

an eye perhaps does not exist, but different instruments allow us to make a

substitute for it.

      TRANSFORMATION OF MATTER INTO LIGHT 195

  Let  us  now  examine  some  of  the  conditions  of  the  transformation  of

matter into light.

  When we heat a body, the vibrations of its particles become more rapid,

and its emission of ethereal waves increases. These waves, at first too long to

be perceived, as they get near 500° C. are short enough to become visible and

to give the sensation of red. From 800° to 1000° C. still shorter waves appear,

and the radiations emitted comprise the whole length of the spectrum. Their

slight amplitude alone prevents us from perceiving them. Temperature acts

especially by increasing the amplitude of the waves emitted, which renders

them visible.

  At  each  temperature,  the  heated  body  emits  waves  different  in  length

according  to  its  nature.  The  brilliancy  of  flames  depending  at  equal

temperatures on the ratio between the long and short waves emitted by the

incandescent  body,  those  sources  of  light  which  emit  many  more  of  the

second than of the first will be the more luminous. The brilliancy of the Auer

mantle is due to the weakness of its emissive power in the red and the infra-red  compared  with  its  power  of  emission  in  the  visible  spectrum.  The

temperature (about 1650° to 1700° C.) does not in this ease ditier notably

from that of a simple gas burner.

  As regards the brilliancy of the light, there would be no advantage in

raising too much the temperature of a body, because we should then produce,

as is the case with the electric arc, invisible ultra-violet rays. The more, in

fact, the temperature of a source of light is raised, the more the radiations it

emits are displaced towards the ultra-violet

  THE EVOLUTION OF FORCES

  mx^

  l^ o

  c3 ^

  ^i-" 't.-^

  On the structure of material bodies depends, for un-knoAvn reasons, their

power of emitting various radiations at the same temperature. At 1650° C. tlie

Auer mantle, soaked in a solution of oxide of thorium containing 1 per cent,

of oxide of cerium, emits a great number of brilliant visible,and relatively

I'eAv invisible, radiations. If we modify the proportions of the two oxides, we

see  the  relation  of  the  waves  emitted  at  the  same  temperature  equally

modified. The visible radiations diminish, and the invisible increase. Since

these last produce much more heat than the visible, it has been thought to

utilize the incandescent burner for heating purposes by simply modifying the

proportion of the oxides with which the mantles are steeped. We thus obtain

burners of little illuminating power but giving forth a good deal of heat, while

the burners used for lighting give out, on the contrary, much light and little

heat.

      TRANSFORMATION OF MATTER INTO LIGHT 197

  The radiation of bodies generated by heating is produced by all actions

capable  of  increasing  their  vibrations,  especially  those  chemical  reactions

which furnished the early modes of lighting. As a type, we may quote the

combustion  of  ordinary  gas.  Formed  by  a  mixture  of  hydrogen  and  of

carbides of hydrogen, it combines violently with the oxygen of the air when

lighted. The particles of carbon from the carbide, being liberated and brought

to incandescence, give the flame a brilliancy which pure hydrogen does not

possess. Gas therefore only owes its brilliancy to these incandescent particles

held  in  suspension.  Any  solid  body  whatever—platinum,  for  example—

might replace the particles of carbon.  In reality, the phenomena which take place in any kind of flame—that of

a simple candle, for example—are quite otherwise complicated. So much is

this the case that we might consider a body in combustion, such as a lighted

candle, as one of the phenomena in physics most difficult of explanation, and

involving  the  solution,  of  which  we  have  yet  hardly  a  glimpse,  of  the

problems  relating  to  the  dissociation  of  matter.  All  incandescence  is

accompanied,  in  fact,  by  the  liberation  of  a  torrent  of  electric  ])articles

comparable to the cathode rays or the emissions of radium. This liberation

necessarily implies a commencement of that disag-crreo-ation of the atom

which was formerly ignored, because the provision of energy contained in

matter  is  so  immense  that  the  loss  of  it  during  combustion  then  passed

unperceived.

  This dissociation of the atom in a flame has been made apparent not only

by the production of electric particles proceeding from this dissociation, but

likewise by the deviation of the electrons of flames by a

  magnetic field; it has as its consequence the doubUng of the spectral rays

of the flame acted on by the magnetic field.

  §  2.—The  Influence  of  Wave-length  and  Amplitude  on  the  Action  of

Light

  A  body  thrown  into  the  water  produces  on  its  surface  a  series  of

concentric  circular  waves  comparable  to  small  parallel  hills  separated  by

valleys. The distance from the top of one hill to another is what is called the

wave-length ; the height of each hill from the bottom of the valley represents

the amplitude of the wave. It is the same with light, the sole difference being

that the undulations take place in the ether instead of being produced in a

liquid.

  The length of the wave and its height constitute two very different things

which we must keep distinct if we wish to understand certain actions of light.

  Whether  it  is  a  question  of  sound  or  of  light,  or  of  any  periodical

disturbance of any fluid whatever, the wave-length is an element of invariable

magnitude during the whole period of a vibration, while its am-phtude may

vary within wide limits. Waves lose their amphtude by propagation, but their

length, and consequently the number of vibrations per second, remain the

same. The analogy with the oscillations of a pendulum is complete. Move a

pendulum much or little from the vertical line, and the distance it travels in its

oscillating trajectory may be very short or very long, but the time taken to

effect  it  will  be  invariable,  and  will  depend  solely  on  the  length  of  thependulum.

      TRANSFORMATION OF MATTER INTO LIGHT 199

  What  is  the  part  played  by  these  two  elements,  wave-length  and

amplitude ? In the case of the pendulum, the vis viva [kinetic energy] of its

waves increases with the amplitude of its vibrations. As regards sound, it is

the wave-length that determines the pitch of a given note, while the amplitude

determines the intensity of this note.

  With light the undulations of the ether give, accordino' to their lensfth,

notes Avhich we call blue, red, green, &c. Their length is strictly invariable

for each note; but their intensity may vary enormously with the amplitude of

the waves emitted—from 1 to 1,000,000 between (300° and 1800° C, for

instance, in the case of the red radiations according to the measurements of

M. Lechatelier. The intensity of a radiation will make it oscillate between

darkness  and  a  blinding  flash,  without  the  wave-length  undergoing  any

change.

  Besides  the  temperature,  there  are  ditfcrent  means  of  increasing  or

decreasing  the  amplitude  of  the  ethereal  waves,  and  consequently  the

intensity of a pencil of light. To do so, it is enough to concentrate or, on the

contrary, to disperse it, by lenses of suitable form. The intensity of a note or

of a colour is then very variable, but the length of the waves which produce

this note or colour remains absolutely the same during the whole period of

the vibrations.

  The eye and the ear are not organized so as to accumulate impressions. A

colour  or  a  note  of  given  intensity  will  always  produce  the  same  effect,

whatever the duration of their action. It is otherwise for certain reagents—the

photographic plate, for instance —capable of accumulating impressions. We

can 1,hus, Avith a very slight but prolonged intensity, produce

  effects identical with those obtained with a very great intensity, acting for

a very short time. It is the possibiUty of this accumulation which enables us

to photograph bodies having a phosphorescence invisible to the eye, simply

because the amplitude of the vibrations of light emitted was too slight to

impress the retina.

  The sensitive plate sees the radiations emitted because it can accumulate

them, and photographs stars which the eye does not see by reason of their too

slight  amplitude,  although  the  sensitiveness  of  the  retina  is  enormously

superior to that of the plate. The eye is for light wdiat the ear is for sound.

There  exist  dark  light  and  silent  sound,  which  the  eye  and  ear  do  notperceive, but which suitable reagents may reveal.

  From the fact that those stars which are on the edge of visibility take an

hour's  exposure  to  photograph,  Deslandres  remarks  that  "  the  relation

between the sensitiveness of the eye and that of the photographic plate should

be the ratio between y^o of a second and 1 hour, or (say) anouo."

    Whatever  be  the  reagent  employed  —  retina,  photographic  plate,  or

chemical compound — there is always a minimum of amplitude variable in

each, below which light has no action. Berthelot pointed out, for example,

that  the  oxidation  of  bisulphide  of  carbon,  which  in  the  sunlight  can  be

efiected in a few hours, is never effected in diffused light, even in a year's

time. For other reactions, such as the combinations of chlorine and hydrogen,

the intensity of the light may, on the other hand, be extremely slight. These

are phenomena which are not always taken into account, but which must be

known in

      TRANSFORMATION OF MATTER INTO LIGHT 201

  order  to  understand  the  effects  of  light.  It  is  because  they  have  been

misunderstood  that  the  variations  of  certain  vegetable  functions  in  the

different regions of the spectrum have given rise, as we shall see, to so many

contradictory interpretations.

  § 3.— The Invisible Spectrum

  The researches effected during recent years have proved that the invisible

solar spectrum is much more extended than the visible. While this last only

reaches from 0-40 /n to 0-80 /x, the invisible spectrum goes a little beyond 5

/u, according to Langley ^—that is to say, it is about twelve times as long as

the  other.  The  invisible  spectrum  of  artificial  sources  of  light  is  more

extended still, since, according to Rubens, it stretches as far as 60 /u..

  The plates of the solar spectrum published in text-books of physics give a

very  false  idea  of  it.  Not  only  do  they  reproduce  nothing  but  the  visible

region, but the distribution of the colour in it is very inexact, inasmuch as the

prismatic spectra used as models reduce to a fourth or a fifth of its real size

the extent of the red, and much exaggerate that of the violet rays.

  The distribution of the colours is only exact with the diffraction spectra

obtained by means of gratings. The distance between the rays being then

proportionate to the wave-length, the red occupies a

  1 The instrument employed by Lnngley was the bolometer, which allows

the Tinjonoo»Tjtb of a degree to be measured. It is based on the fact that by

heating a conducting body we increase its electrical resistance. If rays ofdifferent  intensities  are  allowed  to  fall  upon  the  microscopic  wire  which

constitutes the essential part of the instrument, its electrical resistance varies.

This is measured by well-known methods [i.e. by a galvanometer.— Ed.].

  much more considerable extent than in the spectra obtained with a prism.

  It was in fact the employment of prisms for the production of the spectra

which  led  us  to  interpret  inaccurately  the  position  of  the  maximum  of

calorific energy. It was formerly placed in the infra-red. We now know that it

is found in the luminous part of the spectrum. But as, in comparison with the

total length of this last, the visible region is of very small extent, it follows

that  the  total  calorific  energy  is  much  greater  in  the  invisible  infra-red.

According

  5J* J^l" SH 2P 1^^

  Yi<y. 14.— Proportion of visible and invisible radiations in a normal

Solar Spectrum. The great dark band on the left represents the invisible infra-

red  region.  It  extends,  aocording  to  the  latest  measurements,  up  to  rather

more than 5 fi. The little white band represents the visible portion of the

spectrum. It is about iVt^ of ^^^ foregoing. The still smaller dark band to the

right represents the invisible ultra-violet region.

  to  the  last  measurements  of  Langley,  the  visible  solar  spectrum  only

contains one-fifth part of the calorific energy of the infra-red region. The

invisible region of the spectrum constitutes, then, the most important portion

of  light.  It  is  only  the  sensitiveness  of  the  human  eye  which  creates  the

division between the visible and the invisible parts of the spectrum. It is not,

doubtless, the same with all animals.

  This  immense  invisible  region  of  the  spectrum,  wherein  is  found  the

greatest part of its energy, ought to play a very important, though hardly

suspected, part in the phenomena of vegetable life

      TRANSFORMATION OF MATTER INTO LIGHT 203

  and in meteorology. We as yet know none of its properties except the

calorific  action.  Its  variations  probably  have  considerable  eftect  in  the

changes  of  the  seasons.  Langley  ha's  recognised  that  the  solar  spectrum

changes at the ditierent periods of the year, and that the distribution of its

energy is not the same at different seasons.

  The  one-fifth  of  the  solar  radiation  which  appears  under  the  form  of

visible light seems at first a very small proportion of the whole. It is in reality

very great if we compare it with that of artificial light.

  Fig. 15.— Distribution of visible and invisible energy in the light of theelectric  arc.  All  the  part  coloured  black  represents  the  energy  which,

according to Langley, is unused. The part A B is alone used in lighting. The

scale here stojDS at 3 /x. To make it quite exact, it should be prolonged much

farther to the right.

    According to Wedding's latest researches (1905) all artificial sources of

light, includinsf the electric arc, utilize hardly 1 per cent, of the radiations

produced.

    Ninety-nine per cent, of the radiations emitted are, then, invisible.1

    Although these figures vary with the observers, none of them have found

a less loss than 90 per cent.

  1 These figures vary notably according to different observers. Chwolson

gives 10 per cent, for the utilizable part of the electric arc and 4 per cent, for

gas. Professor Sylvanus Thompson (The Manufacture of Light, 1906) adopts

Wedding's latest figure of 1 per cent.

  If, then, we estimate at £3,000,000 or £4,000,000, as has been done, the

annual expenditure on artificial lighting of a great country like England, we

shall see that the discovery of a means of transforming the invisible calorific

energy into visible light would effect a saving of nearly £3,000,000 a year for

one country alone.

  The problem does not appear at all insoluble, since nature has already

found  the  solution  of  it.  The  light  of  phosphorescent  animals  is  almost

exclusively composed of rays belonging to the visible region of the spectrum.

All phosphorescent bodies also produce light without previous heating. It is

probable that in this case, then, it is the energies of the atoms and not the

disturbances of the molecules—as in the case of incandescence—which come

into play. We will return to this point when studying, in a future chapter, the

phosphorescence of gases.

  § 4.— The Distribution of Energy throughout the Spectrum

  The distribution of energy in the various regions of the spectrum has been

the object of numerous researches. They have not led, however, to any very

useful  results,  for  the  simple  reason  that,  at  a  uniform  temperature,  the

intensity of the various radiations varies greatly according to the source of

light. We have seen, for example, that the distribution in the spectrum of a

gas burner and in that of an Auer mantle was very different, although their

temperature was almost identical.

  Nor is there any profit to be drawn from the published researches on the

distribution of energy      TRANSFORMATION OF MATTER INTO LIGHT 205

  in the solar spectrum, by reason of the very great variation which takes

place in the infra-red according to the days, the hours, the attitude, and the

absorption exercised by the greater or less quantity of water vapour in the

atmosphere, &c.

  All  the  early  measurements  of  the  energy  of  the  spectrum  were,

moreover, affected by errors due to the employment of the prism to separate

the various radiations. As the prism heaps together the radiations in the infra-

red, and spreads them out considerably at the other extremity of the spectrum,

it  was  natural  that  the  heat  should  be  very  great  in  the  part  Avhere  the

radiations were most condensed. We therefore supposed that in the infra-red

was to be found the hottest part of the solar spectrum. This error and the

curve which represents it still figure in most elementary treatises on physics.

  As soon as we succeeded, by means of gratings, in producing spectra in

which the deviation of the radiations is proportional to the wave-length, it

became  evident  that  it  was  not  in  the  invisible  infrared,  but  in  the  most

luminous part of the spectrum, that is from A to D, that the maximum of

calorific action in the light of the sun is to be found.

  No part of the spectrum is really devoid of calorific action, as physicists

for a long time believed. It would suffice to give to any radiation sufficient

intensity to cause it to produce any calorific action one could desire.

    Independently of the causes of error just enumerated, there is one much

more serious still, which is connected with the very principle of the materials

used.

    Physicists were led to measure the energy of the

  spectrum solely by the evaluation of the calorific action of its different

parts. M. Jamin shows in the following passage the mental process involved

in that conception:—

  " It was formerly supposed that three distinct agents emanated from the

sun—heat, light, and the chemical rays—and that each of these gave rise to a

spectrum partially superposed upon the two others, but as distinct in its nature

as in its properties. But we have been led by the force of events to reject this

complicated hypothesis, because all experiments proved powerless to realize

in practice the separation supposed to be possible in theory. Everybody now

admits that the sun sends us vibrations, which are all of the same nature, and

which are only distinguished from each other by their wave-lengths. These

different actions (luminous, chemical, and calorific) are all executed at theexpense of the energy of the vibrations, but the calorific action supplies the

only rational measurement of them." ^

  This mode of measurement was applied not only to light, but to all forms

of energy. It is deduced from the idea that all the modes of energy, being

capable of transformation into heat, are measurable by their calorific effects

evaluated  in  calories  or  kilo-grammetres,  which  are  consequently  their

equivalents.

  By considering in the spectrum nothing but heat, Ave were naturally led

to attribute to it all the actions observed. This,is exactly what the last-quoted

author  did.  "  It  is  at  the  expense  of  the  calorific  energy  of  which  the

radiations can dispose," he says, " that the impression of light on the eye and

that on the photo-

  ^ Physique, 4th edition, t. iii. p. 100.

      TRANSFORMATION OF MATTER INTO LIGHT 207

  graphic plate are alike produced." If it were really so, the rays which can

produce the maximum of heat ought to be those which can best act on the

photographic plate and on the eye. Now, it is just the contrary which is the

case. It is not only in the photographic action that we notice this want of

parallelism  between  the  calorific  intensity  and  the  eti'ects  observed.  It  is

really striking to see produced in very energetic fashion, in the ultra-violet,

the  calorific  action  of  which  is  almost  nil,  certain  effects,  such  as  the

dissociation of matter, while they are insignificant in the hotter parts of the

spectrum.

  We ought to conclude from this, that the various regions of the spectrum

possess  actions  having  no  common  measure.  According  to  the  reagent

employed—the  eye,  the  photographic  plate,  the  thermometer,  the

electrometer — the distribution of energy will be very different. The reagents

strongly impressed by a certain radiation are silent to another.

  In reality, a curve is required for each of them, and it must not be claimed

that the energy of the spectrum can be determined by a single one, as has

hitherto been done.

  § 0.— Tlte Absorption of Light by Matter

  To its property of emitting luminous rays, matter adds that of being able

to absorb them or to allow them to pass through it. There is thus a permanent

interchange between matter and the ether, as I have already pointed out.

  When a body allows light to pass through itself without subjecting it to

any sensible modification,  it is called transparent. In the contrary case, it is called opaque.

  Our ideas as to transparency and opacity have been much modified during

the last few years. It is known at the present day that there is no body entirely

transparent to all radiations. A strip of glass one-tenth of a millimetre thick,

completely transparent to the eye, is yet absolutely opaque for the whole

ultra-violet extremity of the spectrum and for a notable part of the infra-red.

    Transparency is always selective and, consequently, never complete. If

there existed a body entirely transparent, it could be exposed to the most

intense source of heat without becoming warm, since it would not absorb any

radiation. The rise in temperature of a body exposed to a radiation is only

due,  in  fact,  to  the  absorption  by  it  of  those  radiations  which  have  no

temperature of their own.

  The greater the opaqueness of a body the more it absorbs and the more it

becomes heated, except, naturally, in cases where, through the polish of its

surface, it sends back into space the vibrations of the ether which reach it.

  We now attempt, as before said, to explain the transparency and opacity

of bodies by a phenomenon resembling that of acoustic resonance. A slight

modification of the current theory will suffice to show that these phenomena

are  the  consequences  of  the  same  law.  Matter  may  be  considered  to  be

composed  of  small  molecular  tuning-forks  capable,  like  ordinary  ones,  of

vibrating to certain notes, but not to others. When struck by the vibrations of

the ether, they vibrate according to their structure, in unison with certain

vibrations and receive no impres-

      TRANSFORMATION OF MATTER INTO LIGHT 209

  tion from others. The radiation which causes them to vibrate remains, in

issuing from the transparent body, exactly the same as when it entered it,

having undergone, in the case of other modifications, only a slackening of

speed,  in  consequence,  no  doubt,  of  the  time  necessary  to  increase  the

vibrations of the atoms.

  Opaque bodies must, on the contrary, be formed of elements unable to

vibrate in unison with the vibrations which strike them. They can, then, only

emit irregular vibrations which vanish at once by transmitting themselves to

the neighbouring molecules. From these movements must result the heating

of bodies struck by light. Absorption would 1)6, then, an absolute transfer of

the movement of the ether to the bodies which are plunged therein.

  When a substance is transparent to one radiation ;ind opaque to another—

which  is  the  general  case—  t  he  molecules  vibrate  in  unison  with  thevibrations which pass through them and absorb others. A red or blue glass

possesses its colour because it can only allow the radiations of the spectrum

corresponding to the blue or red to pass and can keep back the others.

  This  theory  of  resonance  is  only  maintainable  if  we  suppose  the

molecules of bodies to be already animated by rapid movements to which the

vibrations of the ether do but impart direction. It would bo, otherwise, quite

impossible to suppose that the vibrations of the ether could give to the atoms

the enormous total of energy necessary to cause them to oscillate with the

rapidity of light.

    According to this theory, the only difference between a transparent and an

opaque body rests on

  the nature of the vibrations they each emit. The vibrations falling upon

them pass through the transparent body, and cause in their passage the atoms

of matter to vibrate in unison with the incident ray. They would equally cause

the  atoms  of  the  opaque  body  to  vibrate,  but  would  diffuse  themselves

throughout its mass. In both cases the luminous energy, having struck the

face of an opaque or a transparent plate, necessarily reappears on the other

side.  In  the  case  of  transparency,  the  ray  on  issuing  is  the  same  as  on

entering; in the case of opacity, the plate is heated, and then emits in all

directions —and no longer in one single direction—radiations with a wave-

length greatly differing from that which struck the other side. While the light

does  not  modify  the  temperature  of  a  transparent  body,  it  raises,  on  the

contrary, that of an opaque one.

  If the amplitude of the luminous waves striking an opaque body be great

enough, the" molecules of this body may be driven sufficiently apart to cause

it to pass into the liquid or gaseous state.

  The absorption of light by matter is closely connected with the structure

of  this  last.  The  modifications  produced  by  its  changes  enable  the

composition  of  bodies  to  l3e  ascertained.  They  are  easily  noticed  by

interposing the substance it is desired to examine between a luminous source

and the prism of a spectroscope. Many liquids very transparent to the eye

present bands of absorption which vary with the slightest changes in their

composition. Traces of impurity are thus easily discerned. It is possible, for

instance, to detect the presence of 30000th part of pyridine in ammonia.

  Gases are very absorbent for certain radiations.

      TKANSFORMATION OF MATTER INTO LIGHT 211

  and very little so for others. The gases of the atmosphere totally absorb allthe ultra-violet starting from 0 295 y-, and all the infra-red beyond 5 [j-. The

ozone of the atmosphere also shows itself very absorbent for the ultra-violet,

and the accidental disappearance of this region from the line M onwards,

observed in my experiments, is perhaps due to the momentary excess of this

substance.

  It is somewhat difficult in the theory of transparency by resonance, given

above, to understand how the same body can be transparent or opaque to

regions situated at the extremities of the spectrum. Window glass is quite

opaque, not only to the ultraviolet, but likewise to all the infra-red region

beyond from 2 to 3 /a, and consequently to the calorific radiations emitted by

bodies heated to 100° C. or less.

  This partial transparency of matter to the luminous vibrations of the ether

should  be  compared  with  its  complete  transparency  to  the  electric  or

magnetic lines of force pointed out previously, which are also composed of

ether, but in a form unknown to us. They are the only elements of which

matter is unable to stay the progress. Why does it allow the ether to pass in

one form and not in another ? I can give no answer to this question.

  § G. The CJiemical and FhotograpJiic Action of Light

  When the vibrations of the ether produced by the heating of matter meet a

body, they produce varied effects, which Ave may divide into three classes.

  1. Mechanical Action. This is the pressure exer-

  ■ cised by radiant energy. Being very slight, it can

  only be made evident by very sensitive instruments.

  It may, however, be sufficiently intense to annul gravity in the case of

very light bodies. The deformation of comets is attributed to its influence.

  2. Dissociating Action on the Atoms of Matter. This is put in evidence by

the researches set forth in my former work, to which I shall return in a later

chapter.

  Chemical  Actions.  Comprise  very  different  reactions  (oxidation,

reduction, &c.) made use of in photography.

  Of these different actions, I shall now only study certain particular effects

with regard to photography which have been observed in the course of my

researches.

  It being conceded that the electric particles of the cathode rays and of

radio-active  bodies  impress  photographic  plates,  we  might  be  tempted  to

ascribe  the  formation  of  the  latent  imago  to  a  kind  of  ionization  of  the

gelatino-bromide of silver. 1 formerly thought of maintaining this hypothesis,but there are the two following facts against it: (1) It is impossible to observe

any radio-activity during the exposure of the photographic plate to the light;

(2) the blue rays which chiefly act on the photographic plate are by no means

the most active agents in the dissociation of matter.

  The  elucidation  of  this  last  point  led  me  to  inquire  which  were  the

radiations with the greatest action on the photographic impression.

  In order to make these evident I exposed a photographic plate behind a

spectroscope, and watched in which region the impression commenced. It

always began in the blue, and never in the violet or the ultra-violet.

    Although the Jena-glass prisms of my spectroscopes allow nearly all the

solar ultra-violet to pass, they, however, absorb a portion, and it might be

objected to the above experiments that the feeble action of the violet and the

ultra-violet  was  the  result  of  this  absorption.  I  therefore  asked  M.  do

Wattcville,  who  owns  a  large  spectroscope  with  a  quartz  prism,  very

transparent to ultra-violet rays, to repeat my experi-

 




 


  Fig. IG.— Photographs of Solar Spectra to shoio the rariatioib of the

risible rays used durinij exposure. The lowest spectrum was obtained with

half a second's exposure. There is no impression except in the blue. 'J'he blue

rays are therefore the only ones made use of in instantaneous photography.

The two spectra placed next above were obtained with successivelj' longer

exposures. The upper spectrum extends some distance into the ultra-violet.

By still further prolonging the exposure I have obtained with ordinary plates

impressions even up to the red ; but the rest of the photograph is then useless.

  ments with his instrument. They gave results identical to those set forth

above. The impression always begins in the blue, and is only propagated

some time afterwards into the ultra-violet. It may be gathered from this that

the use of objectives of quartz or of glass very transparent to the ultraviolet

would offer absolutely no advantage in instantaneous photography.

  It would be mucli more interesting to increase the sensitiveness of the

plates for all regions of the spectrum. The part utilized in photography hardly

represents more than about the twentieth part of the solar spectrum, which

goes from 5 /i. to 0'295 /a, including the visible and invisible rays. The visiblepart only extends from 0-4 /x to 0-8 /*. Even if we only take note of the

visible spectrum, it will be seen that the photographic plate utilizes but a very

small part of it.

  No doubt, by various means, we can render the plates fairly sensitive as

far  as  the  red  ;  but  this  sensitiveness  is  very  illusory,  for  enormous

differences  of  exposure  are  always  required  to  obtain  images  with  blue,

green,  and  red  light.  The  only  real  advantage  of  the  plates  termed

orthochromatic is that they are less sensitive to the blue than ordinary plates.

The  same  result  is  obtained  by  simply  placing  a  yellow  glass  before  the

objective. With any plate whatever we obtain an impression as intense as can

be desired by sufficiently prolonging the exposure. A landscape may very

well be photographed through a red glass.

  It  is  this  difference  of  rapidity  of  action  in  the  different  luminous

radiations which changes all the values in the photographic reproduction of

landscapes.  We  obviate  these  differences  somewhat  by  prolonging  the

exposure so as to allow the feebly actinic rays time to act, but then soon

comes in the phenomenon of irradiation, consisting in the fact that every part

impressed acts as a luminous centre on the neighbouring region, not only

directly, but by its reflection on the posterior face of the glass. I have made

not a few experiments on this subject.

 




 


  i i

  1-I

  1

  2

  Figs. 17 to 20.

  Variations of images obtained by irradiation and inversion ivith a metallic

cross.

  A tin cross is glued on a glass plate and a sensitized plateput in a dark

slide under this screen and in contact with the tin. The whole is then exposed

to the light of a lamp. By merely varying the exposure between one second

and five minutes we obtain (1) White image of the cross (black in positive).

(2)  Propagation  of  the  impression  under  the  cross.  (3)  Almost  completedisappearance of the image. (+) Black image of the cross.

  To face page 215.

  and have observed that with sufficiently long exposures the impression

can be propagated to within half a centimetre of the region reached by the

light.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  photography  of  very  fine  lines  is  very

difficult. Vain attempts have been made to thus reproduce by photography

the diamond-cut gratings employed in certain processes. I will sum up for my

photographer  readers  the  experiments  that  I  have  carried  out—with  the

spectroscope  described  in  another  chapter—for  the  examination  of  those

regions of the spectrum which impress photographic plates according to the

length  of  exposure,  the  nature  of  the  plates  employed,  and  the  coloured

glasses placed before the objective.

  Parts  of  the  Solar  Spectrum  utilized  in  photography  according  to  the

length of exposure with ordinary and with orthochromatic plates. {Of. Fig.

16.)

  (1) Onlinary rajnd plufcs.

    Instantaneous exjiosure. —The impression extends from F to

  the middle of the interval between H and G. Tiro seconds exposure. —

The image extends up to K on one

  side,  and  nearly  to  E  on  the  other.  Fifteen  seconds  exposure.  —The

impression is prolonged beyond L on the side of the ultra-violet, and extends

nearly up to D on the side of the red. It is, then, sufficient to expose an

ordinary plate long enough for it to be impressed by the least actinic rays. In

proportion  as  the  exposure  is  lengthened,  the  intensity  of  the  impression

increases between H and E, and much less rapidly from E to A. We then have

a plate over-exposed for the blue, and hardly enough so for the other colours.

    Influence of a coloured, glass.-—A blue glass reduces but very feebly the

image during instantaneous exposures even with the ultra-violet region.

  A yellow glass does not reduce the intensity of the image on the side of

the red, but does so on the side of the blue, i.e. from H to the ultra-violet. If

instead of one second's exposure we give it thirty seconds, ail the

    colours impress the plate, and, moreover, as the action of the blue is much

extended, the unevenness of the impression is diminished. In photography

therefore, as soon as one has to prolong the exposure, a dark yellow glass

should be put in front of the objective. The best orthochromatic plate is an

ordinary one with a yellow glass. A green glass would further reduce the

impression on the side of the blue, but its use would only be of advantagewith a too prolonged exposure.

  (2) So-called ortliochromatic plates.

  The substances with which these plates are covered render them much

less  sensitive  to  the  blue  rays  than  ordinary  plates.  Their  sensitiveness

extends from a little on the side of the red to beyond D, but without in any

way attaining the ray A save with an exaggerated exposure. These plates

behave in reality like an ordinary plate before which one has placed a yellow

glass, but are very inferior to it.

  They ai-e very little sensitive in the green (between E and F), i.e. exactly

in  that  region  where  sensitiveness  is  most  necessary.  Moreover,  if  their

sensitiveness is greater than that of ordinary plates on the side of the red, it is

much less so on the side of the violet. If one uses them with a yellow glass, as

has been proposed, the effects are disastrous. The impression between E and

F, i.e. in the region of the green, from being insufticient is arrested altogether.

Orthochromatic plates —at least those made in France, which I have alone

studied— possess beside the above defects that of being foggy. Even when

one develops them in complete darkness they give grey and flat images.

    CHAPTER IV

  THE DEMATERIALIZATION OF MATTER UNDER THE ACTION

OF LIGHT

  § 1.— Tlie Dit^sociation of Matter under tlie influence of the different

Radiations of tlie Solar Spectrum

  I HAVE studied at length, in l'Evolution de la Matiere, the dissociation

which all bodies undergo under the influence of luminous radiations, and

have

  THE DEMATERIALIZATION OF MATTER 217

  shown that a body struck by light emits etHuves of the family of the

cathode rays, of which the quantity varies considerably with the nature of the

radiations. If I return to this question, it is because I have been led to study in

this work the principal actions of light. My experiments on this subject were

recently  verified  by  one  of  the  most  illustrious  scholars  of  the  day,  Sir

William Ramsay.^

  He  has  published,  with  regard  to  the  dissociation  of  matter  under  the

influence of light, a memoir extremely remarkable, not only on account of the

precision of the experiments, but also of the theoretical considerations which

it contains. The results obtained by him were identical with my own, and he

entirely admits the theory of the dissociation of matter. His conclusions areeven bolder than mine.

  " If it turns out to be true," he says, " as Soddy claims to have shown . . .

that a disinteafratingf element which parts with ft rays or electrons, leaves

behind it matter not associated with a positive charge; and if it be also true

that  such  'disintegration'  implies  transmutation  into  some  other  form  of  '

elementary matter,' then it may be that the phenomena of which a description

is given in the following pages refer to cases of transmutation. When zinc, for

example, illuminated by ultra-violet light parts with corpuscles, it may be that

the residual matter—the zinc minus electrons—is no longer zinc, but some

other form or

  ^  "The  work,"  writes  Sir  William  Ramsay,  "was  undertaken  with  the

object of repeating some experiments of Le Bon, described in several papers

published  in  the  Comptes  Rendus,  and  afterwards  in  greater  detail  in  his

treatise, I'Evolution de la MatUre. . . . It will be remembered that Le Bon, by

allowing  ultra-violet  to  fall  upon  clean  metallic  surfaces  raised  to  a  high

potential, caused them to give up their charges" {Philosophical Magazine,

October 1906, p. 401).

  forms of elementary matter." Ramsay considers the action of ultra-violet

light, moreover, as a kind of detonator which produces the disintegration of

the elements of matter.

  I was very pleased to see so eminent a scholar confirm the correctness of

my experiments, and arrive at the conclusions which I have so long upheld. It

will not be without interest to state briefly the origin of these last.

  The  experiments  by  which  I  demonstrated  that  the  action  of  light  on

bodies produced etttLives similar to those of uranium—the only radio-active

body then known—are not new, since they were published for the first time

about  ten  years  ago.  They  were  the  starting-point  of  my  theory  of  the

universal  dissociation  of  matter,  and  I  have  recurred  to  them  in  several

memoirs.

  After  having  shown  that  solar  hght  exercised  in  ditt'erent  degrees  a

dissociating action on all bodies, I commenced the examination of ultra-violet

radiations, the study of which had given rise to many works. My remarks

demonstrated :—

  1. That the so-called negative discharge was likewise positive, contrary to

what was then taught.

  2. That the discharge of electrified bodies is very different according to

the bodies employed, a point likewise verified by Ramsay, and contrary towhat Avas then taugfht.

  3. That it was not at all by the pulverization of the metal struck by light

that the discharge was effected, as was formerly the opinion of Lenard, but by

the dissociation of its atoms. This most important point, but little disputed at

the  present  time,  and  likewise  admitted  by  Ramsay,  was  very  new  and

unforeseen at

  THE DEMATERIALIZATION OF MATTER 219

  a  date  Avhen  no  one  dreamed  of  establishing  a  kinship  of  any  kind

between the efHuves produced by the action of hght and the cathode and

uranium rays.

  All these experiments, which appear so simple when one reads them set

forth in a book, bristle with enormous difficulties, and, above all, with causes

of error, which explain the erroneous opinions formulated by observers. They

studied,  moreover,  the  action  of  light  on  bodies  without  having  ever

suspected  that  from  this  study  would  one  day  issue  the  theory  of  the

dissociation of matter.

  Other persons will carry on these researches, for the subject is far from

being exhausted. I shall render them service by pointing out the causes of

error which delayed me for a long time, and finally led me to establish the

spontaneous  radio-activity  of  all  the  metals.  Nothing  would  be  more

instructive for the history of the evolution of ideas than the recital of the

uncertainties through which those engaged in research have passed, and of

which their final works naturally contain no trace.

  In my first experiment I had indeed verified that the efHuves emitted by

bodies subjected to the action of light passed, as has been likewise recognized

by Ramsay, through thin metallic screens. But as they sometimes seemed to

transpierce somewhat thick ones, I had to seek the reason of this anomaly.

The cathode rays, to which I assimilated these efHuves, can, in fact, only pass

through extremely thin plates.

  I  first  observed  that  these  efHuves  went  round  obstacles  in  the  most

curious  way,  as  if  they  rolled  on  their  surface.  The  remedy  seemed  very

simple, since it was only a question of giving to the supposed screens the

form of a closed cylinder surrounding the

  ball of the electroscope. But instead of simplifying the question I had

created new problems, to interpret which took me several months.

  The electroscope, surrounded by its protecting cylinder, on exposure to

the sun discharged itself to the extent of several degrees in a few minutes, andthen it gave no further discharge, even when the metal was cleaned. If the

cylinder  was  replaced  by  another  of  the  same  substance  the  discharge

recommenced, and then after a certain lapse of time stopped again. For what

reasons did a body having certain properties lose them a few minutes later ?

  I will not enumerate here all the researches made to separate the factors

which might be at work and to study the action of each. From one elimination

after another, there remained only the influence of heat. This was indeed the

active cause, for by replacing the sun by a body heated but not incandescent,

and placed in the dark near the cylinder surrounding the electroscope, the

discharge took place; but, as with the sun, it soon stopped. What part did heat

play in this phenomenon ?

    Evidently  it  was  improbable  that  an  amount  of  heat  only  capable  of

raising by a few degrees the surface of a metal should render the air contained

in its interior a conductor of electricity. Heat, moreover, could not be the only

element which intervened, since the metal cylinders exposed to its action

soon lost their influence on the electroscope. No amount of cleaning restored

their  properties.  The  majority  of  them,  however,  regained  them

spontaneously in the course of a few days.

  Ao-ain  I  had  to  proceed  by  successive  eliminations,  and  I  at  last

succeeded in verifying that the metals

  THE DEMATERIALIZATION OF MATTER 221

  lost under the influence of heat something which they could afterwards

regain b}^ repose. This something was simply a small provision of radio-

active particles formed spontaneously in all bodies. As the final result of

these  researches  I  reached  the  two  following  conclusions  :—(1)  Light,

especially  the  ultra-violet  rays,  which  only  exercise,  as  is  known,  an

insignificant  calorific  action,  dissociates  matter  and  transforms  it  into

products analogous to those emitted by radium or uranium; (2) outside the

action of light, and independently of it, luminous or dark heat provokes in

bodies the loss of an infinitesimal quantity of the radio-activity they contain,

which may be spontaneously regenerated. All bodies are therefore slightly

radio-active,  and  the  dissociation  of  matter  is  indeed  a  universal

phenomenon.

  Ramsay has very thoroughly observed in his skilful experiments this "

fatigue" of metals, which lose their properties more or less after a certain

time. He attributes it to a modification of the equilibrium of the atoms on

their surface, a theory which, however, does not sensibly differ from mine.  § 2.— Origin of the Phenomena attributed to the Presence of Radium

  Since I am on the subject of radio-activity, it will not be without interest

to say a few words on a great discussion which has been eagerly followed by

the English public, and in which the most eminent scholars—Lord Kelvin, Sir

Oliver  Lodge,  Sir  William  Crookes,  &c.—have  taken  part.  From  the

scientific journals it has passed into political papers like the Times. Though

the engagement was sharp, the conclusions have remained very uncertain.

  Its starting-point was the extension of this theory, still very general but

very  erroneous,  as  may  be  seen  by  the  above  statements,  that  all  radio-

activity is due to the presence of radium or some body of that family.

    Kadio-activity being now found everywhere, physicists who do not yet

admit the theory of the universal dissociation of matter are indeed compelled

to suppose that there is radium everywhere. After having been the most rare

body in nature, it should now be the most abundant.

  Starting  with  this  idea,  a  physicist  maintained  before  the  British

Association that the internal heat of the globe might well be due to the action

of the radium of which the earth should be full.

  Persons who have not made a deep study of this body may think that it is

a well-defined substance like sodium or gold, and that consequently it is easy

to ascertain its presence by certain reagents; now, it is nothing of the kind.

Let  us  put  aside  certain  rays  in  the  spectrum  of  a  rather  disputable

interpretation, and which, moreover, are only observed in very concentrated

solutions of salts of radium; and let us examine on what is based the assertion

that this body is very common.

  It  is  simply  this  fundamental  characteristic—the  emission  of  particles

which  bear  a  certain  quantity  of  electricity,  and  are  therefore  capable  of

discharging  an  electrometer.  There  exists  no  other  means  of  practical

investigation, and it was by taking this exclusively as a guide that radium was

finally isolated from the various substances with which it was mixed up.

  This characteristic would, moreover, be an excellent

  THE DEMATERIALIZATION OF MATTER 223

  touchstone if radium or the substances of the same family were alone in

presenting  it.  But  all  bodies  in  nature  possess  it,  as  I  have  shown,  either

spontaneously or under the influence of very varied causes, such as light,

heat, chemical reactions, &c.; and it follows that properties are attributed to

radium  which  may  belong  to  very  different  bodies.  If  Ave  are  bent  on

admitting that radio-activity is the cause of the internal temperature of theglobe, there is no need to invoke the supposed presence of radium. All bodies

at a high temperature, such as are apparently those which exist in the interior

of  our  planet,  liberate  torrents  of  electric  particles  analogous  to  those

produced by radium. I do not know whether they serve to maintain the earth's

heat, but it seems more reasonable to believe that they play a part in the

production of earthquakes.

  That which concerns the actions of lio-ht on matter may be summed up in

the statement that the light absorbed by a body transforms itself, according to

that body and to the rays which act on it, into very different effects—light,

heat,  chemical  equilibria,  dissociation  of  matter,  &c.  In  the  case  of

dissociation,  the  energy  emitted  by  the  dissociated  body  in  the  form  of

different  particles  may  be  far  superior  to  the  energy  which  provoked  its

dissociation. Light, then, acts like a spark on a mass of gunpowder. It may

therefore be said in a general way that all the physical or chemical properties

of a body which has absorbed light are more or less modified by the fact of

this absorption alone.

  BOOK III THE PROBLEMS OF PHOSPHORESCENCE

    CHAPTER I

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY LIGHT

  I 1.— Tlie Different Forms of PlLosphorescence

  The  name  of  phosphorescence  is  given  to  the  property  which  several

bodies possess of becoming luminous after having been exposed to various

influences, that of the solar radiations especially.

    Phosphorescence, one of the most diflicult problems in physics, and one

of  those  of  which  the  interpretation  is  the  most  complicated,  realizes  the

apparent paradox of generating cold light—that is to say, light without any

rise  in  temperature.  In  all  our  ordinary  sources  of  lighting,  light  is  only

manifested after the bodies producing it have been first brought to a high

temperature.

  For a long time, phosphorescence was thought a phenomenon as rare in

the mineral as in the animal world. Recent researches on deep-sea animals

prove that, for an immense number of beings, phosphorescence is a normal

means  of  lighting  which  enables  them  to  guide  themselves  in  those  dark

abysses of the sea where the sun never penetrates. It may be asked at the

present day whether

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY LIGHT 225

  the animals knowing no other light but phosphorescence are not morenumerous  than  those  whose  light  is  the  sun.  The  phenomena  of

phosphorescence  which  formerly  struck  us  by  their  exceptional  character,

now do so by their frequency.

  We have often come across the action of phosphorescence in the course

of our researches. The documents already published, which were confined

almost entirely to the researches of Edmond Becquerel fifty years ago, not

enabling me to explain the phenomena observed, I was led to take up this

study anew. The new facts which I recognised are soon stated.

  The  customary  divisions  of  phosphorescence  being  very  artificial,  it

would be useless to reproduce them. I shall confine myself to dividing the

phenomena  into  four  classes.  The  three  first  have  long  been  known.  The

fourth is due to my researches.

  1.  Phospliorescence  generated  by  ligJtt.  —2.  Phosphorescence

independent of light and determined by different physical excitants, such as

heat, friction, electricity, and the X-rays.—3. Phosi^horescence by chemical

reaction.  In  this  class  are  placed  the  luminous  phenomena  exhibited  by

certain  living  beings.—4.  Invisible  phosphorescence.  This  comprises  the

production of light incapable of impressing the eye, but able to impress the

photographic plate and to be rendered visible by different means.

  We will only study, in this chapter, the phosphorescence produced by

light.

  § 2.— Action of the difevent Regions of the Spectrum on Bodies capable

of Phosphorescence

  Many  bodies,  either  natural,  like  tlie  diamond,  apatite,  fluorite,  and

leucophane, or artificial, like the sulphides of the alkaline earths, have the

property of shining in the dark after having been exposed for a moment to

daylight.

  With the exception of the diamond, of which the luminosity is, at times,

very vivid, the phosphorescence acquired by minerals is always much inferior

to that of artificially manufactured substances. A very large number of bodies

are capable, as E. Becquerel showed with his phosphoroscope, of acquiring

the property of shining for a small fraction of a second after being exposed to

light.

  In  this  last  class  of  bodies  of  brief  phosphorescence  are  placed  the

compounds called fluorescent. It was formerly wished to make of these a

special  class,  on  the  pretext  that  they  had  the  property  of  transforming

invisible ultra-violet light into visible light. This property is really common tothe various phosphorescent bodies. Nearly all, in fact, are capable of being

illuminated by the ultra-violet end of the spectrum.

  The action of the various regions of the spectrum is best observed with

the phosphorescent sulphides. These sulphides are only four in number: those

of  calcium,  barium,  strontium,  and  zinc.  Exposed  to  the  light  for  a  few

seconds, they acquire a phosphorescence which lasts several hours after the

insolation,^ but constantly decreases during this period.

  ^ Insolation, or exposure to the sun, is, it need hardly be remarked, to be

distinguished from insulation, the term used in electricity.— Ed.

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY LIGHT 227

  The great sensitiveness of these bodies to light comes very near to that of

the gelatino-bromide photographic plates.

  The sulphides of calcium, of strontium, and of barium have very similar

properties; they hardly differ from each other, except by the colour of their

phosphorescence and the rapidity with which they are impressed by light.

The sulphide of calcium is the most rapidly impressed, that of strontium the

least so. This last requires several seconds of insolation to reach its maximum

of  illumination,  while  the  sulphide  of  calcium  can  be  impressed  in  one-

thirtieth of a second in the sun.

  The sulphide of zinc with green phosphorescence —and not those with

the yellow or orange—possesses, for the study of the radiations from green to

very  far  in)  the  infra-red,  a  special  sensitiveness  lacking  in  the  other

sulphides. Thanks to this, I was able to demonstrate the great transparency to

light of bodies formerly deemed very opaque. A screen of sulphide of zinc

exposed to daylight when exposed to yellow, green, red, and especially to

infra-red radiations, is immediately extinguished. By precise measurements

effected by diaphragms, of which I had measured the speed with a registering

chronograph,  I  was  able  to  note  that,  in  less  than  one-tenth  of  a  second,

insolated sulphide of zinc began to be extinguished in the infra-red. I made

use  of  this  property  to  obtain  instantaneous  photographs  in  complete

darkness, as will be seen in another chapter.

  The  extreme  sensitiveness  of  sulphide  of  zinc  renders  its  illumination

very variable, according to the proportion of infra-red rays contained in the

    various sources of light. While the other sulphides become illuminated by

the simple light of a paraffin lamp, sulphide of zinc not only does not do so,

but becomes immediately extinguished if it has been previously exposed to

daylight.  The sulphides of calcium and strontium being little sensitive to the infra-

red rays, light up very well, on the contrary, with the light of a lamp or even

of a candle. We thus obtain at once the means of distinguishing the sulphide

of strontium if it be fraudulently substituted for sulphide of zinc, although its

phosphorescence  possesses  the  same  green  tint.  A  screen  of  sulphide  of

strontium becomes illuminated by the light of a candle; a screen of sulphide

of  zinc  previously  exposed  to  sunlight,  on  the  contrary,  becomes

extinguished.  I  must  add  that  the  sulphide  of  zinc  with  green

phosphorescence, the only one serviceable for these experiments, is rarely

met with in commerce.

  If sulphide of zinc is a valuable reagent for the infra-red rays, sulphide of

calcium  is  as  valuable  for  the  radiations  of  the  other  extremity  of  the

spectrum—that is to say, for the blue and violet rays. One-tenth of a second's

exposure to light suffices for its impression to commence.

  To  study  the  action  of  the  various  rays  of  the  spectrum  on

phosphorescence,  we  have  only  to  place  in  the  focus  of  a  spectroscope

adapted for projection and mounted on a camera obscura, a plate covered

with a phosphorescent sulphide, and after exposure to light to open the carrier

in the dark.

  I used a three-prism spectroscope in front of which was a condensing

lens,  which  is  necessary  in  many  experiments  in  order  to  increase  the

intensity

 




 


 




 


  bo

  5

  '^

  •2 °

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY LIGHT 229  of the luminous rays falling on the plate. In studying the action of light on

phosphorescent bodies, these latter ought to be spread on glass or cardboard

screens.  The  process  of  making  phosphorescent  screens,  which  I  finally

adopted after trying several, is the following:—The sulphide is ground in an

agate mortar and passed through a sieve of the very finest silk. It is then

thoroughly  mixed  in  the  same  mortar  with  a  varnish  known  to  colour

merchants as bronzing varnish; the proportion of the powder added to the

varnish may vary according to the quality of the latter, but must not be less

than 30 per cent. When the mixture is perfectly homogeneous, it is poured,

without beinof allowed to settle and in the same manner as collodion, on to a

piece of cardboard laid flat. Care must be previously taken to gum on the

edges of the card a small mount half a millimetre thick, and two or three

millimetres wide.

  If the mixture is poured on to a strip of glass, we obtain a transparent

screen having exactly the appearance of fine ground glass. If the liquid is

poured on cardboard, the screen is naturally opaque, but as the coating can be

made thicker, it is more luminous. When too much varnish has not been put

into the mixture, the screen is dry and ready for use in a quarter of an hour.

  If we wish to preserve the image of the sulphide impressed by the various

rays,  all  that  is  needed  is  to  lay  the  screen  for  a  few  minutes  on  a

photographic plate, which is afterwards developed in the ordinary way.

  When operating with screens as above described and placed in the focus

of the spectroscope, nothing is more simple than to observe the action of the

    various parts of the spectrum. We then remark that the only part of the

solar spectrum able to impress phosphorescent bodies starts from the blue to

end very far on in the ultra-violet. The rest of the spectrum—that is to say, all

the rays from the green to far on in the infra-red—are not only without action

on  the  production  of  phosphorescence,  but  destroy  it  when  directed  on  a

phosphorescent body made luminous by the ultra-violet rays.

  These facts had been summarily observed long ago, but the interpretation

of them was very incomplete, for the extinction of light was attributed to a

calorific excitement which obliged the sulphide to emit its phosphorescence

in  a  short  space  of  time.  As  far  as  concerns  sulphide  of  zinc  especially,

comparative experiments made on screens placed one beside the other have

shown me that no period of excitement ever precedes the period of extinction.

It is only in the case of sulphide of calcium that a very slight excitement of

phosphorescence is seen to precede its extinction.  From the point of view of its action on phosphorescent bodies, the solar

spectrum thus comprises two regions very different, since their properties are

quite opposed to each other—(1) a region of illumination corresponding to

about half the visible spectrum, ranging from the blue into the ultra-violet; (2)

a region of extinction corresponding to the other part of the spectrum and

going far into the infra-red.

  In  the  part  intermediate  between  these  two  regions,  varying  slightly

according to the sulphide used, but oscillating round the line F, there is a

zone at once extinguishing and illuminating according to circumstances. With

a screen of unexposed sulphide, it

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY LIGHT 231

  excites a certain degree of phosphorescence, which is always very slight.

With a screen rendered very brilliant by previous insolation, it also restores

the phosphorescence in a slight degree.

  These last experiments, easy to observe in a camera obscura fu-rnished

with  a  spectroscope,  are  more  conveniently,  though  less  exactly  effected,

with  a  simple  yellow  glass.  If,  in  a  photographic  slide  closed  by  a  light

yellow glass, a screen of unexposed sulphide of calcium is placed, and beside

it another screen previously insolated, and the frame is opened in the dark

after the exposui'e of the two screens to sunlight through the yellow glass, it

is observed that they are both very slightly luminous. On the non-insolated

one, the rays which are both extinguishers and illuminators have acted as the

latter, and have produced a slight phosphorescence. On the screen previously

insolated of which the phosphorescence was at first very bright, they have

acted as extinguishers and have reduced it considerably. There therefore exist

rays  possessing  the  property  of  both  producing  a  certain  degree  of

phosphorescence and extinguishing it when it exceeds that degree.

  The  above  results  are  of  great  importance.  They  Avill  permit  us,  in

another chapter, to resolve by very simple experiments the question of the

existence oi" the antagonistic action of the two extremities of the spectrum.

This point had been discussed for more than fifty years, and photographic

experiments have not hitherto thrown much light upon it.

  § 3.— Phosphorescence of the Diamond Although by its phosphorescent

actions the diamond resembles the bodies we have just studied.

  it  yet  possesses  special  and  highly  interesting  properties,  the  study  of

which delayed me some time. It is for this reason that I devote a section to it.

  The  diamond  differs  from  the  other  natural  minerals  capable  ofphosphorescence,  because  while  in  these  last  the  aptitude  for  becoming

luminous under the influence of light is in part destroyed by heat, in the

diamond it is not so.

    Although the property possessed by the diamond of becoming luminous

in the dark after having been exposed to the light was known throughout

antiquity, its phosphorescence has not been the object of any special study.

Mineralogists  had  not  even  taken  the  trouble  to  seek  for  the  origin  of

phosphorescent  diamonds,  and  to  note  that  while  certain  mines  furnish

diamonds which are always phosphorescent, the contrary is the case with

others.

  The diamonds of commerce come either from Brazil or from the Cape.

Nearly  all  the  Indian  mines  have  been  long  since  exhausted.  Those  still

worked yield inferior products, which are no longer sent to Europe.

  All diamonds, including the very whitest, are to a practised eye slightly

tinted. Not one of the specialists consulted admits the existence of absolutely

colourless diamonds.

  The finest diamonds—that is to say, the most sparkling—come from the

Bahia  mines  in  Brazil.  They  become  every  day  more  rare.  The  immense

majority of those at present sold as Brazilian are simply Cape diamonds.^

  ^ Very small diamonds, those under one carat, fetch about the same price,

whether they come from the Cape or Brazil. Considerable diiferences of price

only occur in diamonds above one carat (205 milligr.). Bahia diamonds are in

that case worth about 40 per

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY LIGHT 233

  Cape diamonds, often as colourless as those of Brazil, and sometimes

larger, are always very inferior to the Brazilian, not only by their hardness but

also by their brightness. Placed by the side of the Brazilian, they appear dull.

  In order not to confuse the particular with the general, I studied about two

hundred diamonds of all sizes, some Cape and some Brazilian. The latter

mostly  came  from  the  Bahia  mine,  and  presented  all  known  varieties  of

colour.^

  In  order  to  study  the  visible  phosphorescence,  the  diamonds  were

subjected  to  an  illumination  produced  by  a  ribbon  of  magnesium  15

centimetres long, set on fire by a spirit lamp. This operation must always be

effected by an assistant, while the observer remains in the dark so as not to be

dazzled by the strong light of the burning magnesium, which prevents him

afterwards from seeing the phosphorescence.  The first trials made on a parcel of about a hundred diamonds of all tints,

half of them Brazilian and the other half Cape, immediately showed me one

curious fact. Nearly all the Brazilian and all those of the Bahia mine were,

during the operation, brightly phosphorescent, as much so as an insolated

fragment  of  sulphide  of  zinc.  Not  one  of  the  Cape  diamonds  was

phosphorescent.

  cent, more than those of the Cape. I will indicate further on means within

the  reach  of  every  one  of  distinguishing  between  these  two  qualities  of

diamonds,  which  jewellers  often  do  not  hesitate  to  substitute  one  for  the

other.

  1 All these diamonds, exclusive of those which I bought for the purpose

of pounding up, were lent to me by two of our great diamond importers, M.

Pelletier and M. Ochs. All my thanks are due to them for the trouble they

took in procuring for me, from various mines, the diamonds I desired.

  The  non-pliosplioresceiice  of  the  Cape  diamond  is,  however,  not

absolute, for after one has remained in the dark for at least twenty minutes, in

order to rest the eyes,—during which time the diamonds should be exposed to

the sun by an assistant,—a very slight phosphorescence on nearly half of

them is detected. This phosphorescence is on the border of the perceptible

minimum of light, and is in no way comparable to the brilliant light of the

Brazilian diamonds.

  The  same  experiments  repeated  many  times  with  other  diamonds  of

known origin have always afforded the same results,^

  As  a  first  conclusion,  we  see  that  it  is  not  to  the  coloration  of  the

diamond, but to its geological origin, that its phosphorescence is due. Whitish

or yellowish diamonds from Bahia are phosphorescent, while those from the

Cape are not, whatever be their colour.

  As with the various phosphorescent bodies, pulverization notably reduces

the phosphorescence of the diamond, but does not destroy it.

  All diamonds which phosphoresce by the action of light also do so when

a pencil of X-rays is directed upon them.

  Subjected to the electric induction spark in the

  ^ This means of distinguishing Brazilian from Cape diamonds is very

exact, and has more than once enabled me to enlighten purchasers on the real

value of their diamonds, indications which have always been found correct

by appraisers. I was able to discover immediately, out of a parcel of sixty

Cape  diamonds,  a  Brazilian  one  placed  there  in  error.  This  diagnosis  isavailable to every one, and will enable many persons to observe that they

sometimes pay nearly double their value for diamonds. A diamond sold for

10,000 francs on the strength of its being Brazilian is in reality only worth

6000 francs if it is from the Cape.

    PHOSPHORESCPJlSrOE PRODUCED BY LIGHT 235

  method  described  in  another  chapter,  all  diamonds  become

phosphorescent. They likewise become so when exposed to the influence of

radium, even through a thin leaf of aluminium.

  We  shall  see  in  another  chapter  that  diamonds  likewise  exhibit  the

phenomenon of invisible phosphorescence.

  The aptitude of diamonds for becoming phosphorescent by the action of

light is not destroyed by heat, as in the case with many mineral substances.

While, after being calcined for fifteen hours, it was destroyed in the case of

many bodies, such as fluor-spar, apatite, &c., yet I have been able to heat

diamonds  to  1000°  C.  for  sixty  hours  without  altering  their  aptitude  for

phosphorescence. They have then been reduced to impalpable powder in an

agate mortar, and then calcined over again.i This has not prevented them

from again shining after insolation.

  This persistence of the aptitude for phosphorescence, notwithstanding so

prolonged a calcination, shows that, if the phosphorescence of diamonds is

due to the presence of foreign bodies, these bodies are not altered by heat, or

at all events by a heat below that at which the diamond is destroyed.

  We are generally taught in the text-books that the rough diamond is not

phosphorescent, and only

  ^  This  operation  was  necessary  in  order  to  discover  if  the

phosphorescence were not due, as in the case of the amethyst, to foreig;n

bodies destructible by heat. It is not a very economical one, for the mercantile

value of cut diamonds of small dimensions is about 1300 francs per gramme.

This  cost  would  be  much  reduced  by  employing  rough  diamonds,  but

Brazilian  rough  diamonds  are  almost  undiscoverable  in  Paris,  merchants

iinding greater profit in importing them cut.

  acquires tliat property after being polished. Landrin, in his Dictionnaire

de Mineralogie, expresses himself as follows:—" A crystal of fluorite is not

phosphorescent when polished . . . The contrary is the case with the diamond,

which only gives light after having been subjected to polishing, and does not

manifest this faculty when in its natural crystalline state."

  I  was  almost  convinced  of  the  inexactitude  of  this  assertion,  since,according  to  my  observations,  the  pulverized  diamond  does  not  lose  its

aptitude  for  phosphorescence.  I  was  anxious,  however,  to  verify  by

experiments this belief of mineralogists; for the scientific consequences of the

property they attributed to the polished diamond would have been very great.

As I expected, it was one of those classic errors repeated without verification

to which repetition at length gives indisputable authority. Having succeeded

in procuring some rough diamonds from Brazil, yellow, blue, and transparent

—  some  crystallized,  others  rounded—I  was  enabled  to  note  their

phosphorescence by the action of light.

  The phosphorescence of diamonds seems to be connected, as in the case

with  other  bodies,  especially  the  sulphides  before  mentioned,  with  the

presence  of  traces  of  foreign  substances.  The  most  transparent  diamonds,

when incinerated, leave a small quantity of ash hardly less than 2 per cent.,

containing various bodies—magnesia, lime, and especially iron.

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY LIGHT 237

  § 4.— Relation betiueen the Intensity of the Phos-pjiorescence and the

Tem23erature of Insolated

    Substances

  Is the degree of phosphorescence which an insolated body may reach,

closely related to the temperature of this body during insolation ? Experiment

alone can decide this question.

  At  a  temperature  markedly  below  0°  C,  and  varying  according  to  the

substance,  bodies  exposed  to  the  light  do  not  acquire  visible

phosphorescence. Above this temperature the intensity of phosphorescence

obtained by a body exposed to the light increases when heated up to 100° C.

Above 100° C, the phosphorescence it may acquire diminishes, and towards

500°  C.  falls  to  nothing.  The  influence  of  this  high  temperature  may  be

explained by admitting that the precipitation of the light'by heat is then as

rapid as the absorption. The expulsion taking place at the same time as the

absorption, the phosphorescence does not appear.

  The  above  facts  can  be  verified  by  means  of  screens  of  sulphide  of

calcium placed on cards divided into halves. The two halves, placed side by

side in the dark, on recipients brought to different temperatures, are examined

as soon as they have been lighted up by a magnesium ribbon. Towards about

—190° C, which temperature is obtained by plunging the screen of sulphide

into liquid air, no phosphorescence under the action of light is observed, as

was first recognised by Dewar ; but on withdrawing the screen, and leaving itfor a moment in the dark at the ambient temperature, it becomes luminous.

The passage from -190° C. to the ambient temperature

    represents to the sulphide a considerable increase of heat, which causes it

to rapidly expel the invisible phosphorescence acquired at —190° C,

  But  it  is  between  0°  and  100°  C.  that  the  experiment  is  most  easily

effected. One half of the screen having been placed on a block of ice, the

other  on  a  sand  bath  heated  to  different  temperatures,  we  observe  after

exposure to magnesium light that the sulphide exposed when heated to 100°

C. is much more brilliant than that exposed at 0° C. In the case of sulphide of

calcium  the  difference  is  considerable,  but  much  less  so  in  the  case  of

sulphide of zinc.

  If one of the two screens is placed on a plate heated to 200° C, and the

other  kept  at  the  temperature  of  the  ambient  air,  i.e.  about  15°  C,  we

recognize, after illumination by magnesium, that the screen heated to 200° C.

is much less brilliant than the other. Repeating the same experiment with a

screen  heated  to  500°  C,  we  only  obtain  on  it  an  extremely  slight

phosphorescence.  I  have  given  above  the  probable  reason  for  these

differences.

  § 5.— Loss of Phosphorescence by the Action of Tivie

  What has been said of the action of various rays of the spectrum and of

the  temperature  during  exposure  has  already  proved  that  the  intensity  of

phosphorescence depends on several factors.

  There  remains  to  us  one  more  to  study,  viz.  time.  All  authors  have

regarded it as having a preponderating influence.

  Time has, on the loss of phosphorescence, an

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY LIGHT 239

    influence  evident  but  inferior  to  that  of  temperature.  As  the  visible

phosphorescence  which  follows  insolation  hardly  exceeds  for  the  most

sensitive  bodies  the  duration  of  a  few  hours,  time  has  hitherto  been

considered  as  the  principal  element  destructive  of  phosphorescence.  This

element has in reality no fundamental influence, since, by means of a suitable

temperature, we can entirely eliminate its action.

  Curves of the loss of phosphorescence as a function of the time have

several times been published, and their equations calculated. These curves

would only mean something if they expressed the loss at a given temperature,

for this loss varies with the temperature. The number of curves would then

have to be very considerable, since a special one would be required for eachtemperature.

  Curves  thus  constructed  would  have,  moreover,  no  characteristic  in

common. At a very low temperature varying with each body, the curve of

loss  as  a  function  of  the  time  would  be  represented  by  a  line  nearly

horizontal,  which  would  signify  that  at  that  low  temperature  the

phosphorescence diminished very slowly. At a high temperature the curve

would be almost vertical, signifying that the loss of phosphorescence is, on

the contrary, very rapid. At an intermediate temperature the curve would be

represented by a line at first and during the first few seconds after insolation

almost vertical, and then after a fairly short time almost horizontal.

  If the influence of the temperature had been more carefully studied, it

would  have  been  seen  long  ago  that  these  curves  of  the  loss  of

phosphorescence as a function of the time, since they set aside a much more

important factor than time, could possess no correctness.

  Not only is time a secondary factor in the phenomenon, but a moment

arrives when it has no eflfect on the loss of phosphorescence. We shall see, in

fact, that after a certain emission of light at a given temperature, the body

retains indefinitely a residual phosphorescence so long as its temperature is

not again raised.

  This law is very general. The loss of phosphorescence after insolation,

which appears to be spontaneous in certain bodies, such as the sulphides, is

the result of their not being able to retain at the ordinary temperature an

excess of phosphorescence, against which an antagonistic force, to which I

shall refer later on, contends. By cooling them sufficiently, we suppress all

emission. They are then analogous to liodies such as fiuorite or apatite, which

are only phosphorescent above 50° C, and on which time has absolutely no

effect.

  The action of the temperature is therefore much more important than that

of  time.  It  is  this,  and  not  time,  which  regulates  the  emission  of

phosphorescence.

  There can, however, be deduced some useful information from the study

of the loss of light under the influence of time if the temperature be kept

constant for the whole duration of the phosphorescent emission.

  Let us take a screen of insolated sulphide of calcium, keep it at 15° C, and

examine the curve of the loss of its light. It will fully justify what has been

said regarding the part played by temperature.

  If this last remains constant, the fall of the curve, representing the loss ofphosphorescence as a function of the time, is for the first minute after the

insolation almost vertical. It then bends slowly, becomes less

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY LIGHT 241

  and less oblique, and finally quite horizontal. At this moment the body no

longer radiates, time no longer influences it, and it keeps intact an invisible

provision of luminous energy which it will part with only by various means,

or, more particularly, by a rise in temperature. We will return at length to this

last point in another chapter.

  The general appearance of the above curve shows, indeed, that things

happen  as  if  the  reaction  exciting  the  phosphorescence  placed  itself  in

equilibrium  with  an  opposing  force  acting  in  a  converse  direction.

Immediately  after  its  insolation  the  screen  contains  an  excess  of

phosphorescence. Under the influence of the opposing force, this excess is

dissipated, rapidly at first, then slowly when the moment approaches when

the equilibrium is established between the phosphorescence and the opposing

force.  When  this  equilibrium  is  attained,  the  reactions  which  produce  the

phosphorescence stop entirely. The opposing force being unable to act further

on the reaction which generated the phosphorescence, the body will retain its

residue  of  phosphorescence  until  a  rise  in  temperature  again  destroys  the

equilibrium.

  I do not know of what this opposing force consists. I can only say that

things take place exactly as if it existed. This interpretation has also led me to

the discovery of the phenomena of invisible phosphorescence studied in a

future chapter.

    CHAPTER II

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY HEAT

  § 1.— Method of Observation

  Many  minerals  in  nature  possess  tlie  property  of  acquiring  a  bright

phosphorescence  when  brought  to  a  low  temperature  without  having  first

been exposed to light. If the heating is sufficiently prolonged, they lose all

their provision of phosphorescence, and no longer shine when heated after

being allowed to cool. They regain, but in a slight degree, the property of

shining by a rise in temperature, when we expose them to the light after

having exhausted their phosphorescence by heating.

  These facts, which have been known for a long time, represent about all

that  is  to  be  found  in  textbooks  on  physics  regarding  phosphorescence

produced by heat.  It is astonishing that so surprising a phenomenon as the phosphorescence

caused  by  slight  heat  should  not  long  ago  have  engaged  the  attention  of

physicists, With the theories current it is not apparent in what form a body

could have preserved since its geological formation a provision of luminous

energy which we can force it to expend by bringing it to a temperature which

may often be less than 100° C.

  The experiments now to be mentioned prove that the explanation of the

phenomenon is much simpler than that last given. It is not in the form of

luminous  energy  that  bodies  preserve  for  ages  their  aptitude  for

phosphorescence on a slight rise in temperature. They have simply preserved

com-

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY HEAT 243

  pounds  incapable  of  combining  with  each  other  at  an  ordinary

temperature, but able to do so when it is raised, which is the case with many

chemical reactions. Phosphorescence simply arises from these combinations.

Bodies in presence of each other which will not combine under a certain

temperature,  can  evidently  retain  for  an  indefinite  period  the  aptitude  for

phosphorescence  produced  by  their  combination,  just  as  chlorine  and

hydrogen remain inactive for an indefinite period in darkness, and combine

only when we introduce some exciting agent such as light.

  If I had not deemed it useless to modify accepted classifications, it is

really in the paragraph devoted to phosphorescence by chemical reaction that

I  should  have  inserted  that  which  concerns  phosphorescence  produced  by

heat.

  The methodical study of the action of heat on phosphorescence demands

a little apparatus easy to construct. It will serve us not only for study of the

action  of  heat,  but  likewise  for  that  of  the  infra-red  and  of  invisible

phosphorescence, which we shall examine in other chapters.

  The method of observation plays an important part in the research into the

phenomena  of  phosphorescence  by  heat.  The  processes  of  observation

employed  by  mineralogists,  which  consist  in  placing  the  bodies  to  be

examined on metal plates or crucibles at a red heat, are quite primitive, and it

is because their processes are rude that so many phenomena have escaped

them.

  The  moment  the  source  of  the  heat  becomes  visible,  whether  it  be

produced by a simple spirit lamp, or a gas burner with a blue flame, the eye

  is dazzled, and all feeble phosphorescence escapes observation.  For  the  purpose  of  studying  the  phosphorescence  produced  near  the

regions of the red rays, I simply make use of a large metal box, without a

cover, inverted over a small spirit lamp. Its sides should be serrated at the

bottom to allow the passage of air, and, in the part over the lamp, an orifice

made in which to place a small copper cup one-tenth of a millimetre thick,

which receives the body to be heated. By reason of the thinness of its walls

this cup can be heated and cooled almost instantaneously. It can be made red-

hot with the greatest ease, whenever necessary.

  To obtain the temperatures between 60° and 225° C, which are those most

often required, the following apparatus is used. It permits a dark heat to be

obtained without the sensitiveness of the eye being weakened by any ray of

light.

  We  procure  for  ten  francs  or  thereabouts,  from  some  dealer  in

photographic  apparatus,  one  of  those  triple  burner  lamps  with  a  metal

chimney, which are used for lighting magic-hinterns. On the upper extremity

of the chimney, which is pierced with lateral holes for the passage of air, we

place horizontally, in order to stop the light entirely and to have a plane

surface to receive the bodies required to be heated, the lid of a biscuit-box.

The glass or mica plate through which the light of the lamp issues, and which

slides in grooves, is replaced by a metal plate which thus masks all the visible

rays. As a little light still issues from the lower part of the apparatus, the latter

is surrounded by cardboard, which entirely envelopes it.

 




 


 




 


  Figs.  22  and  23.  Front  and  side  view  of  dark  lantern  used  in  these

experiments.

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY HEAT 245

  Thus constituted, the apparatus is all that is needed for researches where

heat  alone  comes  into  play.  But  in  many  experiments  on  invisiblephosphorescence,  we  need  an  abundant  source  of  infrared  variations  of

determinate wave-leno'th. In order to obtain these, it suffices to replace the

metal plate in front of the lamp by a strip of ebonite about 0*5 mm. thick,

fixed between two strips of glass to prevent its shape being altered by the

heat. The ebonite may be replaced with advantage by black glass, but this

umst be of good quality, so that the disc of the sun cannot be seen through it,

and yet that it may be transparent to the infra-red. This being difficult to

procure, I do not dwell on its use.

  Under these conditions, the lamp gives the following temperatures:—

    Temperature of the side of the cover placed on the top of the metallic

chimney of the lamp :

  1. With all three burners alight, about 225° C.

  2. With two burners, about 130° C.

  3. With one burner, about 65° C.

  4. Temperature of the vertical side of the metallic chimney of the lamp,

about 105° C.

  5. Temperature at 1 cm. from the vertical side of the chimney, about 50°

C.

  In front of the strip of ebonite or black glass, the temperature at 2 mm. of

their surface is only 30° C, but through these bodies there passes a great

quantity of invisible infra-red radiations, of Avhich a great part is comprised

in the region of the spectrum from 0*8 fi to about 3 fi. It is these which act on

phosphorescent  substances,  and  possess  the  property  of  passing  through

opaque bodies, as we shall see in another chapter.

  All the metal sides of the lamp also, of course, emit infra-red rays, as do

all heated bodies, but these radiations, having a wave-length of 5 /i to 10 /x,

do not act on phosphorescent bodies.

  In this manner is constituted the source of heat and of dark radiations

which I have designated by the name of dark lamp.

  The  instrument  should  be  placed  in  an  absolutely  dark  room.  It  is

preferable to make the experiments in the evening, for then the eye is much

more sensitive to dim light. If the operations are effected in daylight, one

should  remain  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  the  dark  and  let  the  illumination,

whether by magnesium or by the sun, be carried out by an assistant, while the

observer  remains  in  the  dark.  This  last  precaution  is  quite  indispensable.

Many phenomena escaped me at the commencement of my experiments for

want of this precaution.  § 2.— The Properties of Bodies Pliosphorescent by Heat

  The list of bodies phosphorescent by heat is very long, though in treatises

on  mineralogy  but  a  small  number  are  given:  fluorite,  fluor-spar,  topaz,

several varieties of phosphate of lime, leucophane, diamond, are noticeable

among them, A large number of others must now be added to these different

bodies. Among those I have examined I will mention especially the Siberian

and Bogotan emeralds, the Auvergne amethyst (but not that of Madagascar),

the chlorospinel, the opal, cryolite, scheelite, wagnerite, phenacite, petalite,

castor, pollux, colemanite, talc, baryta, &c.

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY HEAT 247

  Most  of  these  compounds  are  of  aqueous  origin.  Bodies  very

phosphorescent by light—that is, the sulphides of the alkaline earths—only

acquire,  on  the  contrary,  the  property  of  becoming  phosphorescent  after

having been subjected, during their manufacture, to a high temperature.

  Many of the bodies phosphorescent by heat, and especially the Australian

opal, leucophane, and the apatite of Estremadura, together with nearly all the

different varieties of fluorite, likewise become phosphorescent by exposure to

light;  but  their  phosphorescence,  being  in  that  case  very  slight,  is  only

perceived by the observer after a stay of a quarter of an hour in the dark.

  As the above bodies possess identical properties, and only differ from one

another  by  the  intensity  of  their  phosphorescence,  its  duration,  and  the

temperature at which it manifests itself, I shall here confine myself to the

examination of some of those which offer the brightest phosphorescence—

such as the apatite of Estremadura and the green fluorite especially.

  The apatite of Estremadura, a body easily procured in large quantities, is

the one of which the phosphorescence commences at the lowest temperature.

Reduced to powder, and put in a tube placed in a sand bath or in water slowly

heated in the dark, it begins to shine with a feeble light at 51° C. Heated to

200° C. it acquires a bright phosphorescence, which lasts for about an hour,

on  condition,  be  it  understood,  that  that  temperature  is  not  exceeded.  If

brought to a red heat its brilliancy will be greater still, but will pass off in less

than a minute.

  The different varieties of fluorite noticed by me—

  and they are very numerous — behave much like apatite, but are always

less luminous.

  The  temperature  at  which  the  fluorites  become  phosphorescent  varies

greatly with the different samples. I have examined some thirty of differentorigins, and have noted that the majority shine at temperatures below 200° C.

The varieties which become illuminated at the lowest temperature are those

from  Morgen  (Saone  ct  Loire),  from  the  Pyrenees,  and  from

Schwarzenbergen in Saxony. They commence to shine at about G2° C.

  It  has  been  said  that  the  transparent  fluorites  do  not  exhibit

phosphorescence by heat. This erroneous assertion can only be due to an

imperfect  method  of  observation.  All  the  fluorites  that  I  have  examined,

including some which were colourless and transparent as glass, and which are

used in the manufacture of prisms and lenses, are very phosphorescent by

heat.  I  have,  moreover,  found  but  one  sample  of  fluorite  which  was  not

phosphorescent  by  heat,  i.e.  the  yellowish  cubic  variety  in  little  crystals

which comes from Herblay.

  All fluorites are slightly phosphorescent by light, save the yellow variety

above-mentioned and a green crystaUized fluorite coming from Durham,

  When, after the expulsion by heat of all their phosphorescence, the bodies

examined above are exposed to the sun and heated anew, they again shine,

but much less brightly than the flrst time.

  The property appertaining to several bodies like fluorite, of becoming

phosphorescent at one and the same time by heat and by light, has been the

origin  of  an  error  which  for  a  century  runs  through  all  treatises  on

mineralogy, and has been religiously

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY HEAT 249

  repeated by various authors, including Edmond Becquerel, without their

ever having taken the trouble to verify the grounds of it. According to them,

certain varieties of the green fiuorite called chlorophane shine indefinitely in

the dark at a temperature of 30° C.—that is to say, they are luminous in

darkness nearly all the summer in our climate and the whole year round in

hot  countries.  This  is  how  Beudant  expresses  himself  with  regard  to  this

matter : " There are varieties designated under the name of Gldorophane, of

which some are phosphorescent at the average temperature of our climate, so

that  they  shine  constantly  in  the  dark,  while  others  simply  require  the

temperature of the hand." ^

  The most recent and important German treatise on mineralogy, that of

Naumann and Zirkel, expresses the same idea: " Many topazes, diamonds,

and fluorites become phosphorescent at the temperature of the hand. . . . The

green  fiuorite  (chlorophane)  often  remains  brilliant  for  weeks  after  being

insolated."    Although this fact enunciated by mineralogists seemed theoretically very

improbable, I desired, by reason of its consequences, to verify it. I therefore

examined innumerable samples of the variety of fluorites called chlorophane

from the most important firms of mineralogists in Europe. Not one shone at

30° C, nor at the temperature of the hand.

    Evidently this was bound to be so. Suppose, in fact, the}^ could have

shone  at  from  30°  to  37°  C,  Having  been  many  times  exposed  to  this

temperature since their geological formation, they must have lost long ago

their provision of phosphorescence, unless

  ^ Mineraloyie, 2ud editiou, vol. i. 203.

  we class them in the category of radio-active bodies spontaneously and

perpetually phosphorescent.

  After  having  discovered  that  the  fact  set  forth  by  physicists  like  E.

Becquerel  and  mineralogists  like  Beudant  was  incorrect,  the  cause  of  the

error had to be established. Its explanation is very simple.

  The  fluorites  in  question  acquire,  by  insolation,  a  very  feeble

phosphorescence, which the eye, unless previously rested, does not perceive

in the dark. If heated subsequently by holding them in the hand, it happens, as

is also the case with all phosphorescent bodies, that their luminosity becomes

more vivid. It is then easily seen, and the observer concludes that it is the heat

of the hand which has produced this phosphorescence. To be convinced that

it is nothing of the kind, we need only leave the same sample in the dark for

forty-eight hours. Then, placing it in the hollow of the hand, it is noticed that

it no longer shines at all. If it be exposed to the light and then placed in the

hand, it Avill shine at once. Consequently light is plainly the origin of the

phenomenon.

  The  cause  of  the  error,  so  faithfully  reproduced  in  all  treatises  of

mineralogy, was therefore that operators had left their specimens of fluorite

exposed to the light before putting it in their hand. Far from shining all the

summer, fluorite actually docs not keep this property after insolation longer

than ordinary phosphorescent bodies—that is to say, for a few hours.

  What is the origin of the phosphorescence manifested by certain bodies

under the influence of heat ? Phosphorescent sulphides can retain indefinitely

a part of the energy stored up by exposure

      PHOSPHORESCElSrCE PRODUCED BY HEAT 251

  to light. Might it not then be supposed that the phosphorescence emitted

under the influence of heat is due to the fact that the bodies manifesting ithave been often manipulated in the light before reaching the hands of the

observer ? Their phosphorescence would consequently be of recent origin,

and analogous to that preserved for years by the sulphides after insolation,

which can be made to appear by heating.

  In order to solve this question, it was necessary to examine bodies which

had not been brought to light since their geological formation.

  For  this  purpose,  it  sufficed  to  break  up,  in  absolute  darkness,  large

blocks of substances easily procurable in gross, such as apatite and fluorite,

to extract fragments from the centre of these blocks, and to subject them to

the influence of heat. These fragments shone as vividly as those taken from

the surface of the blocks. It was therefore not to a residuum derived from the

recent action of light that their phosphorescence by heat was due.

  When studying the causes of phosphorescence, we shall see that the light

manifested  by  bodies  under  the  influence  of  temperature  is  the  result  of

chemical reaction provoked by heat. In bodies phosphorescent by light, in the

ordinary  temperature,  these  combinations  are  easily  re-formed  after  being

torn apart, and that is why all their phosphorescence is restored to them by

exposing them anew to the light when they have become dark. For bodies

which only become phosphorescent at a more or less elevated temperature,

and only regain very feebly the aptitude for a new phosphorescence by heat

after insolation, it is probable that the combinations destroyed by

  the temperature are only very incompletely re-formed by light. We shall

see, however, that they may be completely regenerated under the influence of

electricity, and that there can be restored to bodies which have lost it, the

property of shining anew under the influence of heat as vividly as the first

time they were heated.

  The aptitude of bodies to again become phosphorescent m the light after

having been heated is, moreover, only lost with great ditiiculty. All those on

which I have experimented — flaorite, leuco-phane, apatite, &c.—must be

calcined at a red heat for fifteen hours before losing it entirely. Ten hours of

calcination were quite insufticient.

  How does a protracted rise in temperature act ? Why does it take from a

body its aptitude for giving phosphorescence ?

  The first idea which strikes one is that the calcination destroys certain

foreign bodies necessary to phosphorescence.

  This hypothesis seems at first sight justified by the change in appearance

undergone by a small number of bodies subjected to this calcination. Theviolet  amethyst,  when  calcined,  loses  its  colour  entirely,  and  becomes  as

transparent as glass. It has therefore evidently lost something which produced

the phosphorescence, since this can no longer be restored to it afterwards by

the action of light or of heat.

  But  that  which  is  true  as  regards  ameth3^sts  and,  perhaps,  also  other

bodies,  ceases  entirely  to  be  so  for  the  great  majority  of  phosphorescent

substances. By calcining them for fifteen hours, I have caused them to lose

entirely  their  property  of  becoming  again  phosphorescent  by  heat  after

insolation. But

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY HEAT 253

  by this operation I eliminated no foreign element. I simply destroyed the

aptitude  of  the  bodies  present  for  chemical  combination.  Proof  of  this  is

furnished by the fact that by suitable treatment the aptitude to become as

phosphorescent by heat as they were before calcination can be restored to

calcined bodies.

  To restore to a calcined body its aptitude for phosphorescence, it suffices

to pass electric sparks through it for a certain length of time. This property of

the electric spark was summarily observed as early as the first years of last

century. As, however, the induction coil was not then known, I thought it

might be useful to take up again the study of the phenomenon.

  The bodies subjected to the influence of the induction spark were placed

in a glass tube closed at its two extremities by corks, through which passed

copper  rods  connected  to  a  strong  coil.  By  approaching  and  withdrawing

these two rods sparks of from 1 to 15 centimetres could be obtained at will.

  The length of the spark has a manifest action. If, for example, carbonate

of lime is electrified by a spark of 2 cm., it shines very feebly at 200° C. It

shines, on the contrary, very vividly if the spark is 15 cm. long.

  The  duration  of  the  electrification  has  also  a  notable  influence.  If

powdered glass is electrified for five seconds only, it shines but feebly at

200° C. It shines, on the contrary, vividly at that temperature if the action of

the spark is prolonged for five minutes.

  In  a  general  way,  electricity  simply  vivifies  the  phosphorescence  of

bodies which, without its in-

  fluence, would have been very weak; but it has never, to my knowledge,

communicated it to bodies without any traces of it. In addition, it lowers the

degree at which they begin to shine by the action of heat. Cape diamonds,

hardly phosphorescent at 200° C, shine brilliantly at this temperature after thepassage of the electricity through them. Bologna spar, which only shines at

500° C. without electrification, is brilliant at 200° C, so soon as it has been

electrified.

  There exists indeed a very small number of bodies which present no trace

of phosphorescence at 500° C, and give a very slight one at that temperature

after electrification. This is, for example, the case with bromide of barium.

But then it may be supposed that before electrification they manifested a

phosphorescence  too  slight  to  be  visible.  I  found  this'  conclusion  on  this

general  fact,—that  electrification  only  renders  more  vivid  a  slight

phosphorescence. Even Avith bodies which possess a bright phosphorescence

when  they  are  impure,  such  as  the  sulphides  of  calcium,  of  barium,  of

strontium, and of zinc, the electric spark confers on them no trace of aptitude

for phosphorescence when they are pure.

  The  only  bodies  to  which  no  phosphorescence  can  be  restored  by

electricity are those to which calcination really causes a loss. Such is the case

with the amethyst, which loses its colouring matter when calcined. To all

other  bodies  phosphorescent  by  heat,  electrification  restores  the

phosphorescence lost by calcination. I have noted it especially in fluorite,

leucophane, and apatite, which, after having been calcined for fifteen hours,

lost the property of regaining phosphorescence by heat after insolation.

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY BEAT 255

  It seems therefore abundantly proved that, when we destroy m a body its

aptitude for phosphorescence by a sufficiently long calcination, this last most

often  acts,  not  by  eliminating  foreign  bodies,  but  by  modifying  certain

chemical equilibria which the electric spark is alone able to re-establish.

  §  3.—  Analogies  between  the  PJi.osphorescence  of  Bodies  caused  by

Light and by Heat

  Taken together, the preceding facts should have already begotten in the

reader's  mind  the  idea  that  there  must  be  a  near  kinship  between

phosphorescence by heat and that by light. The following experiments prove

definitely that they are phenomena of the same order.

  Let us take bodies phosphorescent by heat, such as fluorite and apatite, or

bodies  phosphorescent  by  light,  such  as  sulphide  of  calcium  which  has

remained a few days in the dark after insolation.

  Let us place them on a plate heated to 100° C. They will immediately

become  luminous,  will  shine  for  a  certain  time,  and  then  be  completely

extinguished. Without going out of the dark, let us place the same bodies on asecond plate heated to 200° C-Again they will shine, and then go out. We

may continue the same experiment at all temperatures up to 500° or 600° C,

and  we  see  with  every  increase  of  heat  the  body  shine  and  then  be

extinguished. It is only after being heated to a red heat for a sufficient time

that it loses all its phosphorescence.

  These experiments show that to a given temperature there corresponds a

certain emission of phosphorescence which can never be exceeded at that

    tem/perature. A phosphorescent body heated for months at 200° C. will

only lose what it can lose at 200° or less, and in no case the provision of

phosphorescence which would be emitted at a higher temperature.

  From  these  first  experiments  it  was  possible  to  deduce  that  a

phosphorescent  body  can  indefinitely  preserve  a  certain  provision  of

phosphorescence which it will only lose till heated to a suitable temperature.

This I was able to verify with different sulphides of alkaline earths, especially

sulphide  of  calcium  kept  for  ten  years  in  the  dark;  some  sulphide  of

strontium,  belonging  to  M.  Mourelo,  which  had  remained  five  years  in  a

closed box, and diamonds kept in the dark for one year, &c.

    Canton, who was one of the first observers of phosphorescence, seems to

have had a presentiment of the above laAV. Having heated a sulphide in

boiling water some time after its insolation, and not having seen it shine, he

rendered it luminous by heating it to 500° C, but neither he nor his successors

tried  to  define  the  conditions  of  the  phenomenon  and  did  not  suspect  its

duration.

  In the experiments related above, we progressively raised the temperature

of the bodies examined, and thus proved that to each degree of heat there

corresponds  a  certain  emission  of  phosphorescence  which  cannot  be

exceeded.

  Instead  of  raising  the  temperature  progressively,  let  us  proceed

conversely—that is to say, let us heat a body at once to 500° C. without

prolonging  the  heat  sufficiently  to  obtain  the  complete  extinction  of  the

phosphorescence. Then let it cool, and heat the body to only 200° C. What

happens?

    PHOSPHORESCENCE PRODUCED BY HEAT 257

  In this last case the body heated to 500° C. will first emit all it can lose at

all lower temperatures, and consequently will no longer be able to shine at

less than 500° C. To give it back its phosphorescence, it will have to be

heated again to 500° C. or more.  This general law of the emission of phosphorescence as a function of the

temperature, already pointed out in the last chapter, enables us to unite in one

class certain bodies phosphorescent by light and heat, till now separated. We

can very easily, in fact, transform bodies phosphorescent by light into bodies

phosphorescent by heat. The sulphides of calcium, of zinc, and of strontium,

kept in the dark for days or years after their insolation, are identical with

bodies phosphorescent by heat, such as the amethyst, fluorite, leucophane,

and apatite. It will suffice also to heat them up to about 70° C. to enable us to

see them shine.

  The analogy may be, however, carried much further. The substances we

call phosphorescent by heat only shine at determinate temperatures, varying

from  +50°  to  +300°  C,  according  to  the  bodies  observed.  The  luminous

sulphides, which shine when insolated at the normal temperature differ from

the  preceding  bodies  solely  because  the  temperature  at  which  they  cease

shining is much lower. Dewar, as has been said, has shown that, in liquid air,

insolated  bodies  acquire  no  phosphorescence,  but  that  they  manifest  it  so

soon  as  they  are  allowed  to  return'  to  the  ambient  temperature.  To  bring

bodies  refrigerated  to  about  —  190°  C.  back  to  the  temperature  of  the

ambient air, simply signifies that we heat them to more than

  B

  200° C.^ Sulphides which are dark at -190° C. and shine at 0° C. are

analogous to bodies which become phosphorescent by heat at a temperature

of  +200°  C.  Both  kinds  are  only  phosphorescent  when  they  have  been

sufficiently heated. A phosphorescent sulphide kept for an indefinite time at

—190° C. would always remain dark, as would apatite kept indefinitely at a

temperature lower than +50° C. The two bodies only differ, I repeat, by the

temperature at which the combinations accompanying their phosphorescence

take r)lace.

  When  bodies  phosphorescent  by  heat  have  been  brought  to  the

temperature  at  which  their  phosphorescence  becomes  extinguished,  they

cannot, as has been said, recover by exposure to the light more than a very

small part of it. This is probably due to the fact that the chemical reaction

which  produces  the  phosphorescence  can  only  be  partially  regenerated  in

certain bodies by light, while in others it is totally so, as especially with the

phosphorescent  sulphides  and  diamonds.  These  are  shades  rather  than

fundamental  differences.  There  exists  no  real  barrier  between  bodies

phosphorescent by light and those phosphorescent by heat.  From  the  above  considerations  may  be  deduced  the  following  laws,

applicable to all bodies phosphorescent by light or by heat:—

  1. There are no bodies phosphorescent Avithout heat. A body capable of

being rendered phosphores-

  1  These  are,  however,  changes  much  too  great.  The  divers

phosphorescent  sulphides  cease  to  shine  long  before  -190°,  and  return  to

phosphorescence  long  before  0°  C.  is  reached.  The  temperature  varies,

moreover, vs^ith the various sulphides.

    PHOSPHORESCENCE FROM OTHER CAUSES 259

  cent  by  light  will  only  manifest  its  phosphorescence  at  a  certain

temperature.

  2. For each phosphorescent body there is a minimum temperature below

which exposure to the light cannot produce visible phosphorescence.

  3.  To  each  temperature  corresponds  a  certain  emission  of

phosphorescence which cannot be exceeded.

  4. Bodies which heat renders phosphorescent also become so by light, but

only slightly. They differ from those vividly phosphorescent by light only in

that  in  these  last  the  luminous  rays  entirely  regenerate  the  whole  of  the

destroyed phosphorescence instead of regenerating only a part of it.

    CHAPTER III

    PHOSPHORESCENCE  PROCEEDING  FROM  CAUSES  OTHER

THAN LIGHT AND HEAT

  § 1. Phosphorescence through Impact and by Friction

  A LARGE number of bodies become phosphorescent by friction or by

impact.  In  the  case  of  some—  apatite,  leucophane,  diamonds,  sugar,  and

uranium— the impacts or movements may be slight; for others —such as

fluorite and silex—the friction or impact must be somewhat energetic.

  Whether  violent  or  slight,  they  only  generate  a  very  weak  rise  in

temperature,  quite  insufficient  to  bring  them  to  incandescence.  It  cannot

therefore

  be lieat which produces the phosphorescence observed in the substances

mentioned.

  Neither does the shock nor the friction seem to determine the preliminary

operations necessary to produce a reaction propagated from point to point, as

in the decomposition of iodide of nitrogen, for instance. Phosphorescence by

shock or friction does not, in fact, survive the disappearance of its cause, as in

the case with that due to light.  The oxygen of the air plays no part in phosphorescence by shock, which

is favoured, on the contrary, by the total absence of oxygen—that is to say,

by  a  vacuum.  An  exhausted  tube  containing  a  little  mercury  becomes

luminous as soon as the metal is displaced by a slight movement.

  Several bodies which friction renders phosphorescent also become so by

the action of light and of heat. There exist, however, a small number, such as

metallic  uranium,  Avhich  are  rendered  phosphorescent  exclusively  by

friction.

  If, by a very prolonged calcination, we destroy the property possessed by

many  bodies—fluorite,  apatite,  and  leucophane—of  phosphorescing  under

the  influence  of  heat,  these  substances  retain  the  facility  of  becoming

luminous by friction. We shall notice, on the other hand, that bodies hardly at

all  phosphorescent  by  heat,  like  Cape  diamonds,  become  vividly  so  by

friction.

  The result of these experiments seems to be that the reactions which give

to bodies an aptitude for luminous and calorific phosphorescence differ from

those which cause them to shine after friction or a shock. It is probable,

however, that it is a question of different causes producing the same effect.

    PHOSPHORESCENCE FROM OTHER CAUSES 261

  § 2, PJiosphorescence by X-Rays, Cathode Rays, and High-Frequency

Ejffiiives

  The phenomena of phosphorescence from the above causes are very well

known, and I shall have very little to add to them.

  We know that a large number of bodies, and among them compounds not

phosphorescent  by  other  processes,  such  as  rubies,  become  extremely

luminous  when  exposed  to  the  bombardment  of  the  raretied  gases  in  a

Crookes  tube.  The  phosphorescence  of  those  which  become  brilliant  in  a

strong light, such as diamonds and certain sulphides, is greatly increased. It is

sufficient to place them in a Geissler tube subjected to induction sparks. With

some  sulphide  of  calcium  in  such  a  tube,  I  was  able  to  obtain  a

phosphorescence of which the brilliancy, surface for surface, reached I'u of a

candle power.

  The  X-rays  from  a  Crookes  tube  provoke  only  a  very  weak

phosphorescence, and only in a small number of bodies, contrary to what is

generally thought. Even with those phosphorescent in ordinary or in ultra-

violet  light,  the  illumination  is  slight.  The  X-rays  make  the  sulphide  of

calcium  luminous  to  an  extremely  slight  extent,  much  less  than  would  asimple candle. They also illumine moderately— that is to say, much less than

ordinary daylight —sulphide of zinc, and herein differ entirely from the ultra-

violet radiations to which it was for a long time sought to assimilate them.

  On  the  fluorescent  substances  —  that  is  to  say,  those  of  which  the

phosphorescence does not survive the cause producing it—the X-rays act, on

the con-

  trary,  very  vividly,  tlaerein  behaving  like  ultraviolet  rays,  but  more

energetically.  It  was  even,  as  is  known,  this  property  which  caused  their

discovery, and rendered them utilizable. Platinocyanide of barium, of which

radiographic screens are formed, is not the only salt which becomes strongly

luminous  under  their  action.  Apatite,  leucophane,  fluorite,  and,  above  all,

Brazilian diamonds are also illumined, though more feebly.

  Many bodies, diamonds, sulphide of zinc, &c., which are luminous under

the influence of the X-rays, also'become so under the action of the salts of

radium. Cape diamonds, not phosphorescent by light, become so in presence

of bromide of radium, even when this salt is enclosed in a thin metal tube.

  Sir W. Crookes has remarked that diamonds placed for several months in

contact with radium, acquire such a radio-activity that it does not disappear

when they are heated to a dark red.

  Taken altogether, the preceding phenomena show us that certain bodies

become  phosphorescent  from  very  different  causes—light,  shock,  cathode

rays, X-rays, &c.; these causes perhaps act, as has been said, by producing

reactions, which, if not identical, are at least of the same order.

  § 3.— Phosphorescence bi/ Chemical Reaction

  For  a  long  time,  the  only  chemical  reaction  known  to  produce

phosphorescence  was  the  slow  oxidation  of  phosphorus.  It  is  known,  by

recent  investigations,  that  phosphorescence  accompanies  a  considerable

number of reactions.

    PHOSPHORESCENCE FROM OTHER CAUSES 263

  Most  of  these,  however,  are  badly  defined  and  result  from  somewhat

complex  mixtures.  Thus,  for  instance,  those  produced  by  mixing  certain

organic bodies, like esculine or various essences with an alcoholic solution of

potash, or, again, that obtained by pouring sulphate of aluminum or chloride

of gold into an alkaline solution of pyrogallol.i

  To arrive at a precise knowledge of the causes of phosphorescence by

chemical reaction, it must be produced by reactions far more simple than

those preceding—the oxidation or hydration of well-defined compounds, forinstance. This is what I have endeavoured to realize.

    Phosphorescence by oxidation is exceptional. That of phosphorus is very

probably not due to a simple oxidation only, as I have shown elsewhere.

  I have obtained other phosphorescences by oxidation, but they border on

incandescence  as  much  as  on  phosphorescence,  and  constitute  perhaps  a

transition between the two. Such is notably the case with uranium.

  Let us take a strip of this metal about one millimetre thick, and place it on

a plate heated to about 600° C. It becomes vividly brilliant. AVith-draw it

with pincers, and it continues to shine for two or three minutes, which would

not happen if it were a simple phenomenon of incandescence that was in

question. The same operation may be

  ^ For producing a rather lively phosphorescence there has been

  recently mentioned a mixture of :—

  iO c.c. of a 10 per cent, solution of pyrogallic acid,

  20 c.c. of a 40 per cent, solution of carbonate of potash,

  10 c.c. of a 30 per cent, solution of formol.

  The above mixture should become phosphorescent by adding to it

  30 per cent, of concentrated oxygenated water.

  repeated several times, but the duration of the luminosity of the metal

becomes shorter each time, and finally—no doubt when it is entirely oxidized

— heat no longer produces any effect upon it.

  The  only  clearly  defined  reaction  which  allowed  me  to  obtain

phosphorescence is hydration. The best-defined cases are those of sulphate of

quinine and cinchonine. Heated to 150° C, these salts lose part of their water,

and after shining for an instant again become completely dark. When they

have  thus  lost  all  their  phosphorescence,  they  are  allowed  to  cool;  they

become  at  once  hydrated  by  contact  with  the  air,  again  become

phosphorescent, and at the same time radio-active. I shall not dwell upon this

experiment, the details of which I have given in VEvolution dt la Matiere. By

reason of its considerable theoretical importance from the point of view of the

causes of radio-activity, it has been the object of important papers abroad.

The exactness of my observations has thus been clearly confirmed.

  It is possible, in the preceding experiment, to render the employment of

heat completely useless. It is sufHcient to mix the sulphate of quinine in a

bottle with a little anhydrous phosphoric acid which at once dehydrates it. It

is hydrated anew by simply breathing on its surface. Persons not previously

informed  of  the  theory  of  the  operation  are  always  much  surprised  whenshown a body which becomes phosphorescent when breathed upon.

  Sulphate of quinine is, of course, not the only compound which possesses

the property of becoming phosphorescent by hydration. I have found a whole

series  of  bodies  offering  the  same  phenomenon.  Such,  especially,  are

ordinary mag-

    PHOSPHORESCENCE FROM OTHER CAUSES 265

  nesia, the sulphate of lime of commerce, and hydrated alumina.^

  These only ditter from sulphate of quinine by becoming phosphorescent

by  dehydration  alone,  instead  of  phosphorescing,  like  the  first,  both  by  -

hydration and by dehydration. Further, as these bodies become dehydrated

slowly and with difficulty, they have to be heated to nearly 500° C. for the

phenomenon to be well marked.

    Phosphorescence  is  very  easy  to  observe  with  sulphate  of  lime  and

especially  with  ordinary  magnesia,  Avhich  becomes  very  luminous  when

dehydrating. This is less apparent with alumina.

  If,  after  heating  these  compounds  for  some  minutes  until  the

phosphorescence is extinct, they are allowed to cool in the dark and then

heated again, they again shine. But the luminosity is much greater if their

hydration has been rendered more complete by moistenincr them with a little

water  before  heating'  them.  As  soon  as  the  heat  is  sufficient  to  produce

dehydration, they become very phosphorescent.

  The phosphorescence thus obtained can be repeated indefinitely on the

same body by simply moistening it the moment it is dried by the heat. This is

not at all the case, as we have seen, with bodies made phosphorescent by a

simple rise in temperature. Cooled and then heated again, these last no longer

become phosphorescent unless in the meantime they have been exposed to

the light.

  Salts of radium lose, as I have shown in my earlier

  1  I  only  mention  the  easiest  bodies  to  procure,  in  which  the

phosphorescence is most vivid. There are many others—oxide of tliorium, for

instance, which exhibits phosphorescence by hydration, but it is v^ery slight.

  work, their phosphorescence when hydrated. The very active ones regain

it at once after having been dehydrated by heat, those slightly active, only

some days after their desiccation.

  § 4.— Phosphorescence of Living Beings

  The phosphorescence of living beings has for a long time been considered

as a rather rare phenomenon manifested by a very small number of animalsand vegetables.

  It has been observed, however, from remote antiquity. Besides the " sea

of fire " necessarily known to all navigators, and the luminosity of which is

produced by the presence of infusoria, the ancient authors have mentioned

the phosphorescence of certain marine animals. Pliny pointed out that the

liquid from the pholads renders luminous in the dark the lips and hands of

those who eat this mollusc. Fisher relates, in his Manuel de Gonchyliologie,

that Keaumur " has noted that fragments of these beings remain luminous

after their separation from the body, and that when dried, they are able to

emit light anew when moistened."  Until  recent  years  the  number  of  phosphorescent  animals  known  was

somewhat restricted. No one could have suspected that the depths, so long

inaccessible, of the vast oceans, where reigned, it was thought, eternal night,

were inhabited by innumerable luminous beings. Since suitable instruments

have  permitted  the  study  of  the  inhabitants  of  seas  at  depths  of  several

thousand metres, a complete new world has been revealed.

  It then became known that the bottom of the

    PHOSPHORESCENCE FROM OTHER CAUSES 267

  sea was covered with veritable forests of phosphorescent polyps; that the

smallest as well as the most bulky of the beings inhabiting these dark depths

often possessed organs enabling them to light themselves through the abysses

in which they live.

  The phosphorescent organs of the marine animals reveal very different

dispositions. Some are placed in different parts of the body; others in the eye

itself,  or  above  it,  and  it  is  quite  correctly  that  these  latter  have  been

compared to  bicycle lamps. Dr. Richard, curator of the collections of the

Prince  of  Monaco,  showed  me  a  whole  series  of  phosphorescent  marine

animals,  and  notably  large  fishes,  possessing  on  each  side  of  the  body

veritable lamps which they can mask at will. All these beings have been the

subject of numerous studies, almost exclusively of an anatomical nature.

  In addition to the phosphorescent beings which people the depths of the

sea, there should be quoted the luminous bacteria which appear on the bodies

of fishes after their death and before their decomposition. These bacteria can

be cultivated very easily by the classic processes. An excellent culture can be

made with ordinary water containing about 3 per cent, of sea-salt and 1 per

cent,  of  asparagine.  It  is  with  analogous  products  that  were  obtained  the

bottles sold by the name of " Living Light" at the Paris Exhibition of 1900. I

have prepared some similar ones by simply scraping with a knife blade the

scales of a herring and introducing the scrapings into bottles of the above

liquid. At the end of twenty-four hours they possess a luminosity which lasts

for three or four days.

    Notwithstanding various researches we have not

  succeeded  in  determining  the  cliemical  bodies  which  produce  this

phosphorescence. We only Ivnow that it is a phenomenon which can survive

the death of the animal. Carus had already seen that the luminous organs of

the  Italian  lamprey,  when  dried  and  powdered,  regained  their  lost

phosphorescence on being simply moistened.  These phenomena of the phosphoresence of living beings are certainly

due to chemical actions requiring the presence of air and water. When these

two elements are suppressed it disappears. It has been shown above that for

certain  well-defined  bodies  hydration  is  always  accompanied  by

phosphorescence.

  The spectrum of the phosphorescence of living beings seems to present a

few variations differing with the animals. It impresses the photographic plate

very rapidly. I have been able to reproduce negatives with two minutes of

exposure  by  taking,  as  the  source  of  light,  fish  which  have  become

phosphorescent after death by the development of luminous bacteria.

  The  phosphorescence  of  living  beings  presents,  in  its  effects,  close

analogies to the phosphorescence produced by the various bodies we have

already studied. It differs from them, in its causes, by being generated neither

by light nor by heat. By its effects as well as by its causes, it is near akin to

the phosphorescence by chemical reaction examined above.

  § 5.— The Phosphorescence of Gases

  The study of electric discharges in gases demonstrates the part played by

electricity in the pro-

    PHOSPHORESCENCE FROM OTHER CAUSES 269

  duction of phosphorescence. The various causes studied above regarding

this phenomenon, such as Hght and heat, act perhaps by indirectly exciting

electric manifestations capable of producing phosphorescence.

  In the phosphorescence of gases the action of electricity is perfectly clear,

since it alone can render them luminous. The highest temperature, even when

a  whole  metre  of  gas  is  heated,  only  gives  them  a  hardly  perceptible

luminosity ; whereas, if they are introduced in a rarefied state into a tube

through which an electric current is passed, they become greatly luminous. It

is  even  sufficient  to  place  the  tube  containing  the  rarefied  gas  in  the

neighbourhood of a high-frequency resonator, or, again, to subject it to the

action of electric waves. With tubes of helium, the luminosity is brilliant

enough for it to be used to detect these last.^

  The phosphorescence obtained by the electrification of gases is relatively

bright,  but  up  to  late  years  there  seemed  no  hope  of  rendering  it  intense

enough for lighting purposes.

  The remarkable discovery of the mercury lamp has shown that lighting by

phosphorescence was practicable, and proves once njore to what a degree

incandescence is independent of phosphorescence.  It  will  be  remembered  that  this  lamp  consists  of  a  long  glass  tube

furnished with electrodes—one of iron, the other of mercury. If, after having

made a vacuum in this tube, these two electrodes are connected to a source of

electricity, the traces of

  1  Tubes  of  neon  rather  than  of  heh'um  are  now  used  as  detectors  of

Hertzian waves. Dr. Fleming's well-known cymometer is a good example of

their use.— Ed.

  gas and mercury vapour that it contains become brightly phosphorescent.

In this luminosity there is evidently no phenomenon of incandescence, seeing

that the temperature inside the tube is only about 125° C.—that is to say,

about much less than that necessary to render a body incandescent. The flame

of a simple candle, as we know, has a temperature of about 1700° C.

  The spectrum of the phosphorescence of gases, such as is given by the

mercury tube, contains very few red and infra-red rays, although it has an

output much higher than that of the ordinary incandescent light. To obtain

this last there must first be produced an enormous quantity of invisible, and

therefore useless, calorific rays. Our present process of artificial lighting is

barbarous, as has been recognised for some time. While the ideal method

would  be  to  produce  only  the  visible  and  not  the  invisible  part  of  the

spectrum, a gas flame or the electric arc contains only 1 per cent, of useful

rays, 99 per cent, of the energy produced manifesting itself in the form of

dark heat. This amounts to saying that when we burn 100 fcs, worth of gas,

99 fcs. are entirely lost, and only one franc's worth made use of. With the

phosphorescence of the mercury lamp, of the 100 fcs. expended 40 fcs. seems

to serve for lighting. The output of the phosphorescent animals, such as the

glowworm, is higher still, since nearly the whole of the energy expended is

transformed into visible light. Phosphorescence will probably be the artificial

light of the future.

  It  is  not  for  this  reason  alone  necessary  to  pursue  the  study  of  the

phosphorescence of gases. I have always regretted that it was too costly for

my modest

    researches, because I am persuaded that its thorough knowledge will open

up new vistas on the greatest problems of physics and astronomy.

    Phosphorescence  by  electrical  action  gives,  then,  to  atoms  the  same

radiating properties as does heat. Intra-atomic energy ought to play some part

in the production of this phenomenon, for the gases in the tubes described are

strongly ionized-—that is to say, dissociated by the passage of the current.  It is probably to the influence of electric actions analogous to those of

which the effects have just been shown that certain stars, composed, as their

spectrum shows, of gas, owe their luminous brilliancy. Since gaseous bodies

cannot shine by incandescence, as we have seen, other causes than heat must

be sought for the light of many stars.

  But if some stars are luminous simply by electric actions similar to those

studied, it would follow that the stars to which one attributes an enormous

heat, may be on the contrary at a temperature relatively low. It is perhaps

only at a certain phase of their existence that they shine by incandescence.

    CHAPTER IV

  THE CAUSES OF PHOSPHORESCENCE

  § 1.— Phosphorescence as a Manifestation of Intra-Atomic Energy

    Phosphorescence  represents  the  transformation  into  light  of  various

energies of which only a few are known. In the case of gases we have seen

that

    electric energy is fhe sole possible cause of their phosphorescence. In that

due to the action of light, of heat, and of chemical reactions, other energies

intervene, the mode of action of which is still undetermined.

  Since very different causes—light, shock or impact, and X-rays—may

produce phosphorescence in the same substance, there is ground for believing

that  these  very  different  excitants  act  by  provoking  the  manifestation  of

reactions,  which,  if  not  identical,  are  at  least  of  the  same  order.  The  old

theory which considered phosphorescent bodies as simply restoring the light

absorbed, as a sponge restores the water it has imbibed, is no longer tenable

at the present day.

  The  phenomenon  of  phosphorescence  seems  linked  with  that  of  the

dissociation of matter, and with the liberation of energies which accompany

this dissociation. The link is evident as regards the phosphorescence of gases,

since the latter only become phosphorescent under the influence of electrical

actions, which are always accompanied by ionization —that is to say, by the

disintegration of their atoms.

  As  regards  other  forms  of  phosphorescence,  the  connection  with

dissociation is far less evident. It, however, appears at least probable in the

case of phosphorescence by light, when we remember that light energetically

dissociates matter, and that it is just the radiations producing this dissociation

which are the most apt to produce phosphorescence.

  The tendency to consider phosphorescence as one of the consequences ofthe dissociation of atoms is beginning to take shape among physicists. De

Heen and, after him, Lenard, have recently arrived at the

  conclusion  that  light  acts  by  provoking  the  emission  of  negative  ions

issuing from the atom, and capable of returning to it by oscillation.

  To these movements of the elements of the dissociated atom should be

due the radiation in the ether producing phosphorescence. Its light, of the

same nature as that of incandescent bodies, differs from it by the absence of

any elevation of temperature, which amply justifies the name of cold light

sometimes given to it. It is possible that the rays of light, electricity, and the

different  causes  of  phosphorescence  bring  the  intra-atomic  energy

immediately  in  play  without  its  having  to  first  pass  through  molecular

movements, as in the case of heat.

  It is not strictly proved, moreover, that cold light is not in reality quite as

hot  as  that  generated  by  incandescence.  If  phosphorescence  is  a  very

superficial  atomic  phenomenon,  it  may  be  that  the  elevated  temperature

accompanying it is not appreciable. Crookes has observed that by exposing

diamonds  to  the  cathode  bombardment,  their  surface  is  transformed  into

graphite—which implies, according to Moissan, a temperature of 3600° C.—

and yet the deeper strata of the diamond experience no notable elevation of

temperature. The tube in which it is enclosed is very little heated. The same

author has likewise observed that the surface of silver plates can be thus

brought to a red heat, while the temperature of the whole mass of metal is

hardly raised, notwithstanding the high conductivity of silver for heat. I must

remark, however, that after rendering phosphorescent large masses of certain

sulphides, spread out so as to have only a thickness of some hundredths of a

millimetre, and afterwards collect-

  s

  ing the mass in a flask, its temperature was not appreciably raised.

  The above -considerations on the intra-atomic origins of phosphorescence

only constitute the suggestion of an explanation ; the complete solution of the

problem is still far off.

  It is of importance to first thoroughly determine the reactions producing

phosphorescence. They are of a special order, for which the laws of the early

chemistry  are  of  no  service.  How,  in  fact,  could  we  have  conceived  that

reactions bringing in play insignificant quantities of energy, as, for example,

the very slight hydration of a salt of quinine, could act on so stable a structure

as  an  atom,  and  at  the  same  time  generate  both  radio-activity  andphosphorescence ?

  Without being able to entirely elucidate such phenomena, one can at least

grasp its possibility by bearing in mind the notion, repeatedly referred to in

the book, that the atom, notwithstanding its stability, may become unstable

when we bring to bear upon it a suitable reagent. It then behaves somewhat

like a tuning-fork, which the most intense noise is powerless to shake, while a

slight  sound  of  suitable  period  will  cause  it  to  vibrate.  A  thin  pencil  of

ultraviolet light will thus dissociate without difficulty the atoms of a block of

steel capable of withstanding the most violent shocks. When a salt of quinine

becomes very phosphorescent and radio-active solely by the addition of a

thousandth  part  of  its  weight  in  water-vapour,  we  have  simply—without,

however, clearly knowing how—excited reactions giving to the atoms of this

body the instability which precedes dissociation.

  § 2.— Special Character of the Chemical Ecactions giving to Bodies the

Aptitude for Phosphorescence

  What has been said will enable us to catch a glimpse of the reason why

bodies, never phosphorescent under the influence of light when pure, acquire

this property when we add to them a few hundred-thousandth parts of their

weight—that is to say, almost imponderable traces—of foreign bodies.

  The  sulphides  of  the  alkaline  earths  and  natural  minerals  are  never

phosphorescent in a state of purity. Certain bodies considered as very pure,

such  as  the  fluorite  used  to  make  lenses,  crystallized  apatite,  &c.,  are,

however, phosphorescent, but their pure state is only apparent. They always

contain traces of foreign bodies. So does the diamond, as chemical analysis

of it shows.

  It is the special combinations due to the presence of these foreign bodies

which give to certain chemical compounds the aptitude for phosphorescence.

Once formed, these combinations present some curious characteristics. Very

movable, as is proved by the rapidity with which the different rays of light

cause phosphorescence to appear or disappear, they nevertheless withstand

energetic causes of destruction, since it takes fifteen hours of calcination at a

red heat to deprive certain substances of their aptitude for phosphorescence.

This  calcination  in  no  wise  acts  by  eliminating  anything,  since  the

regeneration of the combination and the aptitude for phosphorescence which

ensues are obtained by passing induction sparks through the calcined bodies.

Heat has not therefore eliminated any foreign body, but has simply destroyed

the chemical combinations capable of being    accompanied by phosphorescence, wliich re-form under the influence of

the electric spark.

  The foreign bodies capable of causing phosphorescence must always be

present in infinitesimal proportions. Different substances may be substituted

for one another to produce effects, if not identical, at all events analogous. M.

Mourelo  has  shown  that,  to  give  a  sulphide  of  strontium  the  property  of

becoming  phosphorescent  by  heat,  it  has  only  to  be  calcined  with  a  ten-

thousandth part of a salt of manganese or of bismuth. Similar observations

have been made with regard to the other sulphides.

  The  early  experiments  of  Edmond  Becquerel  prove  that  the  slightest

variation in the composition of the bodies in the mixture have an influence on

their  phosphorescence.  Marble,  chalk,  Iceland  spar,  bodies  chemically

identical, since they are composed of carbonate of lime, when dissolved in

nitric acid and precipitated by carbonate of ammonia, give carbonates of lime

which we might suppose to be identical. They are not so, however; since, by

calcining with sulphur the carbonates of lime from various sources we obtain

sulphides of calcium of which the phosphorescence may be yellow, green, or

violet.  The  carbonates  of  lime  employed  have  thus  retained  infinitesimal

traces of foreign bodies varying with their origin.

  One of the most singular characteristics of the chemical combinations

capable of giving to bodies the aptitude for phosphorescence by light is, as is

said above, an extreme mobility—that is to say, the faculty of being formed,

and  of  being  destroyed  indefinitely,  in  an  almost  simultaneous  fashion.

Certain

  radiations produce phosphorescence in sulphide of zinc in one-tenth of a

second, and others destroy it in the same space of time. Different animals,

such  as  the  glow-worm,  likewise  possess  this  property  of  causing  their

phosphorescence to appear and disappear instantaneously.

  This notion of chemical reactions capable of being produced in the heart

of perfectly solid bodies, such as diamonds, lluorite, and the sulphides of

alkaline earths, is evidently still outside the range of classic ideas.

  These last hardly admit, according to the adage of the early chemists, that

bodies can act on one another save in a state of solution; nor do they admit

combinations in proportions neither simple nor definite. Chemical science,

moreover,  has  no  knowledge  of  combinations  which  can  almost

instantaneously be made, unmade, and remade indefinitely under such slight

influences as a ray of light.  Of what do these combinations consist where one of the elements is in an

infinitely small proportion relatively to the other ?

  We know by all that has been said that the combinations which render

phosphorescence possible realize the following conditions:—(1) The bodies,

the  addition  of  which  produces  combination  accompanied  by

phosphorescence when excited by light or by heat, ought to be added in very

small proportions; (2) the combinations formed are mobile and capable of

being regenerated, since they are destroyed and remade in a small fraction of

a  second;  (3)  these  combinations,  so  rapidly  destroyed  and  so  rapidly

regenerated,  are  intimately  connected  with  the  action  of  the  temperature,

which, when it is raised, destroys them very

    quickly, and very slowly when it is sufficiently low. The phosphorescent

body emits for months invisible radiations. The return of the combination to

its primitive state is completely stopped at a still lower temperature, and the

body  preserves  its  phosphorescence  indefinitely  until  its  temperature  is

raised.

  Apart  from  phosphorescent  bodies  we  do  not  know  any  chemical

combinations able to realize these various conditions, and simple mixtures

certainly do not do so. We are therefore obliged to admit that we have to do

with  an  utterly  unknown  order  of  chemical  reactions.  They  will  probably

remain unknown for a long time, because their extreme instability and the

ease with which they are destroyed and regenerated protect them against all

processes  of  chemical  analysis  in  present  use.  To  determine  the  bodies

present is of no use, since it is the combinations formed by them which we

want to grasp.

  The  problem  is  further  complicated,  because  the  foreign  bodies,  the

combination whereof induces the aptitude for phosphorescence, seem only to

act by giving instability to the atom so as to allow it to liberate the energies it

contains.

  We  are  hardly  in  reality  beginning  to  suspect  the  causes  of

phosphorescence: but that which we catch a glimpse of enables us to feel by

anticipation  that  it  will  constitute  one  of  the  most  important  chapters  of

chemistry, and will surely be linked vnth the history, as yet hardly outlined,

of the dissociation of matter.

  BOOK IV

  BLACK LIGHT

    CHAPTER I    INVISIBLE PHOSPHORESCENCE

  § 1.— The Divisions of Black LigJd

  The appearance in 1896 of the work of Rontgen on the X-rays determined

me to publish immediately, in order to settle the order of dates, a note on

some particular radiations capable of passing through bodies, which I had

been  studying  for  two  years  and  which  were  attached  to  no  known

phenomena, I called them by the name of Black Light by reason of their

sometimes acting like light while remaining invisible.

  These radiations, which I had not had time to separate, at that period,

were composed of three very distinct elements: (1) Radio-active particles of

the family of cathode rays; (2) radiations of great wavelength ; (3) radiations

due to invisible phosphorescence. I have already set forth in VEvolution de la

Matiere  ^  how  I  managed  to  distinguish  these  different  elements  in  their

order.

  The first of the three categories of radiations enumerated being identical

with the cathode rays and

  1 Page 22, 12th edition. 279

    radio-active emissions, it would be useless now to give them a special

name. I shall therefore only designate by the name of Black Light: (1) the

invisible radiations, totally unknown before my researches, emitted by certain

phosphorescent bodies; and (2) the radiations of great wave-length, belonging

to the infrared part of the spectrum. This region has been known for a long

time,  but  the  majority  of  its  properties  have  been  ignored.  It  was  not

suspected before my researches that these radiations passed through a great

number  of  bodies,  allowed  instantaneous  photography  in  the  dark,  and

possessed very special physiological actions.

  The  first  category  of  radiations  enumerated  above  have  the  same

composition as ordinary light, and only differ from it by their invisibility.

Designating them, together with those of the infra-red, under the term Black

Light, completes the continuous scale of invisible radiations.^

  Black Light, then, comprises: (1) the invisible light emitted by certain

phosphorescent  bodies;  (2)  the  invisible  infra-red  light  which  in  the  solar

spectrum goes up to 5 fx, and possesses consequently an extent ten times

superior to that of the visible spectrum.

  I will now study the division of the BLack Light constituted by invisible

phosphorescence.

  § 2.— History of Invisible Phosphorescence  When I published in 1899 and 1900 the experiments to the description of

which this chapter is

  ^ A complete scale of all the ether waves known, including the visible

spectrum,  has  been  drawn  up  by  Prof.  Lebedeff,  and  is  given  in  Kolho'a

Electricity (Eng. ed.), p. 3Si3.— Ed.

  devoted, they seemed so astonishing to physicists that they preferred not

to beheve them. Yet the verification of the most fundamental of them was

extremely easy, and demanded no other expense than 50 centimes in money

and a few minutes in time. I now know, however, that several repeated them,

but, astonished at their success, preferred not to speak of results which were

evidently  of  no  account,  since  official  science  had  not  consecrated  them.

Even to-day it is with great timidity that they are noticed in a few treatises on

physics. Thus, for example, a distinguished scholar, M. Gariel, Professor of

Physics at the Faculte de Medecine de Paris, after having given a summary of

them,  says:  "  These  facts  are  almost  extraordinary.  There  is  no  occasion,

however, to put them on one side, for the phenomena relating to radiations

are certainly not yet all known." ^ This quotation at least shows that if the

discovery of new facts is sometimes difficult, it is still more difficult to get

them admitted.

  The invisible phosphorescence which I discovered is characterised by the

following  phenomena:  (1)  A  phosphorescent  body  exposed  to  the  light

preserves  for  a  period  of  about  eighteen  months  the  property  of  emitting

invisible radiations capable of refraction and polarization, and of impressing

photographic plates. The spectrum of these radiations, which is analogous to

that of light, only differs from it by its invisibility. (2) At the end of these

eighteen  months,  the  body  has  no  longer  any  appreciable  radiation,  but

preserves indefinitely a residuum which can be made visible by projecting on

its surface dark infra-red radiations.

  1 Physique Biolorjique, vol. ii. p. 261.

  These  phenomena  were  completely  unknown,  and  nothing  warranted

then* being foreseen. No doubt it was known from all time that many bodies

are phosphorescent by heat, and, consequently, have preserved since their

geological formation an aptitude for phosphorescence which appears so soon

as they are heated. But as these bodies radiate absolutely nothing in the dark

before being heated, they give birth to no invisible phosphorescence. That

which they manifest by heat is a very visible phosphorescence.

    Notwithstanding their long researches on phosphorescence, E. Becquereland  H.  Becquerel  were  ignorant  of  the  phenomenon  of  invisible

phosphorescence.  Never  did  they  suspect  that  bodies  on  which  light  had

fallen for a minute could spontaneously emit in the dark invisible radiations

during many long months. While knowing, as Canton had observed, that a

phosphorescent sulphide, heated some time after insolation and extinction,

again became slightly luminous for an instant, E. Becquerel supposed that the

spontaneous  emission  of  radiations  quickly  ceased,  and  that  heat  was

necessary to expel the slight phosphorescent residue preserved indeed, but,

according to him, never for long. This is, moreover, what he says in his book

on Light (vol. i. pp. 52 and 59): " When these substances [phosphorescent

sulphides] are exposed to the light and placed in profound darkness for a

short time—say, for three or four Jays—they almost entirely lose the faculty

of shining immediately by a rise in temperature . . . Thus, the modification

acquired by the action of radiation is only preserved in part and for a certain

time in phosphorescent bodies, and then finally disappears . . ."

  The spontaneous invisible radiation produced without any intervention of

temperature had thus escaped the notice of this eminent physicist. It is not at

all true that " the modification acquired by the action of radiation is only

preserved for a certain time, and then finally disappears." We shall see that a

part  of  the  modifications  impressed  by  light  on  phosphorescent  bodies  is

preserved indefinitely, and even after they have ceased to emit any invisible

phosphorescence, which, however, only happens at the end of about eighteen

months.

  There  exist  two  forms  of  invisible  phosphorescence  —(1)  the  one

following visible phosphorescence; (2) the one preceding it. They can both be

easily transformed into visible lisrht.

  O

  § 3.— Properties of Invisible Phosphorescence

  The invisible phosphorescence which follows the visible constitutes one

of  the  least  known  and  most  curious  forms  of  light.  It  would  have  been

difficult, before my experiments, to foresee that a body exposed for a minute

to the sun and then kept in darkness would for eighteen months preserve the

property of emitting, without cessation, radiations identical with light and

only differing from it by an absolute invisibility.

  The majority of bodies struck by light preserve sometimes for a very long

time  the  property  of  emitting  dark  radiations  capable  of  impressing

photographic  plates.  But  it  is  with  those  capable  of  first  acquiringphosphorescence that the phenomenon can be best studied.

  First, here are the experiments by which I determined the properties of the

light thus emitted.

  1:  Duration  of  the  emission  and  variation  in  the  intensity  of  the  rays

emitted as a function of the time. —Sulphide of calcium in powder placed

between two strips of glass is exposed to the light for a few seconds, and then

transferred to the drawer of a cupboard placed in a dark room in which no

light has penetrated during the course of the experiments—that is to say, for

several years. At the end of twenty-four hours the screen has become entirely

dark. Without taking it from the dark room, it is placed on a photographic

negative, under which is placed a gelatino-bromide plate. Still keeping in

darkness the system thus constituted, the following is observed :

  Three days after the insolation, a very vigorous image of the negative is

obtained in two hours. At the end of fifteen days the exposure has to be for

twelve hours ; after twenty-five days, thirty hours; after six months, forty

days. At the end of eighteen months traces of the image can still be obtained

after an exposure of sixty days.

  The above proves that the residual charge given by two seconds' exposure

to the sun has taken eighteen months to gradually disappear.

  2. Propagation in a straight line, and refraction. — The propagation in a

straight line and the refraction of the dark light which remains are shown by

the following experiment:

  A statue coated with sulphide of calcium dissolved in copal varnish is

exposed for a few seconds to the light. Three or four days after it has become

entirely dark, it is placed in a photographic dark room placed in a cellar into

which the daylight has never entered. The focussing has been arranged

 




 


 




 


  Figs. 24 and 25.    Photographic reproduction in the dark of statuettes by the invisible rays

emitted by them eighteen months after having been struck by light.

  (The  black  patches  show  parts  which  have  not  been  coated  with  the

substance producing the invisible luminescence, and show that no artificial

light has reached them during exposure.)

    INVISIBLE PHOSPHORESCENCE

  285

  beforehand. By using a portrait camera with large aperture, we obtain, by

exposures varying from eight to fifteen days, images as perfect as those taken

in daylight. The shadows vary at the will of the operator, since they depend

solely on the position given to the statue during insolation (Figs. 24 and 25).

  3. Polarization. — The double refraction and, consequently, polarization

of this dark light are shown by the following experiment :—A strip of Iceland

spar is introduced into the optic system of the camera previously used, and

the statuette is replaced by two ojlass tubes in form of a cross, filled with

sulphide and fixed in a place settled beforehand so as to obtain a good focus.

By working as before, a few days after the sulphide has ceased to emit light,

we see, on one of the axes of the cross, two partially superposed images, of

which the intensity is one half less than that of the part not

    duplicated—which is in conformity with the theory (Fig. 2G).

 




 


  Fig. 26.— Polarization hy double refraction of the dark rays emitted hy

bodies endowed with invisible jthosphores-cence. Duplication of one of the

arms of the cross. The images are superposed at the central part, and allow us

to compare the intensity of the duplicated parts (on the negative tlie central

part is, of course, the darker).

  This  experiment  proves,  at  the  same  time,  the  emission  of  invisible

radiations,  their  propagation  in  a  straight  hne,  their  refraction,  and  their

aptitude for polarization.

  4.  Composition  of  the  rays  emitted.  —The  perfect  sharpness  of  the

images obtained in the preceding experiments already proves that the index

of refraction of the lenses for dark rays is the same as for visible light. Had it

been otherwise, the preliminary focussing by ordinary light would not havebeen  exact  for  rays  of  different  wave-length,  especially  with  the  portrait

camera employed, of which the focal depth is almost nil. But that is only an

indication. To ascertain the composition of the active rays, it would have

been necessary to disperse them by a prism and to photograph them. This

experiment was not realizable on account of the necessity of employing, in

order to obtain fairly clear photographs of the prismatic spectra, a very fine

slit  which  absorbs  nearly  the  whole  of  the  light.  The  difficulty  has  been

obviated by employing an artificial spectrum, composed of bands of coloured

glass  fixed  on  a  strip  of  colourless  crown  glass.  This  spectrum  was  first

exposed to ordinar}* light over a sensitive plate, and the image thus obtained,

after  development,  was  compared  with  successive  images  obtained  by

interposing the artificial spectrum between the dark screen of sulphide and

the sensitive plate. The images were identical in the two cases—that is to say,

nil from the red to the green, and very intense under the blue glass.

  From these experiments we may conclude:— (1) That there is identity of

composition between the visible solar light and the dark light emitted

  by bodies exposed to luminous radiations for a moment. Tbe second only

differs  from  tbe  first  by  its  invisibility,  which  results  from  the  small

amplitude of the waves emitted. (2) That this residual and invisible liofht

lasts for a long time.

  § 4. Persistence of the AptUude for Phoapliorescence after Cessation of

the Spontaneous Radiation — Transformation of Invisible Phosphorescence

into Visible

  We have just seen that certain phosphorescent bodies can for eighteen

months emit invisible radiations, but that a time arrives when the emission

ceases entirely. We shall now see that those dark bodies, which after a period

of radiation so long seem to have lost all their energy, preserve indefinitely a

certain provision of residual phosphorescence. We shall render it visible at

any moment—after a ten years' stay in the dark, for example—by letting

certain  invisible  radiations  fall  on  the  surface  of  these  bodies.  They  then

become brightly phosphorescent enough to be photographed in a few minutes

in the dark room.

  I noted this fact for the first time with the sulphide of calcium screens

which had been used for my former experiments, and which no longer gave

photographic impressions at the end of eighteen months, even after six weeks'

exposure. They were then left in the dark, where they still are after more than

ten years.  Let us put one of those screens in the dark into a plate-carrier, and cover

over the glass with a sheet of black paper or a plate of ebonite, bodies opaque

  to  ordinary  light,  but  very  transparent,  as  lias  been  shown,  to  dark

radiations of OTeat wave-lengtli. Let US expose this plate-carrier for twenty

or thirty seconds to a paraffin lamp, and then take it into the dark to open and

examine it. We shall find that, under the influence of the invisible radiations,

the screen, which has been dark for so many years, has become luminous. Its

phosphorescence is sufficient to give a photographic impression by contact in

two  or  three  minutes,  while  before  it  did  not  give  one  after  six  weeks'

exposure.

  The  phosphorescence  thus  produced  disappears  rapidly,  but  the

experiment can be repeated with the same screen more than fifty times at

certain intervals—that is to say, for an indefinite number of years. There

naturally  arrives  a  moment  when,  the  phosphorescent  residue  being

exhausted by these successive experiments, the dark rays will produce no

effect unless the screen is subjected to a fresh insolation. It is therefore really

a  case  of  a  limited  residual  charge,  which  does  not  renew  itself

spontaneously, but which we can keep indefinitely before expending it.

  A large number of bodies possess in this way the property of acquiring a

provision of residual light, a part of which disappears spontaneously, Avhile

the other part is preserved indefinitely. With some of ihem, such as sulphides

of calcium and of strontium, the invisible residual light may become visible

simply under the influence of dark radiations of great wavelength, even when

the screen exposed to these radiations is maintained at a very low temperature

—for example, between [two glass troughs a centimetre

  thick,  full  of  ice.  Heat  therefore  cannot  be  given  as  the  cause  of  the

phenomenon. It is important to note this, for heat by itself can produce the

same effect if we raise the temperature to 80° C. The action produced by heat

is, moreover, very different from that generated by the dark radiations, as will

presently be shown.

  The above experiments succeed very well with several phosphorescent

sulphides, especially that of calcium, but not at all with sulphide of zinc. The

reason of this, to which I shall return elsewhere, is that the radiations of great

wave-length, capable of destroying the phosphorescence of this sulphide, are

totally incapable of exciting it. Sulphide of zinc will, like other sulphides,

retain a residual charge indelinitel}^, but this residual charge can only be

expelled by a temperature approaching 100° C, and not at all by the darkinfra-red rays.

  Many  other  bodies—the  diamond,  for  instance—  exist  which  can

indefinitely retain a residual phosphorescence, which may be rendered visible

by heat, and not by the infra-red rays. A Brazilian diamond exposed to the

sun acquires a visible phosphorescence which vanishes rapidly; but it .retains

an invisible phosphorescence which can be rendered visible after a few years

by heating it to about 200° C.

  Instead  of  effecting  the  preceding  experiments  with  phosphorescent

screens requiring some little preparation, they can be realised more simply by

placing the sulphide of calcium in a tube placed, after insolation, in a box

closed by a sheet of ebonite, or, better still, by a sheet of glass coated with the

so-called Japanese varnish, in a layer thick enough for

  T

  the sun to be invisible through it.^ At the end of twenty-four hours, the

sulphide  will  no  longer  shine,  but  when  kept  in  the  dark  it  will  retain

indefinitely the faculty of becoming luminous when the invisible radiations

above referred to fall on its surface.

  To prove this, we have only to expose for one minute the box containing

the sulphide of calcium tube to a paraffin lamp. On afterwards opening it in

the dark, it will be seen that the tube has become luminous. It is to this very

easy experiment that I alluded at the beginning of this chapter.

  To render the preceding experiments still more demonstrative, I place at

the bottom of a large cardboard box, closed as indicated above, some bas-

reliefs  coated  with  a  layer  of  sulphide  of  calcium,  dissolved  in  bronzing

varnish. This box is left in the dark. If, at some later period, it is exposed, still

closed,  to  a  lamp  for  two  minutes,  and  then  opened  in  a  dark  room,  the

statues will be luminous. The operation may be carried out several weeks

after insolation.

  Up  till  now  Ave  have  always  used,  to  excite  the  extinguished

phosphorescence, visible radiations passing through an opaque screen, which

renders  them  invisible.  But  the  experiment  in  this  form  allows  it  to  be

supposed that visible light has been able to pass through a chink in the box

and to illumine the sulphide. We will now suppress all visible sources of

light, place the observer in complete darkness, and

  1 To get the layer of the reqiiirerl thickness, put a little raised border of

cardboard  round  the  glass.  The  laj'er  may  be  of  any  thickness.  I  have

observed that a thickness of one centimetre is easily traversed by the infra-redradiations. The only inconvenience of over-thick layers is that they take more

than a week to dry. However, a layer of one millimetre is sufficient to give an

absolute opacity to the eye, which can be tested by holding it up between tlie

latter and the sun's disc.

 




 


  Fig. 27.

  Apparatus for making statuette luminous in the dark by the invisible rays

emitted by dark lantern.

  The observer must be in complete darkness.

  in this darkness cause gradually to appear before his eyes a luminous

statue which no ray of visible light has touched.

  Though very striking, this experiment is most simple, and easily deduced

from  what  is  said  above.  The  reader  who  has  thoroughly  understood  my

explanations  sees  at  once  that,  if  we  shut  up  the  lamp  in  an  opaque  box

instead of the statue, the result will be the same. The operation is as follows:

—

  In a dark room, or, if you have not one, at night, the dark lamp above

described, Avhich allows no streak of visible light to pass, is placed on a

table. In front of it is a statuette coated with sulphide of calcium which has

been left for several days in the dark, and, consequently, presents no trace of

phosphorescence. All being thus prepared, the observer sees, at the end of

one or tw^o minutes, the statue light up and come forth from the darkness.

  The experiment is a very curious one, and has always vividly impressed

the spectator. It is, in fact, very strange to see the dark radiations of the lamp,

added to the dark radiations of the sulphide, produce visible light. It is almost

the converse of the celebrated interference experiment of Fresnel, in which

light  added  to  light  produced  darkness.  In  my  experiment,  it  is  darkness

added to darkness which gives birth to light.

  The light thus obtained is not very vivid. It is enough so, however, to

enable  a  photograph  of  the  statue  to  be  taken  with  an  exposure  of  forty

minutes, with a portrait camera suitably placed beforehand. The dark lamp, of

course, is kept near the statue all the time the operation lasts; for, were it

taken away, the phosphorescence would extinguish itself in  less than a minute. Fig. 28 gives the reproduction of statuettes obtained

by these means.

  The above proves that the residual luminosity stored up by certain bodies

is formed of a transitory element and a permanent one, both being capable of

transformation into visible light. But while the transitory element disappears

spontaneously by radiation in a greater or less space of time, the permanent

element  does  not  radiate  spontaneously,  but  persists  indefinitely  until

artificially  expelled,  either  by  calcination  or,  without  any  rise  in  the

temperature, by exposing the body to dark radiations of a certain Avave-

lensfth.

  § 5.— Invisible Phosphorescence preceding the Visible

  The invisible phosphorescence which, as we have just seen, follows the

visible, may precede it. This is proved by the following experiments.

  Let us take a screen made of a phosphorescent body which is slowly

impressed by light, such as sulphide of strontium, and deprive it, by heat, of

all residual phosphorescence. Let us then place it in the plate-carrier of a

camera halving a diaphragm timed to ith of a second, point the apparatus

towards the sky, and uncover the diaphragm so that the plate is exposed to

light for that period. On opening the frame afterwards in the dark, we note

that the sulphide is not luminous, but it will suttice to place it on a plate

heated to 200° C for illumination to occur. Its short exposure to the light had

thus given it an invisible phosphorescence.

  The experiment may be effected more simply

 




 


  Fig. 28.

    Photographic reproduction in the dark of statuettes hy dark rays of great

wave-length.

  They  make  the  objects  luminous  by  combining  with  other  dark  rays

emitted by the statuettes themselves.

  with other bodies—Iceland spar, for example. This compound acquires a

very  slight  visible  phosphorescence  by  heat  and  none  by  light,  but  if  in-

solated, and then heated to 200° C, it shines with brilliance for some minutes,

v/hich proves that the light communicates to it a certain quantity of invisiblephosphorescence. This series of operations can be repeated indefinitely—that

is to say, we can restore to the spar the same luminosity by heat after havino-

insolated it.

  §  G.—  Comparative  Effects  on  FhospJtorescence  of  the  Infra-red

Radiations and of Heat

  The first observers, having studied the action of the various parts of the

spectrum on bodies capable of phosphorescence, very soon noted that the

radiations going from the blue to the ultra-violet produced phosphorescence,

and that those from the green to far on in the infra-red extinguished it.

  H.  Becquerel  believed  that  he  had  found  the  explanation  of  this

destructive action of the infra-red, by saying that it acted simply as a source

of  heat,  and  consequently  obliged  the  body  to  expend  very  quickly  its

provision  of  phosphorescence.  This  explanation  has,  from  that  time,  been

repeated in all standard works on physics.

  Yet it only required very simple experiments to show that it was founded

on  a  mere  appearance,  which,  moreover,  does  not  exist  with  all

phosphorescent bodies. The following experiments enable the parts played by

the infra-red rays and heat to be clearly ditferentiated.

  Fasten on the same cardboard two small screens,

  the one of sulphide of calcium, the other of sulphide of zinc, and expose

them,  after  insolation,  to  the  infra-red  radiations  of  our  dark  lamp.  The

sulphide  of  calcium  will  become  more  brilliant,  but  the  sulphide  of  zinc

becomes extinguished directly without any increase in light.

  But this is only a first indication. I shall show that heat and infra-red

exercise on phosphorescence two very different actions. They may be added

together, whence the error of interpretation pointed out above, but one of

them may also act in the contrary Avay to the other.

  We will first examine the case in which these two effects, the specific

action of certain radiations and of heat, seem identical.

  Let us take a screen of sulphide of calcium, which has been insolated for

a quarter of an hour, and expose it to the action of our dark lamp, either in

front of the metallic chimney, or of the part closed by ebonite which allows

the infra-red to pass. In both cases the phosphorescence will first be made

more active and then extinguished. Only the action of the heat is slower than

that of the infra-red, because it only acts when the surface of the screen has

had time to get heated.

  The same results occur if we employ a screen which has been insolatedfor a few days, and is consequently dark. It will shine in front of all parts of

the black lamp—that is to say, by the action of heat as well as by that of the

infra-red.

  By  confining  ourselves  to  these  experiments  we  should  arrive  at  the

conclusion,  as  did  the  earlier  observers,  that  the  infra-red  rays  acted  by

heating the phosphorescent screen.

  To  show  the  maccuracy  of  this  interpretation,  we  will  repeat  the

preceding experiment, but interpose between the screen of sulphide and the

lamp a strip of glass to prevent the heating of the phosphorescent matter. The

effects will then be very dift'erent.

  In front of the ebonite, a region low in temperature, but which allows

many of the infra-red rays to pass, there will still be illumination. In front of

the chimney of the lamp, a region fairly warm and acting as a heated body,

there  is  no  longer  any  illumination.  The  strip  of  glass  interposed,  which

prevents  the  action  of  heat,  prevents  likewise  the  phosphorescence.  It  is

therefore evident that the action of heat and of radiations of great wave-length

are very different.

  It evidently might be objected to the above that if the infra-red possesses

the specific action I ascribe to it apart from calorific power, the chimney of

the lamp of which the action is prevented by the interposition of a glass

should have an effect, since it produces infra-red rays to the same extent as

heated bodies. But as the heat of the walls of this chimney hardly exceeds

100° C, the waves emitted have a length not less than 5 to 6 /i, and these have

no specific effect on phosphorescence, They act solely by the heat they are

able to produce after a certain lapse of time, which is why the interposition of

a strip of glass suppresses all such action. Through ebonite, blackened glass,

&c., there are emitted radiations of about 0*8 /i up to 3 /*, which possess a

specific action independent of the calorific effect which they must produce in

course  of  time,  and  that  is  the  reason  they  instantaneously  act  on

phosphorescence.

  To render the above theory still more convincing,

  I will now show that the infra-red can produce on the two halves of the

same screen contrary effects, the one by its specific, the other by its calorific

action.

  For the sulphide of calcium screen, let us substitute one of sulphide of

zinc with green phosphorescence. Let us insolate it by daylight, place one

half in front of the metallic chimney of the lamp (that is to say, in front of asource of heat), and the other half in front of the ebonite which masks the

flame, and allows the infra-red radiations to pass. On the two halves of the

screen, the effects will be diametrically opposite. In front of the ebonite, the

screen will become at once extinguished, witJtout any 'preliminary increase

of the phosjiJiorescence. In front of the metal chimney, its phosphorescence

will be, on the contrary, markedly increased.

  If,  instead  of  having  been  insolated  before  exposure  to  the  lamp,  the

sulphide of zinc screen has remained for some time in a dark room, so that it

no longer manifests any visible phosphorescence, the difference of action

between heat and the infra-red radiations Avill still continue to show itself.

The screen will again become phosphorescent before the heated metal wall,

and will remain dark before the ebonite, since the rays cannot destroy its

visible phosphorescence owing to its being already extinguished.^

  These experiments put in evidence the fundamental differences existing

between the effect of heat and the specific action of certain radiations.

  ^ In all these experiments in which luminous fields of unequal intensity

are compared, it is well to put on the screens (on the side facing the lamp) a

narrow sheet of tin, which preserves the intensity which they would have had

without having been exposed to any radiation.

  The  above  demonstration  may  be  completed  by  enclosing  the

phosphorescent  screen  between  two  troughs  of  frozen  water  1  cm.  thick,

before placing it in front of the infra-red radiation of the lamp. Though its

surface cannot, under these conditions, become heated, there will be observed

in front of the ebonite effects of illumination in the case of the sulphide of

calcium,  and  extinction  in  the  case  of  the  sulphide  of  zinc,  as  already

described.

  It is therefore evident that infra-red radiations may have specific actions

quite independent of those produced by raising the temperature of the bodies

absorbing them.

  Our experiments having proved that heat and infra-red radiations are able

in some cases to produce similar effects on certain phosphorescent sulphides

—especially  that  of  calcium—it  became  of  interest  to  inquire  to  what

temperature these bodies should be brought in order to obtain by heating

them effects identical with those obtained at a low temperature Avith infra-

red  radiations.  Nothing  can  be  easier,  since  it  suffices  to  determine  the

temperature at which sulphide of calcium, after being insolated for a few

days, and thereby darkened, can regain its luminosity. This is effected byplacing it in tubes introduced into a receptacle full of water containing a

thermometer, and heating it gradually in darkness. We thus become aware

that  sulphide  of  calcium  which  has  been  insolated  for  eight  days  only

commences to shine at 60° C, and not before 55 seconds, the time necessary

to  heat  it.  The  same  tube  of  sulphide  becomes,'  on  the  contrary,

instantaneously luminous when exposed at a lov/ temperature to the action of

infra-red radiations.

  One may also wish to discover how much phosphorescence the infra-red

is capable of taking away from luminous sulphides, and thus fix its calorific

equivalent. This is etfected by introducing into a photographic plate-carrier,

with a thin shutter of ebonite, a screen of sulphide of calcium, and exposing it

in  the  sun  for  several  hours.  It  is  then  observed  that,  to  restore  its

phosphorescence, it must be raised to a temperature slightly above 100° C.

The great radiations acting at the ordinary temperature have therefore taken

from a phosphorescent body all the residual light it might lose by heating it to

about 100° C.

  §  7.—  Radiations  of  the  Metals  and  of  Bifferent  Non-Phosphorescent

Bodies

  With  invisible  phosphorescence  there  are  apparently  —but  only

apparently—connected  certain  impressions  obtained  by  bodies  placed  in

contact,  and  in  the  dark,  with  a  sensitive  photographic  plate.  A  gelatino-

bromide  plate  is  placed  in  a  dark  slide  under  a  strip  of  metal  —  zinc,

aluminium, or platinum. By interposing between the strip and the metal a

cross made of various substances, we generally obtain, after a few hours'

exposure  to  the  sun  or  to  a  strong  paraffin  lamp,  an  image  of  the  object

interposed, even when it is separated from the metal by a thin plate of mica.

  This  experiment,  and  others  of  the  same  order  which  in  former  years

caused me to waste much time, succeed very irregularly, and at the end of a

few days the metal no longer gives any image.

  These effects are in no way connected with phos-

    INVISIBLE PHOSPHORESCENCE

  299

    pliorescence,  but  with  the  radio-activity  of  the  metal,  and  this  is  the

reason that they can be increased by slight heat. The absence of action of the

metal-its fatigue, if we may call it so—is likewise observed, I have shown, in

the discharge of the electroscope.

  as 




 


  Fig. 29.— Thick metal plate pierced with holes ore)- xohich plates of

different  metals  have  been  soldered.  It  is  with  this  plate  inserted  in  a

photographic  plate-carrier  that  my  first  researches  on  the  radio-active

properties of different metals were made in 1896. The photographic method

was soon aljandoned, because the impressions were very irregular, as the

metals, for the reasons explained, soon lose their peculiar properties.

  It is owing' to the fact of the metal havincT ex-pelled, under the influence

of  slight  heat,  a  provision  of  radio-active  substance,  which  cannot  be

regenerated without a long rest, that it becomes inactive.

  These  radio-active  actions,  which  I  confused  at  the  beginning  of  my

experiments with those of the

    infra-red  and  invisible  phosphorescence,  were  the  cause  of  many

researches  before  I  could  distinguish  them.  From  time  to  time  different

observers  come  across  my  early  experiments,  and,  as  Dr.  Russell,  Dr.

Kahlbaum,  and  Professor  Melander  have  done,  observe  afresh  such

impressions.  The  causes  of  these  being  determined,  these  experiments  no

longer present any great interest, and that is why I do not dwell on them.

  It  is  not  metals  alone,  as  I  have  already  said,  which  may  give  such

impressions, but wood and animal tissues also produce them. They are made

more  active  by  slight  heat;  but  it  is  evident  that  with  these  different

substances certain chemical reactions may also come into play.

    CHAPTER II

  THE  INFRA-RED  RAYS  AND  PHOTOGRAPHY  THROUGH

OPAQUE BODIES

  § 1.— Visibility througli Opaque Bodies

  We have seen that the greater part of the solar spectrum is formed of

invisible  rays  situated  in  the  region  of  the  infra-red,  and  extending  for

sunlight up to 5 ^, according to the researches of Langley. The spectrum of

flames is much longer still, and extends up to GO ix.

  This very important region has hardly been studied hitherto, except from

the  point  of  view  of  its  calorific  properties.  Having  discovered  that  the

sulphide of zinc with green phosphorescence was ncarl}^ as    PHOTOGRAPHY THROUGH OPAQUE BODIES 301

  sensitive to a part of these radiations as was gelatino-broniide of silver to

visible light, I was able to study their properties, especially the one of passing

through  a  great  number  of  opaque  bodies.  They  allow  us  to  see  and  to

photograph through these last. These phenomena will be dealt with here, and

the other actions of the infra-red will be examined in a future chapter.

  For the eye to discern an object placed behind a body supposed to be

opaque—a  wooden  plank  or  piece  of  black  paper,  for  example—it  is

evidently necessary that the rays should first pass through it. It is afterwards

necessary that the eye should be rendered sensitive to these rays.

  The  first  of  these  conditions  having  always  been  considered  as

impossible, no one could dream of realizing the second.

  The discovery of the X-rays proved that opaque bodies can, indeed, be

traversed by certain radiations ; but the properties of these radiations, created

artificially  by  our  instruments,  could  not  modify  the  old  ideas  as  to  the

opacity of bodies for light. The ancient fable of the lynx, whose sparkling

eyes  could  see  through  walls,  seemed  destined  to  remain  the  most

unrealizable of chimeras.

  This, however, is not the case. By pursuing my researches on the whole

of the radiations designated by the name of Black Light, I was led to establish

: (1) That the luminous rays, or at all events certain of them, passed without

difficulty through a large number of opaque bodies; (2) that the invisible rays

which pass through them can be easily rendered visible.

  If, then, our eye does not see through opaque

  THE EVOLUTION OF FORCES

    bodies, it is not because luminous rays do not pass through, but because

our retina is insensitive to these rays. If the eye of the lynx does not really

possess the property conferred on it in the old legends, there is no scientific

reason why it should not. It would be very easy to imagine an eye but little

different from ours, and, moreover, possibly possessed by nocturnal animals,

which should have the property of seeing through opaque bodies.

  \

  c

  A B

  D

  Fig. iO.—Diagram of the apfaratus employed to determine the radiations

2vhich pc(ss through opaque bodies. A, mirror of the heliostat which rendersmotionless the rays of the sun. B, lens condensing the rays on the slit C of the

collimator (its use is indispensable in these experiments); D, direct vision

prism ; E, screen coated with sulphide of zinc and kept in the dark.

  It is this artificial eye, sensitive to radiations invisible to the human retina,

which is realised by the following experiments.

  By means of a heliostat and a lens a pencil of light is conducted on to the

collimator of a direct vision prism, and the spectrum is received, in the dark,

on a screen of sulphide of zinc graduated in wave-lengths according to the

formula of the prism used. This screen is previously rendered sensitive by a

short exposure to light.

  After this exposure and before causing the spec-

  trum to act on the screen, a portion of the part on which it is to fall is

covered by a layer of the opaque body of which it is desired to study the

transparency

  I —say a sheet of black paper. By cutting off the spectrum after a moment

and  displacing  the  opaque  strip,  we  immediately  sec,  by  the  partial

blackening of the phosphorescent screen under it, the region of the

  1 spectrum which has passed through it. It extends

  I from OS fx to 3 /x.

  Fig.  31.—  Arrangement  of  apparatus  for  seeing  and  photographing

opaque bodies by means of radiations of great wave-lengths. A, sheet-iron

lantern entirely closed, into the face (B) of which is inserted a sheet of black

paper. L, paraffin lamp. H, opaque box, in black paper or ebonite, containing

the object it is desired to render visible. I, transparent screen formed of a thin

layer of sulphide of zinc dissolved in varnish and spread on a strip of glass.

  The whole of the above arrangements being in complete darkness, the

screen I is rendered sensitive by exposing it to the light of day, and then

jslaced behind the box H. In al'ew seconds" there will appear on its surface

the image of the oVjject enclosed in the box. This image can be fixed by

placing the screen I for from thirty to sixty seconds on a photographic plate,

which is subsequeiitly developed.

  If it is desired to take a photograph in the dark chamber the screen I

should be placed at M in the frame of an ordinary camera, furnished with a

portrait diaphragm. The focussing sliould be done previously.

  Now let us examine how, by utilising the properties of these radiations, a

body enclosed in an opaque case may be rendered visible. We have simply to

follow the explanations given below the above figure.  In a few seconds the object enclosed in a box is seen outlined on the

screen Avhich covers it.

  The luminous source of which the rays pass through the opaque body is a

paraffin lamp covered with black paper. The operator is therefore in complete

darkness, in the midst of which there

 




 


  Fig. 32.— Photograph in a dark room of an object (e.g. a decorntion) shut

up in an opaque box. The experiment is arranged as in Fig 31. The index of

refraction  of  lenses  for  radiations  of  great  wave-length  being  unknown,  I

have had to put up with an approximate focussing which has made the image

not very clear. This photograph of an object shut up in an opaque box is the

first to be made with a camera. As the X-rays are not refrangible, one cannot

photograph with them in a dark room.

  appears on the screen the objects contained in the opaque box.

  Of  the  various  experiments  realizable  by  the  above  process,  the  most

striking is that of the visibility of an object, key, decoration, &c., enclosed in

a box. This being placed in front of the invisible lamp, we see gradually

appearing out of the total darkness in

    PHOTOGRAPHY THROUGH OPAQUE BODIES 305

  which the operator is the image of the enclosed object. When working

with transparent screens of h\rge size the effect is surprising.

  The invisible luuiinous rays are much less penetrating than the X-rays,

and can in no way claim to take their place.

  At  the  time  of  my  first  experiments  in  photography  through  opaque

bodies, I was not aware of the sensitiveness of sulphide of zinc to the infra-

red  rays,  and  I  made  use  of  photographic  plates  rendered  sensitive  to

radiations of great wave-length by having them previously made cloudy. The

exposures then lasted hours instead of seconds. I reproduce later (Fig. 40) one

of the images thus obtained.

  The above experiments needing a little attention and some care, I have

sought to supplement them by others which only demand an infinitesimal

amount  of  attention  and  no  apparatus.  The  following  one  enables  a  body

enclosed in an opaque receptacle to be seen : ^—  A sheet of black paper is fixed on a glass plate, and on its surface is

fastened a cross cut out of a thin strip of tin. This cross is covered with a

second sheet of black paper, so that it is imprisoned between two sheets of

this opaque paper. We now have to make it visible.

  A screen of sulphate of zinc on cardboard is illumined by daylight and its

surface applied against the strip of glass covered with black paper. The face

next the phosphorescent screen is exposed for ten seconds at a distance of 20

centimetres from a paraffin lamp. The whole affair is then carried into the

dark room. On lifting up the phosphorescent screen there will be seen on its

surface the image of the metallic cross which was enclosed between the two

sheets of black paper.

  The above experiment is, moreover, the one I have recourse to in order to

verify at once the transparency

  1 See note on next page.

  of the bodies, black paper, ebonite, &c., employed in my experiments,

some samples of which turn out to be opaque by reason of the foreign bodies

they contain.

  The sulphide of zinc with green phosphorescence being rarely met with in

commerce, one can at a pinch replace it, in the case of the last described

experiment only, by a screen of sulphide of calcium ; but it is indispensable

that there should be an interval of at least twenty-four hours between the

exposure  of  the  screen  to  daylight  and  the  time  when  the  experiment  is

effected. If a screen recently insolated, and consequently very luminous, is

used, no image is obtained on its surface.^

  ,§ 2. FJiotography throwjh Opaque Bodies

  It has been explained above (Fig. 31) how objects enclosed in opaque

boxes  may  be  photographed.  We  will  now  vary  these  experiments  by

photographing external objects, such as a house, through an opaque body.

  For the realization of the experiments which now follow, various opaque

bodies can be used. The most convenient is Japan varnish, which is poured,

to the thickness of two or three millimetres, on the movable diaphragm of the

focussing tube, for the back of which is substituted a thin plate of mica fixed

to the sides by strong glue. When the varnish

  1  When  these  experiments  were  first  published  I  gave  away  the  little

material enabling them to be repeated to all the learned men who asked me

for them. A distinguished professor of ph3'sics, M. Izaru, wrote to me : " I

hastened to effect the experiment with the material you were good enough tosend me, and I was stupefied with the clearness of the results. I should never

have believed it would be so evident and so rapid." It must be acknowledged,

however, that the majority of physicists preferred to deny the exactness of my

experiments rather than to repeat them. Others tried them with the aid of a

photographer's  red  lamp,  which  instantaneously  extinguishes  the

phosphorescence of the sulphide of zinc, and, naturally, observed nothing.

 




 


  Fig. 33. Photograph of house through opaque body.

    PHOTOGRAPHY THROUGH OPAQUE BODIES 307

  is dry it will be observed, by interposing it between the sun and the eye,

that it appears absolutely opaque. The object to be reproduced on the ground

glass of the camera is focussed, and the diaphragm is put in front of the

focussing tube. It thus constitutes an opaque body placed between the light

and the roughened glass.

  A screen of sulphide of zinc is then illumined by daylight, and placed in

the usual dark slide of the camera as if it were an ordinary photographic plate.

Then lifting in the ordinary way the shutter of the frame, it is left open before

the object to be reproduced for a period varying with the light.

  The photograph here given (Fig. 33) is that of a house in daylight, and the

objective used was a portrait lens. The exposure lasted one minute.

  The exposure at an end, the frame is closed and taken into the dark room,

whence care has been taken to eliminate all (especially red) light. On opening

the frame, we see on its surface the image of the object which was placed in

front of the objective. In order to fix it, the phosphorescent screen is placed,

while still in the dark, for five minutes against the surface of a gelatino-

bromide plate, which is afterwards developed in the usual way. We then have

an image obtained by using the invisible rays of the light. I give here (Fig.

33) an image thus obtained.

  The want of clearness comes—(1) From the focussing with great wave-

lengths  only  being  possible  by  calculation;  (2)  from  the  phosphorescent

screen used as sensitive plate having a rough surface.

  I said above that it was possible to employ very

  different substances as opaque bodies, but it must be remarked that with aground ghiss no better image could be obtained than by placing a transparent

ground glass before a focussing tube. Unpolished surfaces play, as is known,

the part of diffusing

 




 


  Fig. M. — Photof/raph in the dark room of a printed sketch put in one

envelope of hiack paper, itaelf eaclo&cd in an ebonite box. The source of

light  was  a  paraffin  lamp  surrounded  by  black  paper.  The  crossed  bands

represent the Haps of the envelope. They have not been pierced by the light

because the exposure was not sufficient. The image (produced on a sulphide

of zinc screen) was transformed into a photographic negative by putting the

screen in contact with a gelatino-bromide plate for five minutes and then

developing the last-named.

  screens. If we wish therefore to use as opaque body unpolished or badly

polished matter, it is necessary to place it, not in front of the objective, but

immediately in front of the phosphorescent screen— that is to say, in contact

with it.

 




 


  Fig. 35.

    Comparison of the light of a candle with that of a white surface directly

lighted by a brilliant summer sun.

  To/ace page 300.

    PHOTOGRAPHY THROUGH OPAQUE BODIES 309

  It is useless to.tiy the preceding experiment with sulphide of calcium.

This body is so little sensitive to radiations of great wave-length that even

with an hour's exposure no image would be obtained.

  Some of the experiments just described—that is, those where the object to

be reproduced is enclosed in an opaque box interposed between the sulphide

screen  and  the  source  of  light—succeed  just  as  well  with  the  light  of  a

paraffin lamp or even of an ordinary candle, as with sunlight. This does notresult only, as might be supposed, from the richness of artificial sources of

light in infra-red radiations. It is especially due to the fact that the brightness

of the objects lighted by reflection, as is the case with all those examined in

daylight, is immensely less than that of the source which lights them. An

object brought very close to a candle has very little luminosity, but the flame

of the candle itself is extremely luminous.

  Its radiancy is superior to that of a white wall lighted up by the sun at full

noon in the month of August. This is shown by placing the candle against the

wall, when its flame is brighter than this last.

  The fact that the brilliancy of a simple candle, or even of a modest match,

should  be  more  intense  than  that  of  an  object  lighted  by  the  sun  having

seemed  inadmissible  to  many  persons,  I  took  some  instantaneous

photographs (Fig. 35) of a candle enclosed in a lantern which almost entirely

enveloped it, and at the top of which was a white cardboard lighted by the

sun. When developed, we recognize that the image of the candle is more

intense than that of the cardboard.

  This intensity of sources of light, notwithstand-

  ing  their  feeble  illuminating  power,  may  be  shown  likewise,  by

photographing instantaneously, and at night, a street lighted by gas lamps.

None of the objects lighted up will appear in the photograph, but all the gas

lamps will be reproduced.

  These observations allow us to understand the experiments which follow

relating to instantaneous photography in the dark through opaque bodies.

  § 3.— Instantaneous PhotograpJiy in the Dark

  The experiment about to be described allows us to photograph in ^Lth of

a second the image of a luminous source (a candle enclosed in an opaque

box), the observer being himself in complete darkness.

  With  a  camera  furnished  with  a  wide  focus-tube  and  a  so-called

instantaneous diaphragm, we focus in the proper position on the ground glass

—so as to have an image of about equal size to the original—the flame of a

candle  or  of  a  small  paraffin  lamp  enclosed  in  a  laboratory  photographic

lantern. The lantern is then closed with the opaque body chosen—black glass,

ebonite, or Japanese varnish—fixed between two strips of glass. The observer

is consequently in complete darkness. We then introduce into the dark slide

of the camera a screen of sulphide of zinc illumined by daylight, and we

uncover the objective for the thirtieth of a second. On opening the slide in the

dark there is seen on its surface the image of the source of light, which maybe  preserved  by  placing  it  against  a  photographic  plate.  The  photograph

represented here (Fig. 37) was thus obtained.

  If  the  observer  wishes  to  see  the  image  form  before  his  eyes,  he  has

simply to use one of the transparent glass screens before mentioned, and open

the back shutter of the dark slide so as to be able to observe what passes on

the screen during exposure. This screen is transparent enough to show on its

back the image formed on the front face.

 




 


  Figs. 36 and 37. Instantaneous photograph of a candle through an opaque

body.

    PHOTOGRAPHY THROUGH OPAQUE BODIES 311

  This experiment shows the astonishing sensitiveness of sulphide of zinc

with  (ire<m  phosphorescence  to  radiations  of  great  wave-length,  a

sensitiveness approaching that of gelatino-bromide for visible light.

  Sulphide  of  calcium  does  not  allow  this  preceding  experiment  to  be

realized, nor do the sulphides of zinc with yellow or red phosphorescence.

  § 4.— Transparency of Different Bodies to Infra-Red Radiations.

  The transparency of bodies to radiations of great wave-length is never

complete  for  the  same  body.  That  which  we  observe  with  the  visible

spectrum is equally true with the invisible. Transparency is always selective

for each substance. The bands of transparency always border on those of

opacity.

  There would have been no great interest, and it would have taken an

extremely long time, to determine the regions which were transparent for

each body examined. What I here give is the transparency as a whole. The

transparent region determinable for sulphides goes from the extremity of the

visible spectrum— i.e. 0"8 fx —up to 3 /j, or thereabouts.

  In a general way, it may be said that the infra-red radiations are more

penetrating than those of the visible spectrum. Although not by any means a

constant law, it is noticed that transparency seems to diminish as the wave-

length  is  reduced.  It  is  known  that  light  is  less  penetrating  the  farther  it

advances towards the ultra-violet. At the extremity of this region, all bodies,

even a glass plate jigth of a millimetre thick, become opaque, and to waves ofthe length of 0-1 ft a stratum of air of 1 centimetre is as opaque as lead.

  Bat, I repeat, there is nothing absolute in this law. The transparency also

depends on the structure of the bodies traversed. There are some which are

very opaque for great wave-lengths. It is for this reason, for example, that the

atmosphere absorbs all radiations above 5 /i, and this is the reason why these

latter do not figure in the solar spectrum. The radiations of higher magnitude

—that is to say, from b ^l to 60 yu, —are only observed in flames, and most

bodies have a rather low transparency with regard to them. The Hertzian

waves, supposed to be analogous to light, on the contrary, easily traverse

bodies which the great light-waves do not penetrate.

    Bodies heated to a temperature not very high— that is to say, under 100°

C.—emit radiations hardly exceeding a length of 5 to 6 yct. They have also

but little penetration. Melloni in the course of his experiments observed the

fact, which was quite inexplicable in his time, that transparent bodies, like

glass or quartz, were opaque for the waves emitted by a body heated to 100°

C.

  It will be remembered that this opacity is utilized in greenhouses in which

glass bell-shades shelter certain plants. The visible waves of light pass very

freely through the glass and heat the bodies on the inner side of it. The latter

become at once sources of radiant heat; but, owing to their length, the waves

emitted are unable to escape through the glass. They are thus imprisoned, and

the plants do not become chilled.

    Radiations of great wave-length only appear to act on phosphorescent

screens up to 3 /x or thereabouts. Screens may indeed be impressed at a

greater distance, i.e., up to and beyond 6 /i, but by a

    PHOTOGRAPHY THROUGH OPAQUE BODIES 313

  very different mode of action to that utilized up to the present. The rays

then act only by their thermal properties, and that is why their action only

manifests itself at the expiration of some thirty seconds. The effect produced

may be observed by covering a part of the screen with a strip of glass—

opaque to these radiations—so as to have a field for comparison. A screen of

slightly luminous sulphide of zinc exposed for thirty seconds to the radiations

emitted  by  a  body  heated  to  50°  C.  becomes  slightly  impressed.  The

radiations here act, I repeat, by their thermal action, and not by the specific

action on phosphorescence utilized in the previous experiments.

  My method of observation of the transparency of bodies by means of

pliosphorescence is very simple. On one half of the transparent sulpliide ofzinc and glass screen is placed the body serving as unit of comparison—for

instance, a strip of ebonite 1 millimetre thick—and, on the other, the opaque

body of which it is desired to ascertain the relative transparency.

  I then take up a position at a fixed distance from a parafKn lamp placed in

a dark room, the screen of sulphide of zinc having been insolated by exposure

to daylight. Its surface is protected by a metal plate, and when I am at a

suitable distance from the lamp—1 metre for example —the half not covered

by ebonite is uncovered, and the light allowed to act on it for a given time—

say, five seconds. Then covering up this part, and uncovering that over the

opaque body of which it is desired to ascertain the transparency, we allow the

rays of light to act until the intensity of the two surfaces is the same. If it

takes twenty seconds to obtain this identity, I conclude that the body under

experiment  is  twice  as  transparent  as  the  ebonite  taken  as  standard.  As

pliosphorescent sulphides receive cumulative impressions, the transparency

becomes a function of the time. We must then take the time as its ratio: which

is what the method just indicated does.

  Table of Traxsparency of various Opaque Bodies to Invisible Radiations

not exceeding 3 /x

  Black  JajMnese  varnish,  even  at  a  thickness  of  1  centimetre,  is

transparent  to  such  a  degree  that  the  rays  passing  through  it  impress  the

phosphorescent  screen  in  two  seconds.  Even  when  less  than  1  centimetre

thick, it produces the impression in two or three seconds.

  Pure Ebonite. Nearly as transparent as varnish up to 1 centimetre.

    .Ebonite half a millimetre thick, containing 1 per cent, of lamp-black or

metallic  oxides  (as  sometimes  found  in  commerce).  Almost  completely

opaque.

  Black paper. Very transparent, but only half as much so as pure ebonite.

  Red phosphorus in jj/a/e** 1 centimetre thick. As transparent as ebonite.

  Wood, stone, marble, grey cardboard, black cloth. Transparent, but much

less so than ebonite.

    Coloured glass. Very transparent, but red the least and orange the most so

for the infra-red.

  Bromine and iodine. Still more transparent than ebonite.

  Fused  chloride  of  sdver.  Cut  into  plates  less  than  1  millimetre  thick.

Slightly less transparent than ebonite.

    Antimojiy, lamp-black, and arsenic. Very opaque.

    Amrnoniacal sulphate of copper, bichromate of potassium in saturatedsolution, tvater-glass, and alum in, troughs 1 centimetre thick. Transparent,

but less so than ebonite.

    Saturated solution of sulphate of iron 1 centimetre thick. One-fourth as

transparent as ebonite.

  The above shows that bodies formerl}' considered opaque for infra-red

radiations,  such  as  alum,  black  paper,  water-glass,  (tc,  possess,  on  the

contrary, great transparency.

  When  we  wish  to  compare  very  rapidly  the  relative  transparency  of

certain bodies, the following process may be employed: The substances to be

examined are cut into bands and fixed on a glass plate, and then placed on a

phosphorescent screen of brilliant sulphide of zinc. They

    PHOTOGRAPHY THROUGH OPAQUE BODIES 315

  are exposed for two or three seconds in the dark to the radiations of a

paraffin lamp. The darker the shade of the sulphur under these bands, the

greater the trans-})arency of the bodies.

  Of all the bodies enumerated above, the one found most opaque is lamp-

black or the substances containing it. Black paper and ebonite which contain

it—and  this  is  frequent—at  once  become  opaque.  Before  using  them  in

experiments, it is therefore essential to examine their transparency, which

only takes a few seconds.

  The opaqueness of lamp-black enables us to easily realize the following

experiment, paradoxical at first sight though it is, viz. : to reproduce, either

by  contact  or  by  means  of  a  photograj)hic  camera,  a  print  placed  in  an

envelope of black paper, and shut up in an ebonite box. The printing ink,

which  contains  lamp-black,  is  not  traversed,  while  its  surroundings  are.  I

have given in Fig. 34 (p. 308) a photograph thus obtained.

  This opaqueness of lamp-black seems contrary to all that is taught in

recent works on physics. Bouty and Jamin (t. iii. fasc. 2, p. 90) say that " if

glass, fluorite, and salt are blackened with lamp-black, they extinguish all

light,  but  allow  the  whole  of  the  dark  radiations  which  these  substances

transmit to pass through them." This divergence of results is very easy to

explain on the simple condition that, in the preceding phrase, the word pari be

substituted for the irliole.

  The lamp-black allows some of the rays to pass, but not the whole of

them, since it arrests all those comprised between O'S /x and 3 /x. I have

often repeated that throughout the visible, as well as the invisible spectrum,

transparency is always selective—that is to say, that an opaque body is, like acoloured glass, only transparent for certain radiations.

  ^ 0.— Utilization of the Invisible Bays for rendering Visible Dark Bodies

at a great Distance

  When I published for the first Lime some of the experiments related in

this chapter, the Minister of

  Marine of tliat time asked me whether it would not be possible to mask,

with an opaque body, the lights of a man-of-war or of a lighthouse, in such a

manner as to render them invisible to the enemy and yet visible to those of

one's own vessels which Avere furnished with suitable apparatus.

  The  solution  of  the  problem  was  simple  enough,  but  it  has  lost  all

practical interest at the present time, since the progress of wireless telegraphy

which  enables  distant  vessels  to  communicate  Avith  one  another,  and  I

therefore think it can do no harm to publish the details of my experiments.

Generalizing  the  problem,  I  sought  to  discover  whether  a  ship  could  not

project into a harbour, a fortress, or a besieged town, rays of light invisible to

the besieged, but visible to the besiegers, thus alloAving a precise aim to be

taken at the enemy Avhile keeping the gunners invisible.

  The following problem therefore was set for solution :—To render visible

Avithout  rendering  it  luminous  any  obscure  body—for  instance,  a  vessel

Avith its lights out in a dark roadstead.

  We must first consider that, Avhen Ave project on to a dark body a pencil

of visible light, this body is only rendered perceptible by the rays that it

reflects. We knoAv, on the other hand, that about VVoths of the radiations

projected  by  the  best  sources  of  light,  are  quite  invisible,  and,  therefore,

inutilizable. So that, Avhen Ave find the means of separating the visible from

the invisible radiations, Ave shall only deprive our source of light of jl^th of

its total emission. The greater part of it Avill, consequently, still remain.

  The screens mentioned above possess this very property of eliminating

the visible and alloAving to

    PHOTOGRAPHY THROUGH OPAQUE BODIES 317

  pass the invisible rays. If a pencil of this invisible light is projected on to

a dark body, this body will reflect it as it would ordinary light. It would

therefore  appear  luminous  to  an  eye  capable  of  perceiving  the  invisible

radiations reflected by it. Such an eye does not exist, but a phosphorescent

sulphide of zinc screen can take its place.

  Instead of the ground glass of a camera furnished with an objective of

small focus capable of embracing a wide extent of the horizon, let us exposea screen of sulphide of zinc previously rendered phosphorescent by means of

a ribbon of magnesium or by the X-rays from a Crookes tube; there will then

appear on its surface the image of the bodies in darkness, on which has been

projected a pencil of invisible radiations.

  This invisible light will simply come from the reflection of that sent by

the electric searchlight carried by all men-of-war, the visible rays of which

we shall have previously masked by means of an opaque plate.

  This plate must not be made of ebonite or black paper, as used in our

preceding experiments, for the reason that they would be promptly destroyed

by the heat. The only available body is black glass, of which there exist

varieties  opaque  enough  to  blot  out  the  disc  of  the  sun  when  interposed

between that orb and the eye. Not that all black glasses by a long way are

transparent  to  invisible  radiations,  but  there  are  some  easily  obtained  in

commerce. It is only necessary, before making use of them, to ascertain their

transparency by the means I have pointed out. This only takes a few minutes.

With carefully chosen glasses, the transparency is the same as that of ebonite.

  All the experiments set forth in this chapter are based on the use of bodies

sensitive to radiations of great wave-length, but this sensitiveness is only very

great for radiations hardly exceeding 3 /i. Now, those emitted by bodies at a

relatively  low  temperature—the  human  body,  for  example—are  of  much

greater wave-length, and do not impress phosphorescent matter. If we could

discover a body sensitive to those radiations, nothing would be easier than to

photograph a living body in the dark without any other source of light than

the invisible light it is continuously emitting.

  Down to the absolute zero of temperature, all bodies incessantly radiate,

as  has  been  seen,  waves  of  light  invisible  for  our  eyes,  but  probably

perceptible by the animals called nocturnal and capable of finding their way

in the dark.

  To them, the body of a living being, whose temperature is about 37° C,

ought to be surrounded by a luminous halo, Avhich the want of sensitiveness

of our eye alone prevents our discerning. There does not exist in nature, in

reality, any dark bodies, but only imperfect eyes. All bodies whatever are a

constant source of visible or invisible radiations, which, whether of one kind

or the other, are always radiations of lig'ht.

    CHAPTER III

  THE PART PLAYED BY THE VARIOUS LUMINOUS RADIATIONS

IN THE PHENOMENA OF LIFE  § 1.— The Part of Light in the Phenomena of Life

  As the invisible infra-red rays form the greater part of the solar spectrum,

it may be imagined that they play a considerable part in meteorology and in

vegetable physiology. Their properties in this respect are very little known.

Hitherto, their calorific actions, which were long since observed, and their

power of passing through a great number of opaque bodies as brought to light

by my researches, have alone been studied.

  It occurred to me to also study some of the physiological actions of the

infra-red rays—that is to say, their influence on vegetable life, and to inquire

especially whether they might not exercise some of those antagonistic effects

established during the study of phosphorescence which will be studied in

detail in the next chapter. For want of materials, I was unable to proceed very

far in these researches.

  We  know  that  visible  light  has  two  opposite  actions  on  the  life  of

vegetables—the one oxidation or the respiratory function, the other reduction

or the chlorophyllian function.

  The first of these may be accomplished in the dark. By its means the plant

absorbs oxygen and exhales carbonic acid, as do animals.

  The chlorophylhan function, the converse of the

  above, can only, on the contrary, take place in the light, and is due solely

to absorption. Thanks to this, the plant decomposes carbonic acid and fixes

the carbon in its tissues. The luniinous energy stored up by the chlorophyll

enables the protoplasm of the plant to transform mineral substances into those

organic products, complicated and charged with energy, without which the

life of the higher animals would be impossible. Vegetables thus establish a

permanent link between the mineral and the animal world. Thanks to them,

matter  passes  without  ceasing  through  different  forms  of  life  rising

progressively from the mineral to the higher animal.

  In  this  perpetual  cycle,  two  elements  of  transformation,  bacteria  and

chlorophyll, play a preponderant part. The bacteria bring back to the mineral

state  the  products  used  by  the  functions  of  the  higher  lives,  and  the

chlorophyll raises the mineral substances to the organized state.

  Bacteria are able to pursue their destructive action in complete darkness.

Chlorophyll is obliged to absorb the luminous vibrations before playing its

part. The vegetable T\rorld therefore represents a transformation of light. It is

the luminiferous ether, absorbed and transformed by plants, Avhich ripens

our  harvests  and  makes  green  our  forests.  Life  represents  one  of  itstransformations.

  It cannot, however, be said that the very great energy stored up by the

plant is entirely due to the very slight energy produced by the absorption of

the luminous rays by the chlorophyll. The rays absorbed, no doubt, act by

provoking liberations of intra-atomic energy, the mechanism of which is not

yet comprehended. The vibrations of the ether

  probably  release  forces  which  thousands  of  ages  have  in  times  past

accumulated within the atom.

  What effect have the various visible or invisible radiations on the life of

vegetation ? The part played by the first named has been studied by several

generations of seekers. That of the second is largely unknown hitherto by

reason of the insufficiency of the methods employed to determine its action.

  § 2.— Methods of Observation of the Action of the Solar Spectrum on

Plant Life

  The  value  of  experiments  always  depends  on  the  choice  of  methods.

Those  employed  to  study  the  actions  of  the  various  parts  of  the  solar

spectrum, especially the infra-red rays, on plant life are unfortunately marred

by causes of error Avhich take away all value from many of the results—

contradictory moreover as these are—obtained up to the present time. It is

easy to put these in evidence.

  To observe the properties of the various radiations it was natural to think

of decomposing light by a prism, and of placing the plants under the various

radiations thus separated. The decomposition of carbonic acid by the leaves,

for instance, is measured by introducing them into narrow tubes, and then

placing  them  under  the  different  pencils  of  light  which  the  prism  has

separated.

  This method, so simple in appearance, gives rise to causes of considerable

error. The first and most serious is that the light, when sufficiently dispersed

to spread over a certain surface, loses its intensity to an enormous extent.

Now, the influence of intensity in chemical reactions is, as has been shown,

of capital i X

  importance. When operating with a prism one is inevitably led to seek in

the colour of the ray the cause of effects due, in reality, to differences of

intensity. It has long been known that in the faint light of a room plants

decompose very little or even no carbonic acid at all. Yet this light contains

the rays necessary for its decomposition. The light fails to produce this only

through lack of intensity.  This first cause of error would of itself be sufficient to vitiate all the

consequences draAvn from the facts observed. Moreover, it is not the only

one. Prisms, especially those made from flint, generally chosen on account of

their great power of dispersion, absorb nearly all the ultra-violet rays, the

action of which is very important, and a great part of the infra-red.

  No doubt these two drawbacks can be theoretically remedied by using

quartz or rock-salt prisms, which in fact has been done. But the dispersive

power of these substances is very small, and their spectrum consequently is

small in extent.

  The causes of the preceding errors, and of numbers more of which the

complete details would be too technical to be given here, explain sufficiently

the divergences in the results obtained by former observers. According to

some, the decomposition of carbonic acid by the plant—that is to say, its

most important function—is nil in the red, and considerable in the green.

According to others, it is exactly the contrary—the action is nil in the green,

and at its maximum in the red. This last result is, however, the most probable,

seeing that it is in the red and its neighbourhood that are to be found the

bands of absorption of the chlorophyll. To sum up, there is

  little exact information to be gained from the studies effected by the use

of prisms.

  The  results  obtained  by  replacing  the  prism  by  coloured  glass  are  no

better. This is a pity, for the process is practically very simple, since all that

one has to do is to cover over the greenhouses in which the experiments are

carried out with panes of glass of different colour.

  This method is the result of an error into which many experimenters have

fallen. Because the eye sees but one colour through a coloured screen—blue

glass, for instance—it is imagined that this screen only allows the one colour

perceptible by the retina to pass through. Now this is not at all the case. No

glass, except the red, is monochromatic. All allow the whole of the spectrum

to pass through. This is easily verified by holding coloured glass between the

sky and the slit of a small direct-vision spectroscope. I have had occasion to

examine a considerable quantity of coloured glasses, and have observed that

all except the red allow the whole of the spectrum to pass, and only weaken

the relative intensity of its various parts.

  By covering a greenhouse with coloured glass, then, we do little else but

reduce unevenly the intensity of the various luminous rays. When a plant is

placed  under  a  glass,  blue,  yellow,  violet,  &c.,  it  is  almost  the  same  asplacing it in a badly-lighted room.

  The use of coloured glasses to separate the various radiations carries with

it yet other sources of error. As they absorb the infra-red rays very unequally,

we may attribute to the influence of light what is due to that of heat. Between

one glass and another, the differences of calorific action are considerable. By

    placing  a  thermometer  in  boxes  of  a  capacity  of  about  one  cubic

decimetre, each one covered by different coloured glass and thus forming

small glass-houses, I observed that the internal temperature, which in the sun

was 30° C, went up to from 10 to 15° in ten minutes, according to the colour

of the glass.

  The only experiments realizable with coloured glass are those made with

red glass, This is, as has been said, almost monochromatic.

  The experiments effected in greenhouses covered with such glass at the

observatory of Juvisy, seem to prove that a certain number of plants receive

in red light a much more considerable development than in ordinary light.

Such,  for  instance,  is  the  case  with  sensitive  plants,  lettuces,  gladiolas,

geraniums,  begonias,  potatoes,  male  ferns,  &c.  Some—beetroot,  pansies,

wallflowers, &c.—on the contrary, thrive less under it.

  Were we to admit as demonstrated that certain plants develop much better

in red than in white light, the conclusion must naturally be adopted that—as

is the case of phosphorescence—certain rays have a contrary effect to that of

others. In white light, a plant evidently receives as many red rays as under a

red glass, since this last simply eliminates from the light all the rays saving

the red. If the fact of this elimination alone favours in a large measure the

development of the plant, it is because the eliminated rays act so as to weaken

the action of the red. This would be exactly what is observed with regard to

the  photographic  plate,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  next  chapter.  This  plate

becomes much more luminous when we withdraw certain antagonistic rays

from the light which strikes it.

  The antagonistic actions observed as regards phosphorescence thus exist

also  for  plant  life.  Green  has  already  observed  that  the  violet  and  the

ultraviolet rays tend to destroy the diastase, while its production increases

under the influence of the red. It will be seen further on that, in experiments

made  by  me,  the  infra-red  destroys  the  green  matter  in  plants  and  other

substances formed in the luminous part of the spectrum.

  § 3.— New Method of Studying the Physiological Action of the Infra-red,

and Results Obtained  In the preceding researches, hardly anything but the visible rays of the

spectrum have been dealt with. The only means known in former times of

studying the infra-red rays being separation by the prism, and as this collects

the radiations of this end of the spectrum on a very restricted surface, we

could scarcely determine their action.

  The fact, brought to light by my researches, of the very great transparency

of black paper, ebonite, &c., to rays of great wave-length, enables them to be

easily separated from visible light. A greenhouse is simply covered over with

one of these substances— for choice, the black paper. It is thus plunged in

utter darkness, but bathed with invisible light. In reality, the greenhouse has

only by this means been deprived of about a tenth of the total light (visible

and invisible) which it would have received from the light of the sun.

  It probably need hardly be remarked, that there can be no comparison

made between an enclosed place in which there only penetrate dark radiations

  of great wave-length and the cellars in which the action of darkness on

plant life was studied. The darkness of the greenhouse is the same to the eye

as  that  of  the  cellar,  but  the  effects  produced  must  necessarily  be  very

different, since the greenhouse is bathed in the waves of an invisible lis^ht

which the cellar does not contain.

  I have, unfortunately, not been able to pursue my experiments on this

subject for a long time, the garden in which they were carried out only having

been placed at my disposal for one season. I therefore only give the results as

hints. They may, perhaps, render service to horticulturists by giving them the

means of modifying the colour of certain plants, and the taste of different

fruits.

  It may be asserted in a general way that the infrared—up to 2 or 3 /i—

destroys the green matter formed under the action of light and also certain

colouring matters, while it reduces the quantity of sugar, suppresses the sapid

matter, and thus transforms the taste of different parts of the plants.

  Here is, however, the summary of my trials:—

  1.  Seeds  of  various  plants.  —Lettuces,  cucumbers,  grains,  &c.,  set  to

germinate under glass bellglasses, covered with black paper, transparent to

the  infrared,  all  germinate  quicker  than  by  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  then

wither and die in about a fortnight.

  2. Plants developed in the ligJit of day, and then exposed to the black

ligld. —The various plants behave very differently. Here are a few examples:

—Reine  Marguerite  does  not  flower.  Begonia  withers  in  about  ten  days.Strawberries are not modified, and ripen very well. Cucumbers and haricots

die from the withering of their leaves.

  3. Fruits and different parts of vegetables. —Artichoke tops enveloped in

black paper, transparent to long radiations, blanch completely in a few days,

but develop better than their neighbours exposed to daylight, while gaining

much in quality. Pears, peaches, and grapes blanch somewhat, but develop

very well. They were covered up as soon as they began to form. These three

forms of fruit present the peculiarity that they lost a part of their sweet taste

and  their  aroma.  Tomatoes  lose  their  red  colour,  and  become  completely

white.

  I repeat that I only give these experiments as general indications. In fact,

they deserve the criticisms which could have been avoided had I been able to

repeat them. The comparative method, indispensable for drawing conclusions

from experiments in which several factors may operate, demands that there

should be only one condition varying from one experiment to another, so as

to be able to attribute differences in results to the difference of condition

alone. Now, in these experiments we have not always taken into account

aeration, heat, &c.

  As the different parts of the light exercise, as we are about to see, strongly

antagonistic actions, it would be very useful, both in the light baths now

much used in medicine and in biological researches, to be able to separate the

rays so as to study the part played by each of them.

  In the present state of science, the comparative studies which are possible

on the action of the various rays of visible or invisible light, without seriously

reducing their intensity, are limited to the use of the following screens :—

  THE EVOLUTION OF FORCES

  Nature of the Screens.

  1. Entirely without screen

  2. Screen formed of thick | window glass . . j

  Screen glass

  formed of red

  4. Screen formed of black paper or ebonite

  5. Screen formed of a strip of metal

  Rays Acting with each Screen.

  The parts which act—that is to say, the whole of the solar spectrum—

range from 5 /x to 0-295 fi.

  The greater part of the ultraviolet rays and the infra-red beginning at 2 jnare suppressed.

    Complete suppression of all the ultra-violet and of all the visible spectrum

as far as the red. The only rays which act are the red and the infra-red as far

as 2 or 3 n, according to the quality of the glass.

  r Suppression of all the visible spectrum. The active rays are I the infra-

red.

  No ray traverses the metal, but it becomes heated, and emits from its

under side radiations of 6 /x and beyond, according to its temperature. These

radiations do not exist in the solar spectrum, but it would be of interest to

ascertain their action, and discover whether it is simply calorific.

    Notwithstanding

  their insufficienc}', these researches give us a presentiment of the great

interest of the researches for which, through lack of a suitable laboratory and

of sufficient means, I have only been able to sketch the way.

    ANTAGONISTIC PROPERTIES IN SPECTRUM 329

    CHAPTER IV

  THE  ANTAGONISTIC  PROPERTIES  OF  CERTAIN  REGIONS  OF

THE SPECTRUM

  § 1.— Rays tvhich Illuminate and Rays which Extinguish

  The study of the infra-red has led us to observe that it often exercises

actions diametrically opposed to those of the other extremity of the spectrum,

destroying, for instance, an action produced under the influence of this last.

  The discovery of these antagonistic actions of the two extremities of the

spectrum  is  contemporaneous  with  the  origin  of  photography;  but  we  are

compelled to imagine that the experiments effected to prove this phenomena

were not sufficiently demonstrative since their interpretation has often been

disputed, and was again challenged recently in a long discussion before the

Societe de Physique. The slow actions of inversion following one another in

photographic  impressions  seem,  in  fact,  to  lend  themselves  to  various

interpretations. The question, evidently, can only be entirely elucidated by

finding  means  of  rendering  instantaneously  evident  these  antagonistic

actions. It is these instantaneous effects which are realized in the experiments

which follow.

  The first observations on phosphorescence made it plain that all one end

of the spectrum, comprising the blue, violet, and ultra-violet rays, illumine a

phosphorescent screen taken out of the dark. The other end of the spectrum—

the green, red, and    infra-red rays—on the contrary, extinguish phosphorescence, and never

produce  it.  Certain  rays  therefore  act  as  illuminating  and  others  as

extinguishing rays. These two actions are plainly antagonistic, but as they are

very slow in the case of most phosphorescent bodies, they lend themselves to

various explanations. To put them in evidence, we needed a body extremely

sensitive to those radiations which extinguish phosphorescence. Sulphide of

zinc with green phosphorescence is the only body actually known to possess

this property, and all my experiments have been made with screens coated

with this sulphide in the manner described in a former chapter.

  If it is exact that certain rays produce phosphorescence, and that others

acting in the opposite direction consequently extinguish it, it is evident that

by  depriving  the  light  of  these  extinguishing  rays  by  the  interposition  of

suitable screens, we may increase the brilliancy of the phosphorescence on a

given screen. We shall see that this is really so, and that, for example, a body

which  does  not  become  illuminated  behind  a  glass  trough  of  sulphate  of

quinine, will become so if we keep back, by means of appropriate screens and

without changing the position of the trough, certain rays from reaching its

surface.

  E,  Becquerel  formerly  pointed  out  that  a  screen  of  phosphorescent

sulphide exposed to the light behind a trough of sulphate of quinine, did not

become illuminated, and he attributed this phenomenon to the absorption of

the ultra-violet rays by the sulphate of quinine—rays which, according to

him, " are the principal ones to excite phosphorescence." This ex-

    ANTAGONISTIC PROPERTIES IN SPECTRUM 331

    planation is wholly insufficient, for if the ultra-violet rays are able to

excite phosphorescence, they are not by any means the ones that excite it

most. Phosphorescent bodies are much better illumined by the blue and violet

rays—that is to say, by the part of the spectrum comprised between the lines

G and H. This point must be borne in mind in order to understand thoroughly

the experiments which follow.

  By varying the duration of the exposure of the phosphorescent screen we

can  easily  take  note  of  the  sensitiveness  of  the  sulphides  in  the  various

regions  of  the  spectrum.  With  the  projection  spectroscope  and  condenser

above described,^ a screen of sulphide of calcium or of zinc is impressed in

four seconds between G and H, and not at all in the ultra-violet. There must

be an exposure of several minutes to obtain an impression in this last region.

On the blue side the prolongation of the exposure extends the impressionnearly up to the line F, but no farther.

  Let us now take a screen of sulphide of zinc, a body so little sensitive to

violet rays that it does not light up at all behind the trough of sulphate of

quinine. We will now compel it to be brightly lighted up behind this trough

by simply superposing on the latter another trough which does not arrest the

blue rays, but does stop the extinguishing green, yellow, red, and infra-red

rays.

  This  experiment,  and  others  of  the  same  order  showing  distinctly  the

instantaneous  action  of  the  extinofuishinof  and  illuminating  rays,  are

decisive. For lecture purposes they may be thus simplified.

  We expose to sunlight (1) a screen of sulphide of zinc; and (2) by the side

of it another screen similar,

  ^ See Fig. 21 supra. — Ed.

  but placed behind a flat-sided flask filled with a saturated solution of

ammoniacal sulphate of copper. This solution is almost opaque to the eye

when in a stratum of about 2 centimetres. Leaving the flask on its screen, it is

taken  with  the  other  into  the  dark,  and  then  it  will  be  observed,  after

withdrawing the flask of sulphate of copper, that the sulphide screen placed

behind  this  last,  notwithstanding  the  apparent  obstacle  it  presented  to  the

passage of light, is much more luminous than the screen directly exposed.

This  difference  is  merely  due  to  the  fact  that  the  sulphate  of  copper  has

absorbed the extinguishing rays, and only allowed the illuminating ones to

act.  On  the  screen  exposed  directly  to  the  sun  the  brightness  of  the

phosphorescence is much less, because a part of the effect of the illuminating

rays has been destroyed by the extinguishing rays mingled with them.

  We may now return to the description of the experiment with the sulphate

of quinine trough, behind which we can light up or not at will a screen of

phosphorescent  sulphide.  No  experiment  shows  more  strikingly  the  parts

played by the extinguishing and by the illuminating rays.

  Behind a flat flask containing a perfectly clear 10 per cent, solution in

water  of  sulphate  of  quinine,  acidified  by  sulphuric  acid  to  the  point  of

complete  solution,  we  place  a  screen  of  sulphide  of  zinc  and  expose  the

whole to the sun. Notwithstanding the complete transparency to the eye of the

sulphate  of  quinine,  and  however  prolonged  may  be  the  exposure,  we

observed on taking the flask and screen back into the dark that the sulphide of

zinc exhibits no trace of phosphorescence. This absence of phosphorescence

is due solely to the fact that as the sulphate of quinine    ANTAGONISTIC PROPERTIES IN SPECTRUM 333

  retains a part of the illuminating rays and allows all tlie extinguishing

ones to pass, it is these last which prevail.

  To prove that this is really so, we will again expose

  D

  Figs.  38  aud  39.—  Apparatus  showing  instantaneously  the  opposite

properties of the ends of the spectrum. A B and A' B' are screens of sulphide

of zinc with green phosphorescence. C D and C D' are flat-sided flasks filled

with a 10 per cent, solution of sulphate of quinine. E F is a similar flask filled

with a saturated solution (almost opaque) of ammoniacal sulphate of copper.

By exposing the screen A B to sunlight behind the sulphate of quinine flask,

it becomes in no way phosphorescent. If we then lay upon the quinine flask

the other one filled with ammoniated sulphate of copper, the screen A' B'

becomes brightly luminous. It therefore becomes phosphorescent behind two

flasks laid one upon the other, of which one is nearly opaque, while it does

not light up behind the one of these which is transparent. Ordinary light being

a mixture of illuminating and extinguishing rays, it suffices to eliminate the

first-named to considerably increase the brilliancy of the phosphorescence.

  to  the  sun  our  sulphide  of  zinc  screen,  placed  behind  the  sulphate  of

quinine trough; but in front of this

  latter we will again place the trough of ammoniacal ^ sulphate of copper.

Then, taking the trough back into the dark, we observe that our sulphide

screen is brilliantly illumined, although it has only received the light through

an almost opaque liquid.

  The explanation is easy. The sulphate of quinine held back, as I said, a

part of the illuminating rays and allowed to pass all the extmguishing rays;

accordingly, it prevented all phosphorescence. By placing in front of it a

trough  of  sulphate  of  copper  we  suppress  the  great  majority  of  the

extinguishing rays (red and infra-red), and consequently the blue and violet

illuminating rays are allowed to act. The sum of the power of the illuminating

exceeding that of the extinguishing rays, the screen becomes phosphorescent.

  If we had replaced the sulphate of copper trough by a blue glass placed in

front of the sulphate of quinine, we should still have had illumination, but

weaker than with the sulphate of copper, because the blue glass stops the

extinguishing rays very insufficiently, especially those of the infra-red region.

  What has just been said regarding the action of the extinguishing and

illuminating rays on phosphorescent bodies allows us noAV to comprehendthe part taken by the screens interposed between phosphorescent bodies and

the sources of light.

  Light  being  a  mixture  of  radiations  capable  of  actino-  in  contrary

directions, and its composition differing greatly with the sources employed,

or with

  ^  In  diffused  light  there  was  uo  iUumination  behind  the  sulphate  of

copper,  because  of  the  insufficient  intensity  of  the  rays.  The  sulphate  of

copper trough can only be traversed by a very intense light.

    ANTAGONISTIC PROPERTIES IN SPECTRUM 335

  the  filtering  screens  interposed  between  the  light  and  phosphorescent

bodies, the explanation of the facts I am about to enumerate will be easily

arrived at.

  1. A screen of sulphide of zinc is much more illuminated in the dark than

in sunlight.

  2. The same screen is more illuminated under a blue ^ glass in the dark

than in sunlight.

  3. Behind a trough 2 centimetres from back to front, containing a solution

of ammoniacal sulphate of copper, the illumination of the screen is still more

intense, but on this occasion it becomes brighter in the sun than in the shade,

  4. Behind a trough of alum or of sulphate of iron the illumination of

phosphorescent bodies is reduced instead of being increased.

  5. By the light of a paraffin lamp or of a candle the illumination of a

screen of sulphide of zinc is almost nil, and on presenting to these sources of

light a screen insolated by daylight, it at once becomes extinguished. The

same phenomenon is not observed with a screen of sulphide of calcium.

  Here  are  a  few  figures  giving  the  luminous  intensity  of  a  screen  of

sulphide  of  zinc  illumined  under  most  of  the  conditions  we  have  just

examined.

  The brightness of the sulphide insolated by the sun without any screen

interposed is about 0*002^ (20V0 candle power). Taking this intensity as our

unit, we see in the following table the increase in

  ^  In  all  these  experiments  we  must  so  arrange  that  a  part  of  the

phosphorescent screen extends beyond the body placed in front of it, so as to

have a field of comparison when subsequently examined in the dark.

  brilliancy produced by the interposition of various screens between the

source  of  light  and  the  sulphide.  They  show  us,  for  example,  that  the

brilliancy  of  the  sulphide  of  zinc  behind  a  sulphate  of  copper  trough  isfourteen times as great (too c.p.) as when it has been illumined in the sun

without the interposition of any screen.

  Figures

    representing'

  the relative

  intensity.

    Luminous intensity of a screen of sulphide of zinc

  exposed in sunlight ...... 1

  Intensity of the same screen illumined in the shade . 2 Intensity of the

same screen exposed in sunlight

  under a cobalt blue glass ..... 7

  Intensity of the same screen exposed in the shade

  under a cobalt blue glass ..... 9

  Intensity  of  the  same  screen  exposed  in  sunlight  behind  a  saturated

ammoniacal sulphate of copper trough, 2 centimetres through . . 14

  These differences are not observed with other sulphides by reason of their

lower  degree  of  sensitiveness  to  the  extinguishing  action  of  the  great

radiations.!  In  order  to  observe  them,  a  substance  like  sulphide  of  zinc,

sensitive at once to the extinguishing and illuminating rays, was necessary.

Its brilliancy under the influence of light always represents the difference

between the action of the first-named rays and that of the second.

  We see therefore that it is solely on the relation existing in a source of

light  between  the  various  radiations  of  which  it  is  composed  that  the

illumination of a phosphorescent body depends. By varying the relation we

vary the brilliancy.

  This explains the action of a cobalt blue glass screen. It weakens the

extinguishing radiations,

  1 Radiations of great wave-length are evidently meant.— Ed.

    ANTAGONISTIC PROPERTIES IN SPECTRUM 337

  and consequently increases the illumination. Sulphate of copper, which

stops in a much greater degree the extinguishing radiations, likewise greatly

increases  the  illumination.  Sulphate  of  iron  and  alum  act  but  slightly,

because, although they stop a portion of the infra-red, and also a part of the

ultra-violet, which is an illuminant, they stop neither the red nor the green,

which are extinguishers.

  As regards the illumination of sulphide of zinc being greater in the dark

than in the sun—a very curious fact which has escaped all other observers—the explanation is exactly the same. Diffused light is blue light reflected by

the sky. From spectroscopic observations of already ancient date, it contains

relatively many fewer red rays—and probably also fewer infra-red ones—

than  the  direct  light  of  the  sun.  Notwithstanding,  therefore,  the  higher

luminous  intensity  of  the  sun,  the  sulphide  will  be  more  luminous  in  the

shade. This explanation is really the correct one, for if we withdraw from the

solar  rays  by  our  sulphate  of  copper  solution  the  radiations  which  act  as

extinguishers, the illumination will at once become much more brilliant in the

sun than in the shade by reason of the greater intensity of the illuminating

rays.

  The same reasoning explains why the sulphide of zinc not only does not

become illummated in the light of a strong lamp, but goes out when exposed

to  it,  if  previously  illuminated.  In  our  artificial  systems  of  lighting,  nine-

tenths of the rays emitted are extinguishing infra-red rays. The action of the

illuminating rays is, then, destroyed by them. Even by interposing a thick

trough  of  sulphate  of  copper,  only  a  very  weak  illumination  is  obtained

because,

  Y

  in view of the predominance of the infra-red rays, it is impossible to stop

them in sufficient proportion. Moreover, the interposition of this trough much

reduces  the  intensity  of  the  ilkuninating  rays.  Now,  the  degree  of

phosphorescence of a sulphide is, within certain limits, in direct ratio to the

intensity of the source of light which has illuminated it. With feeble sources

of light, phosphorescent sulphides do not become saturated, whatever may be

the duration of the exposure.

  All that I have just said regarding the sulphide of zinc is not applicable, I

repeat,  to  other  phosphorescent  sulphides  by  reason  of  their  slight

sensitiveness to great radiations, especially to the infra-red, and this is why a

screen of sulphide of calcium does not become appreciably brighter behind

troughs which stop the extinguishing radiations. The action of these last is too

slow to combat that of the illuminating radiations which have already had

time to act.

  The  eye  is  even  more  insensible  to  infra-red  radiations  than  the

phosphorescent sulphides other than zinc. If the sensitiveness of the retina

were as it is for this last body, the algebraical sum of the effects produced by

radiations acting in contrary directions, it would suffice to interpose suitable

screens between the eye and a landscape, for the apparent brightness of thislandscape to increase in enormous proportions. It would then be perfectly

unnecessary to use electricity to light our streets.

  Such different actions from the two extremities of the spectrum are not

observed  in  the  case  of  phosphorescence  alone.  They  also  exist  in

photography, as I shall proceed to show.

    ANTAGONISTIC PROPERTIES IN SPECTRUM 339

  § 2. — The Opposite Properties of the various Regions of the Spectrum

and their Action in Photogniphy

  If photographic plates had, to the destructive action of the infra-red rays,

a  sensitiveness  equal  to  that  of  sulphide  of  zinc,  it  would  be  possible  to

greatly increase, as wo have done for the latter, their rapidity of impression

by placing in front of the camera screens which stop the extinguishing rays.

  But this is not the case, because the photographic plate, although very

sensitive to the visible rays, is not so to the invisible, which are thus unable to

act. It is easy, however, by bringing in the action of time, to show that the

extinguishing rays can destroy the impression on the plate produced by the

illuminating rays.

  Let us place in a photographic dark slide a plate of ebonite Avhich may

be 1 millimetre thick, but which it is better to reduce to i millimetre, so as to

obtain sharp outlines. On or under this plate, wo will glue a cross cut out of a

sheet of tin. Behind the ebonite plate I will introduce, in the dark, a gelatino-

bromide plate of very fine grain, previously clouded by exposing it for two

seconds to the light of a candle. I close the frame and expose it for one hour

in sunlight. The infra-red rays pass through the ebonite and destroy the cloud

produced on the plate by the previous exposure. In the part protected by the

metallic cross they will not have acted, and that is why, on developing the

image, we shall find a reproduction of the metal cross on a very light ground.

The ebonite plate may also be

  THE EVOLUTION OF FORCES

  replaced by two or three superposed sheets of black paper.

  There is no analogy between this experiment and

 




 


  Fig. 40.— Dcraonstration, hi/ithcantar/onistic properties of the two endsof the spectrum, of the transpareney of opaque hodics {black paper, ebonite,

<fcc.) to invisible light, and of the opacity of the same bodies to visible light.

To show the transparency of bodies to the invisible rays, we take as our basis

the property possessed by these last of destroying photographic impressions.

In a dark slide is placed a plate of ebonite with metal stars glued in the middle

of it. We place above it a sensitive plate, of which one half has been clouded

by two seconds' exposure to the light of a candle. The slide is then exposed

for one hour to sunlight. On developing the plate no trace of an impression is

perceived on the unclouded part. On the clouded part, the infra-red rays have

passed  through  the  ebonite  and  have  destroyed  the  cloud,  save  under  the

metal  star.  It  follows  from  this  that  this  last  part  is  kept  back,  and

consequently appears in black on the negative image and in white on the

positive as in the illustration.

  the inversions we obtain by over-exposing a plate lighted by the blue or

violet rays. The infra-red

    ANTAGONISTIC PROPERTIES IN SPECTRUM 341

  rays which destroy a photographic impression, never produce one. This

property is limited to the infrared, for the red rays can, Avith a sufficiently

long exposure, impress a plate. If, in fact, we prolong the exposure under red

glass,  the  plate  becomes  first  clouded  and  afterwards  automatically

unclouded. But in this experiment the phenomena of inversion observed with

all radiations, and constituting a very different order of phenomena, come

into play. In the visible part of the spectrum, any radiation whatever destroys

the impression produced by greatly prolonged exposure—a fact easy to verify

by the spectroscope.

  We will summarize in the following table the antagonistic properties of

the two extremities of the spectrum.

  Table op the Antagoxistic Action of the Two Ends OF the Spectrum

  1.— Visible Region of the Spectrum. 2.— Invisible Infra-Red Region.

  A. Cannot pass through opaque A'. Passes through most bodies

    bodies. opaque to the eye, metals

  excepted.

  B. Impresses photographic plates. B'. Destroys the impression

    produced on photographic plates.

  C. Produces phosphorescence. C". Extinguishes phosphores-

  cence.

  D. Produces the majority of the D'. Destroys a great number of    reactions on which plant reactions produced by visi-

  life depends. ble light. Destroys especi-

  ally the colouring matter of plants.

  E. Energetically dissociates mat- E'. Has no dissociating action

  ter, especially throughout on matter,

  the ultra-violet extremity.

  The reasons for these differences cannot yet be sought; if the " How " of

things is sometimes accessible, their " Why " is not yet so.

  BOOK V

    FORCES OF UNKNOWN ORIGIN AND HIDDEN FORCES

    CHAPTER I

    UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION AND HIDDEN FORGES

  § 1.— The Causes of Gravitation

  The description of forces of unknown origin might really be applied to all

those we have hitherto studied, since we are ignorant of their essence; but at

least  we  know  something  of  their  characteristics  and  their  mode  of

propagation. On the other hand there exist forces such as gravitation, affinity,

molecular action, &c., of which we know almost nothinsf. For this reason

they have been relegated to a special division of this book.

  All our knowledge relating to gravitation can be reduced to the following

definition:  Bodies  attract  one  another  proportionally  to  their  mass  and  in

inverse ratio to the square of their distance from each other. Of the causes of

this attraction, of the manner in which it is propagated, and of the speed of its

propagation, we can say nothing.

  The discovery of the just-formulated law is, it will

  be remembered, due to Newton, and cost him long

    research. Gravity had been known a long time

    UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION &- HIDDEN FORCES 343

  before, and Galileo had perfectly studied its laws. But how far did its

action extend, and did it pass beyond the limits of our atmosphere ? Of that

every one was completely ignorant.

  The genius-inspired glance of Newton saw that weight might extend to

the  different  planets  and  be  the  cause  of  their  movements  in  space.  He

devoted many years of his life to the verification of the exactness of this

hypothesis.

  After having discovered the laws of gravitation, Newton vainly attempted

to determine its cause. "The reason of the properties of weight," he said, " Ihave not yet been able to discover." Nor were his successors more successful.

One  gets  clearer  and  clearer  glimpses  that  weight  is  due  to  the  relations

between the ether and matter, connected doubtless by lines of force; but this

is  only  a  more  or  less  vague  hint  which  still  escapes  the  teachings  of

experiment.  It  is  possible  that  the  gyratory  movements  of  the  atoms  are

communicated to the ether, and through it to the different material bodies,

thereby establishing an attraction between them. The reciprocal attraction of

vortices  has  at  the  present  day  been  demonstrated  by  many  experiments.

When the gyratory movement of the particles is transformed into movements

of translation in space during the dissociation of matter, these particles no

longer exercise any attractive action on each other, and consequently cease to

be  ponderable.  This  explanation  was  given  by  M.  Armand  Gautier  in  a

memoir referring to my researches.

    Gravitation displays this incomprehensible characteristic, which no other

manifestation of energy possesses, of not being arrested by any obstacle.

  The most delicate researches have shown that no body exists which is

opaque to attraction.

    Gravitation is a very small force, if we consider only the action of the

masses  we  have  at  our  disposal.^  But  it  is  a  force  extremely  great  for

considerable  masses.  Its  power  is  apparent  to  us  every  day  in  the

phenomenon of the tides. Under the influence of the combined motion of the

sun and moon, the seas are raised to an average height of 1 metre, which

represented aweight of 1000 kilogrammes per surface metre-

    Physicists have been able to say nothing more on gravitation than what is

said above. In an important memoir, of which I reproduce a fcvV passages,

Professor Vernon Boys has shown perfectly how inexplicable it remains. " It

seems to defy," he says, " all our attempts to abandon the inconceivable idea

of action at a distance; for even when we might conceive another mode of

action, it is entirely incomprehensible that gravitation should act at a distance

without regard to the existence or nature of the bodies in its path, and, as it

appears, instantaneously. Moreover, in the actual state of our knowledge, no

other physical agent, even among those which depend upon the ether, has any

influence over the direction or the extent of the action of gravitation. The

difficulties that we experience in creating a mechanical representation of the

ether are considerable; but the mode of propagation of gravitation seems still

further out of our reach." -

  The speed of the propagation of gravitation was  1 Professor Vernon Boys evaluates at the ^-^J^^th of a milligramme the

attraction exercised by two masses'of 1 kilogramme at 1 metre from each

other.

  2 Actes du Congres de Physique dc 1900, t. iii. p. 30G.

    UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION &^ HIDDEN FORCES 345

  estimated by Laplace as being immensely higher than that of light. M.

Henri Poincare considers it as propagated with a velocity of the order of that

of the light-vibration.

  We do not know how gravitation is propagated, but it seems to me that

the law of the inverse square of the distance allows us to imagine gravific

waves having a form analogous to that of the waves of light, electric waves,

&c. It is, in fact, only to forces which are propagated in this way that such a

law is applicable. It is only a consequence of the geometrical properties of

spherical  bodies,  and  result  simply  from  the  fact  that  the  surfaces  of

concentric spheres are proportional to the square of their radii. Place a candle

in the centre of a sphere of given radius, and each part of this sphere will

receive a certain quantity of light. Double the radius of the sphere, and as the

same quantity of light is spread over a surface four times greater than before,

its intensity over the same extent of the sphere will be four times less; while

with treble the radius, the intensity will be nine times less, and so on. It

would be the same if the source of light were replaced by a sonorous body.

The intensity of sound per unit of surface would be, for the same reason,

inversely as the square of the distance. This law of inverse squares simply

signifies  therefore  that  the  intensity  at  a  given  distance  is  inversely

proportional to the surface of the spherical wave propagated to that distance,

which is geometrically evident. When a force decreases with the distance in

accordance  with  this  law,  it  is  legitimate  enough  to  imagine  that  it  is

propagated by spherical waves. This should be the case with gravity.

  § 2.— The Consequences of Gravitation

  The laws of gravitation simply express this experimental fact,—that all

bodies exercise a certain attraction upon one another. From this phenomenon,

apparently simple, although inexplicable, results the course of the stars, and,

according to some physicists, all the forces of the universe, including those

which governed the formation of our solar system.

  It  is,  in  fact,  generally  admitted  that  the  central  globe  which  was  the

origin of our own, must have been formed by the reciprocal attractions of the

elements of the primal nebula.  The maintenance of the heat of the sun, whence is derived the greater part

of  terrestrial  forces,  must  be  the  result,  according  to  Helmholtz,  of  the

progressive contraction of the sun following on the attraction of his elements

for each other and the loss of vis viva [kinetic energy] which the molecules

experience when coming close to each other.

  It is likewise by gravitation combining its effects with those of inertia that

the planets describe their orbits in space. A body launched in a straight line

would continue its course in the same line by reason of its inertia; but if it be

subjected at the same time to the action of a force which attracts it in a

direction  perpendicular  to  that  of  its  course,  its  rectilinear  trajectory  is

deflected  and  becomes  a  curve.  Their  inertia  acting  by  itself  would  have

compelled the planets when they detached themselves from the sun at the

moment  of  their  formation  to  continue  their  course  in  a  straight  line

throughout  space.  On  the  other  hand,  had  they  not  received  this  initial

impulse, gravitation would have brought them together into

    UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION &- HIDDEN FORCES 347

  one single mass. The result of these two antagonistic actions is the curve

described by them round the sun, which can, according to the extent of the

impulse received in the first instance, be a circle, an ellipse, parabola, or

hyperbola. Certain comets alone seem to have a hyperbolic trajectory, for the

planets follow ellipses which are almost circles. All the planets of course act

upon one another, which is why Kepler's laws are only approximately exact.

    Centrifugal  force,  so  named,  results  from  this  double  action  of  the

original impulse combined with gravitation. The star represents the stone held

by  the  cord  whirled  by  the  slinger.  The  impulse  received  by  the  stone

represents that received by the star, and the cord which keeps back the stone

corresponds  to  attraction.  This  attraction  is  the  immaterial  string  which

attracts the star without ceasing, and compels it to tread a circular path. If it

ceased to act for a single instant, the planets would escape into a space in a

straight line by following the tangent to their trajectory, like the stone which

the cord fails to hold during its rotation.

  Thus,  then,  the  movement  of  the  stars  is  the  result  of  two  causes  :  a

permanent force—gravitation—which acts on them without ceasing, and an

initial impulse which has given to the star a certain velocity which it still

keeps  by  reason  of  the  principle  of  inertia,  whereby  a  body  when  set  in

motion continues in motion. We are, then, thrown back on the mysterious

property of inertia studied above, which is perhaps more incomprehensiblethan gravitation.

    Gravitation, which is the origin of the forces and of the movement of the

stars, is also that of the

    phenomenon called weight. This last is only a particular case of universal

attraction, i.e. of the attraction which bodies exercise upon each other. When

we say that a body possesses a given weight, it means that it is attracted by

the  earth.  We  measure  the  magnitude  of  this  attraction  by  inquiring  the

pressure which it exercises on another body, the scale-pan of a balance for

instance, or by opposing to it an antagonistic force of known magnitude, such

as the elasticity of a spring or the attraction of a magnet.

  We most often measure and utilize forces by putting them in opposition

to weight. The greater part of our machines are constructed either to use

weight or to strive against it. Industrial mechanics is in reality the art of

utilizing weight and inertia.

    Gravitation, inertia, and solar heat represent the three fundamental powers

utilized by man. They condition his existence and his civilization. If these

magnitudes  had  been  different,  civilization  would  have  taken  a  different

aspect. So far as solar heat is concerned, we see this clearly when we notice

how different are the fauna and flora at the Pole and at the Equator. Extreme

heat and extreme cold alike seem to imply savage or at least barbarian life.

Below 0° and above 50° C, no civilization can be born.

  We  perhaps  see  less  clearly  the  phenomena  which  differences  of

gravitation might generate. It is easy, however, to anticipate how different

would  be  the  conditions  of  our  existence  if  weisfht  were  reduced  or

assimilated.  At  first  sight,  we  seem  to  have  no  right  to  imagine  its  non-

existence, since it is, like inertia, an irreducible property of matter incapable

    UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION &- HIDDEN FORCES 349

  of modification, and following bodies throuQ-h all their changes. But, if

gravitation remains indestructible, its effects might be restricted or reduced to

nothing.  It  has  been  calculated  that  it  would  suffice  for  the  earth  to  turn

seventeen times as fast as it does now for the centrifugal force to entirely

annul the attraction of the earth's mass on bodies at the Equator. They would

then cease to have weight, and consequently would not fall back on the earth

when  left  to  themselves.  Their  weight  therefore  depends  on  the  speed  of

rotation of our globe, which itself depends upon the impulse received in the

first instance, when, under the influence of centrifugal force, it detached itself

from the sun at the time of its formation.  There are other causes possible by which attraction might be annulled. It

will be remembered that when the waves of light fall upon a surface, they

exercise a certain pressure upon it. It has been calculated that for portions of

matter of small density and finely divided, the attraction of the sun might not

only be annulled ^ but even changed into a repulsion, which may be the cause

of the deformation of the heads of comets. Poynting has calculated that a sun

at the temperature of our own, if it had only 32 kilometres of diameter, would

repel, instead of attracting, all bodies less than 1 cm. through.

  ^ " Consider a small sphere subjected.on the one hand to the forces of

gravitation, and on the other to the action of a powerful radiation, that of the

sun,  for  instance.  Gravitation  acts  proportionately  to  the  volume  of  the

sphere,  i.e.  to  the  cube  of  its  radius,  while  the  radiant  repulsion  is

proportional to the surface of a great circle of the sphere, i.e. to the square of

its radius. When the radius tends towards zero, the force of radiation becomes

more  and  more  important  in  relation  to  gravitation,  and  may  come  to

counterbalance it entirely " (Bouty).

  It would be useless to dwell longer on these considerations, which show

us merely how numerous are the possibilities of things, and how much the

existence of living beings and all the ideas which we form of the world are

conditioned by external forces from which we cannot Avithdraw ourselves.

This is a self-evident notion, but one which certain philosophers rather forget.

  § 3.— Forces Dimly Seen

  It is hardly to be imagined that the forces of nature are limited to the

small number of those with which we are acquainted. If we are ignorant of

them, it is because we have no reagents which disclose them. The discovery

of appropriate reagents is the sole means of putting them in evidence. During

the last twenty years, science has annexed the Hertzian waves, the X-rays, the

cathode  rays,  the  radio-active  rays,  and  intra-atomic  energy  to  the  small

kingdom of the forces known of old. It is difficult to believe that the end of

these discoveries is reached; and mighty forces may surround us without our

knowing  it.  Intra-atomic  energy  was  unsuspected  barely  ten  years  ago.

Electricity, unknown for thousands of years, would perhaps still remain so if

all bodies were good conductors.

  This is no place evidently for a dissertation on things of which we are

ignorant. One ought first to try to discover them. A few hints hardly allow us

to suspect their existence.

  Our means of research are generally the verification of attractions andrepulsions,  and  do  not  take  us  very  far.  Several  times,  however,  the

attractions

    UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION &- HIDDEN FORCES 351

  and repulsions which a hght needle suspended by a thread of raw silk

experiences when approached by a living body has been pointed out; but they

are perhaps due merely to the action of heat.^

  We are, then, here entirely within the domain of pure hypothesis, and we

ought not to stay there long. Let us merely say that intra-atomic energies are a

source  of  many  possible  varieties  of  energy.  M.  Georges  Delbruck,  an

engineer, has suggested that the larger birds, whose soaring flight without

apparent motion is so difficult to explain, may have the faculty of generating

at  the  expense  of  intra-atomic  energy  a  force  capable  of  striving  against

gravitation until it renders it null. This hypothesis is very difficult to verify,

but is not fundamentally absurd. Gravitation is only an attraction, which can

be annihilated by a corresponding repulsion, as that exercised on masses of

iron can be annulled by the action of a magnet.

  This  theory  will  delight  the  spiritualists,  who  believe  that  they  have

verified  the  levitation  phenomena  which  objects  in  relation  with  certain

persons seem to present. Nevertheless, before ex-

  ^ Mr. Legge tells me that he has established the fact that those actions do

not manifest themselves through a vacuum. [I made some experiments with

this some years ago, and gave in an article in a popular magazine {Pall Mall

Magazine, April 1902) a description of an apparatus which I believe to be

very much more sensitive than that referred to in the text. Recently, however,

it occurred to me to surround the apparatus with what is known as a " vacuum

jacket," or, in other words, to invert over it a double bell glass, having a

vacuum  between  its  inner  and  outer  walls.  With  this,  the  needle  remains

motionless, no matter what bodies are brought near to the outer cover of the

apparatus. As a vacuum cuts off not only electrical influences but also heat

rays, it seems most probable that the motion of the needle is, in the cases

originally buoted, the result of (convection currents formed by heat in the

interior of the receptacle. ^Ed.]

  plaining  these  levitations,  tlieir  reality  must  first  be  rendered  beyond

dispute.

  As to the so-called psychic forces, materializations, &c., it will be useless

to  busy  ourselves  with  them  here.  They  have  attracted  the  attention  of

eminent scholars, such as Crookes, Lodge, Richet, and others, but they haveyet to be demonstrated, and until this is done, it is better to try to interpret the

phenomena observed by known causes. I had occasion to examine without

prejudice, and with the assistance of M. Dastre, a subject with a European

reputation,  but  our  investigations,  continued  throughout  several  seances,

disclosed to us nothing demonstrative. The story of the N-rays, moreover,

shows us the difficulty of thorough observations in similar matters, and of

avoiding causes of error. Before building a temple to unknown forces, we

ought to be perfectly certain that they do not issue wholly from that domain

of illusion in which all divinities have hitherto been born.

    CHAPTER II

  THE MOLECULAR AND INTRA-ATOMIC FORCES

  § 1.— The Attractions and Repulsions of the Elements of Matter

  Several chapters of L'Evolution de la Matiere Avere devoted to the study

of the equilibria of the elements of matter, and the forces of which they are

the seat. We will run through them again to show how

    MOLECULAR AND INTRA-ATOMIC FORCES 353

  ignorant  Ave  are  of  the  nature  of  some  of  the  forces  of  which  Ave

observe the effects.

  It is by minute examination of phenomena of daily occurrence that Ave

best  comprehend  hoAv  complicated  are  our  surroundings,  and  hoAv

rudimentary are the classic notions about them. If a physicist be asked what

cause  keeps  together  the  molecules  of  a  solid  body—a  bar  of  iron,  for

instance—he Avill reply that it is a force named cohesion. If he be further

asked of Avhat cohesion consists, he Avill be obliged to ansAver that he has

no idea. If Ave ask a chemist Avhy certain bodies, Avhen brought together,

combine,  he  Avill  say  that  it  is  by  virtue  of  an  unknoAvn  force  called

affinity,  of  Avhich  he  can  only  verify  certain  effects.  We  should  obtain

similar  ansAvers  on  interrogating  him  about  osmosis,  crystallization,

catalytic action, the action of diastasis, &c. All these phenomena belong to

the  cycle  of  molecular  and  intra-atomic  energies,  complete  acquaintance

Avith Avhich is reserved for a science much more advanced than our own.  The most constant and most easily observed effects of these forces are the

attractions and repulsions Avhich take place betAveen the different elements

of matter.

  We  have  seen  that  matter  is  composed  of  infinitely  small  particles

gravitating  round  one  another  as  the  planets  round  the  sun,  and  probably

formed by Avhirls in the ether. Matter is ether already organized, having

acquired certain properties such as Aveight, form, and permanence.

  The elements of matter formed by condensations of ether are, as shoAvn

in the book above quoted, of a minuteness of Avhich Ave can form no idea,

because

  z

  we have no point of comparison. It has been remarked that a drop of sea-

water,  a  cubic  metre  of  which  contains  less  than  a  decigramme  of  gold,

contains more than 6,000,000 molecules of this metal. If we were to touch it

with the point of a needle, this point would be in contact with more than a

thousand molecules of gold.

  In  spite  of  their  extreme  minuteness,  these  molecules  are,  however,

colossi, compared to the particles of which the atoms are composed. These

last, however, execute whirling, vibratory, and rotatory movements as regular

as those of the stars in the firmament.

  They are, however, distinguished from the stars inasmuch as we can by

different means—heat, for example—vary the amplitude of their movements.

From these variations the greater part of the physical properties of bodies,

and, especially, their state whether solid, liquid, or gaseous, result.

  All these movements, the consequences of the gigantic forces of which

matter is the seat, are chiefly disclosed to us, as has been said, by attractions

and repulsions, which is why one is led to seek in such actions the origin of

all phenomena.

  These attractions and repulsions are reciprocal— i.e. they act as if a spiral

spring existed between the two bodies in presence of each other. If both are

movable, they draw near to or move away from each other. If one of them is

motionless, it is the movable body which goes towards or moves away from

the other.

  The distance at which these attractions and repulsions take effect is very

limited. We give the name of field of force to the space in which this

    MOLECULAR AND INTRA-ATOMIC FORCES 355

  action  is  apparent.  We  call  lines  of  force  the  directions  in  which  theattractive and repellent effects are produced. While very easy to observe in

electrical phenomena, the molecular fields of force due to other actions, may

be made equally evident by different artifices, as shown in L'Evolution de la

Matiere.

  The most important of the molecular forces is that called cohesion. The

existence of the bodies of which the universe is formed is due to its influence.

It conditions their forms. Without its action the world would vanish in an

invisible dust of ether.

    Although cohesion is an extremely powerful force, as is proved by the

huge  mechanical  effort  necessary  to  separate  the  particles  of  bodies,  we

possess in heat the means of annulling it.

  As soon as the molecules are sufficiently separated by heat, the most rigid

body loses its consistence and becomes liquid or gaseous. The very fact that

there is no cohesion as soon as the molecules are apart from each other,

proves that the molecular attractions which produce cohesion only act at a

very small distance. Bodies in powder, even when strongly compressed, do

not again become hard for this reason. However near to each other these

particles may be brought by pressure, they are still not enough so to attract

one  another.  To  bring  them  near  enough  for  this  purpose  demands  an

enormous  pressure.  Spring  was  thus  able  to  form  blocks  of  brass  by

energetically compressing powdered copper mixed with powdered tin.

  Simple cooling produces the same effect, which is why, when we allow a

melted body to cool, it returns to the solid state. Temperature constitutes one

of

  those  specially  appropriate  reagents  of  which  we  have  so  often  taken

occasion to show the importance. To separate the molecules kept together by

cohesion demands an enormous effort, while only a relatively feeble one is

necessary to separate them by heat.

  Nothing resists the molecular forces. We can split a bombshell full of

water  by  freezing  it.  We  have  only  to  touch  a  body  for  its  molecules  to

separate a little.

    Cohesion, which is already much reduced in liquefied bodies, disappears

altogether in gaseous ones. Far from attracting each other, the molecules of

gases behave—at least in appearance—as if they repelled each other. Thus,

the smallest quantity of gas, introduced into a receiver, spreads into all parts

of it. To compress a gas— i.e. to force its molecules to draw together—a

considerable pressure must be exercised upon it.  In solution, the molecules of the dissolved bodies behave in a similar

way. They exercise upon the walls of the vessel containing them a pressure

called osmotic, which is easily measured. The solution of a body has for this

reason been compared to a gas.

  In the energy of cohesion we have therefore a force which is very great,

but which has the characteristic of only acting upon the particles of bodies

when they are a very small distance apart. This peculiarity is not found in the

attractions  which  constitute  gravitation.  This  acts  on  all  bodies  at  all

distances.

  We can form a summary idea of the forces which may produce cohesion

by creating something similar in a body—that is to say, a force capable of

generating attraction. If we cause an electric current to circulate

    MOLECULAR AND INTRA-ATOMIC FORCES 357

  in a metal wire surroiindinCT an iron rod, we sfive to the molecules of

the rod a power of attraction sufficient for them to exercise upon a piece of

steel an attraction which may rise as high as 100 kilograms per sq. cm. In the

field of force surrounding the metal, a considerable attraction may also be

exercised. One thus has a glimpse of the way in which the ether can assume a

form making it capable of exercising extremely energetic attractions.

  It has just been said that molecular attractions and repulsions are only

manifest at a slight distance. There are, however, some which act from fairly

far off. A piece of charcoal cooled to — 200°C. will so energetically absorb

the air of the receptacle in Avhich it is placed as to make a vacuum in it. A

hygrometric  body  acts  in  the  same  way  in  respect  of  the  water  vapour

surrounding it. Tantalum, heated to 600° C. in an atmosphere of hydrogen,

absorbs 600 times its volume of the gas in which it is plunged.

  § 2.— The Molecular Equilibria.

  All the attractions and repulsions just spoken of are in equilibrium with

each other, and also with the external forces surrounding them. Matter, which

was  formerly  conceived  to  be  independent  of  its  surrounding  medium,

represents only a state of equilibrium between the internal forces of which it

is the seat and the external forces which envelop it. The most rigid body is

transformed into vapour as soon as this medium is sufiicientl}^ changed. In

fact, wc cannot define any property of a body— inertia excepted—without

mentioning the conditions of the medium in which it is plunged. Even when

  we do not see tlieir variations, the properties of a body follow the least

changes of its medium to put themselves in equilibrium with it. It suffices tobring the hand near matter for its equilibria to be modified, A variation of the

Tooooooooth of a degree in the medium in which it is plunged varies the

electrical resistance of a body in a way detectable by our instruments. The

bolometer is based on this principle.

  If we wish to point out the physical properties of any substance—water,

for instance—we must always for completeness give the conditions of the

medium. Water is solid below 0° C, liquid above that point, and gaseous if

the temperature of the medium exceeds 100° C.

  When the conditions of the medium are similar, the properties of bodies

tend to resemble each other. Tavo different saline solutions with the same

osmotic pressure, have the same freezing-point; while the vapour-pressures

of liquids are equal at temperatures equally removed from their boiling-point,

and bodies of the same atomic weight possess the same calorific capacity,

&c.

  Van der Waals has gone further still in his law of corresponding states,

Avhich  shoAvs  that  if  the  volume,  the  pressure,  and  the  temperature  are

estimated by taking as units the initial quantities, one equation is enough to

translate  the  properties  of  all  fluids.  This  means  that  all  have  the  same

properties in corresponding states.^

  ^  The  generality  of  the  law  of  corresponding  states  is  here  rather

exaggerated. It seems to be true for certain derivatives of benzine only. See L.

Poincare, The Evolution of Modern Physics (vol. xc. of this series), p. 113

and note.

    MOLECULAR AND INTRO-ATOMIC FORCES 359

  § 3.— The Force and the Form

  By  molecular  attractions  and  repulsions  wc  can  go  very  near  to  an

explanation of certain phenomena, but our ignorance in regard to the causes

which give matter its form is complete. Why, for instance, do liquids when

solidifying take certain regular geometrical forms which are invariable for

each body ? The hidden causes of the form of a crystal are as unknown to us

as those of a plant or an animal. These things happen as if physico-chemical

phenomena were governed by unknown forces which compel them to act in a

predetermined direction.

  We, however, may in some sort comprehend the genesis of a few forms

by  reducing  them  to  extremely  simple  cases—for  instance,  to  molecular

attractions within a liquid.

  When we introduce into an aqueous solution a drop of liquid of differentosmotic pressure, the molecules of the two liquids are attracted or repelled,

and  sometimes  form  fairly  regular  figures.  We  may  also,  by  combining

attractions and repulsions of electrical origin, obtain greatly varied figures.

Some have been given in L'Evolution de la Matiere, which were formed by

combining  the  attractions  and  repulsions  of  the  particles  of  dissociated

matter.

  By similar means we may obtain figures imitating plants. For the last

twenty years certain observers, like Traube, have exercised their ingenuity in

creating such reproductions. Of these, M. Stephane Leduc has obtained the

most curious results, as may be judged by the figures here given. The mode

of production indicated by him is very simple. " A granule of sulphate of

copper of 1 nun. to 2 mm.

    diameter, composed of about two parts of saccharose, 1 of sulphate of

copper, and water to cause it to granulate, is planted in an aqueous solution

containing 2 per cent, to 4 per cent, of ferrocyanide of potassium, 1 per cent,

to 10 per cent, of chloride of sodium and other salts, and 1 per cent, to 4 per

cent, of gelatine. It germinates in a space of time which varies from a few

hours to a few days according to the temperature. The granule surrounds

itself with a membrane of ferrocyanide of copper permeable to water and

certain ions, but impermeable to the sugar enclosed within it, which produces

in  this  artificial  seed  the  strong  osmotic  pressure  which  determines  its

absorption and growth. If the liquid is spread over a glass plate, the growth

takes place on the horizontal plane; if the culture is made in a deep basin, it

takes place at once horizontally and vertically. One single artificial seed may

give 15 to 20 stalks sometimes as high as 25 cm."

  We may think we sec here the image of life; but there is hardly any more

connection bet^^'een these artificial plants and real ones than there is between

a  living  man  and  his  statue.  Their  production  merely  shows  that  osmotic

equilibria may condition certain external forms.

  We  have  studied  in  this  chapter  only  the  relatively  simple  forces—

primary  forces,  we  might  say—that  govern  the  mineral  world.  They  are,

however,  very  obscure.  When  we  come  to  the  forces  which  direct  the

phenomena of life, the obscurity becomes greater yet.

 




   Fig. 41.

  Action of molecular forces.

  Mimicry of plant forms by metallic salts.

    (Photograph by Prof. St. Leduc.)

 




 


  Fig. 42.

  Action of molecular forces.

  Mimicry of plant forms by metallic salts in solution of gelatine.

    (Photograph by Prof. St. Leduc.)

    FORCES MANIFESTED BY LIVING BEINGS 361 CHAPTER III

  THE FORCES MANIFESTED BY LIVING BEINGS

  § 1.— Living Matter and Cellular Life

  We observe among living beings very distinct manifestations of energy :

—(1) Physico-chemical forces, such as heat, light, electricity, described in

physics; and (2) those united under the name of vital forces, of the nature and

mode  of  action  of  which  we  are  profoundly  ignorant.  For  the  sake  of

completeness  I  am  obliged  to  speak  of  these  last;  but  I  do  so  with  the

certainty  that  I  can  say  nothing  useful  on  the  subject.  To  descant  on  the

phenomena of life while wo are incapable of explaining why the stone which

leaves the hand falls to the ground is a task which must be left to the leisure

of metaphysicians.

  The  sole  interest  which  this  chapter  may  possess  lies  in  its  showing

exactly  the  present  limits  of  our  slight  acquaintance  with  those  still  very

incomprehensible phenomena, the synthesis of Avhich constitutes life. All

living  beings  without  exception  are  composed  of  an  aggregate  of  little

microscopic  elements  called  cells.  These,  although  of  such  an  extreme

minuteness  that  their  diameter  hardly  exceeds  some  thousandths  of  a

millimetre, have yet an extremely complicated structure, and properties even

more so.

  In a very summary way we may say that they are composed of agranulous

substance called protoplasm, containinar in its midst a nucleus of filaments.

The microscope has shown the structure of this dust of life; but the most

marvellous part is that which we  do not see. It contains, in fact, the germ of ancestral forms and those

which will be born in the future course of its evolution. Every living being is

derived from one primitive cell—the ovum, the transformations of Avhich

suffice to form a complete being in a very short space of time.

  These cells, then, constitute the materials from which living beings are

built.  The  lowest  of  these  beings  are  composed  of  a  single  cell.  They

multiply, stick tosrether, and arc associated with the hioher ones to form their

different organs. The higher being is therefore a veritable society of cells

having each its destined function, but working together in the general interest.

The higher animal possesses a nervous system Avhich puts the organs formed

by the cells, and the digestive and circulatory apparatus which bring to them

the elements of nourishment, in relation with one another: while other organs

are  charged  with  the  expulsion  from  the  system  of  the  remains  of  their

nourishment, and so on. The whole living being labours to maintain the cells;

they depend on it, and it on them.

  The protoplasm of which the cells are composed represents the stock of

life common to all living things, from the most humble to the highest. It

fulfils universal functions, assimilation as well as destruction, and, from the

chemical,  anatomical,  and  physiological  stand-points,  seems  to  be  little

modified from one being to another, while its forms change to an infinite

extent. Nature, which economizes her efforts, has need of little in order to

vary the elementary structure of beings.

  It is by the study of the life of cells that we may best understand the

profundity of the mystery of life

    FORCES MANIFESTED BY LIVING BEINGS 363

  and its amazing complexity. To show this it will be enough to recall what

appears on this subject in LEvolidion de la Matiere.

  The  chemical  edifices  which  humble  cells  know  how  to  manufacture

comprise not only the most skilful operations of our laboratories, such as

etherifi-cation,  oxidation,  reduction,  polymerization,  and  so  on,  but  many

others demanding still more skill which we cannot imitate. By means which

we do not even suspect, the vital cells construct their complicated and varied

compounds—the albuminoids, cellulose, fats, starch, &c., necessary to the

support of life. They are able to decompose the most stable bodies, such as

chloride of sodium, to extract the nitrogen from the ammoniacal salts, and the

phosphorus from the phosphates, &c.

  All these labours, so exact and so admirably adapted towards-one end, aredirected by forces of which we have no idea, and which behave exactly as if

they possessed a second sight far superior to our reason. That which they are

accomplishing every instant of our existence soars far above all that the most

advanced  science  can  realize.  The  scholar  capable  of  solving  by  his

intelligence the problems solved every moment by the cells of the lowest

creature would be so much higher than other men that he might be considered

by them as a god.

    Although protoplasm is the seat of an incessant activity, it is only slowly

renewed in each being, and does not in fact contribute to its support out of its

own substance, but by the materials it incorporates. It hardly uses itself up

more than an engine fed by coal.

  § 2.— Ivstahilify is the Condition of Life — Part Ijlayed by tlie Intra-

Atomic Energies

  Life  is  only  maintained  by  an  incessant  using  up  of  the  materials

borrowed  from  outside.  The  cell  assimilates  and  destroys  without  pause.

Instability is the law of life. As soon as it is succeeded by stability there

comes death.

  Life is, then, the result of a constant exchange between the living being

and the medium in which it is plunged. A being cannot be isolated from this

medium, and would even bo incomprehensible without it. It is the differential

action  of  assimilation  and  destruction  which  governs  the  ascending  or

descending  evolution  of  beings  throughout  their  existence.  The  cell  dies

without ceasing; but as it is renewed without ceasinsc, the living beinsr has

an apparent stability. It resembles a building the stones of which are every

day  removed  by  cunning  demons,  but  are  immediately  replaced  by  other

demons. The building does not change its appearance, and only begins to

grow old when the restoring demons incompletely perform their task. The

day Avhen they no no longer fulfil it, the building falls in ruins.

  The  maintenance  of  life  represents  a  great  expenditure  of  the  energy

furnished by food. AVith a great number of animals this last is constituted of

vegetables, which by themselves can raise mineral matter to the degree of

complexity necessary for the creation of chemical compounds charged within

a slight volume with unstable energy. Thanks to them, matter is unceasingly

raised from the unorganized state, to return at length to the starting-point.

  But if the instability of the chemical elements of

    FOECES MANIFESTED BY LIVING BEINGS 365

  tlie cells is the very condition of life, does not tlie instability of the atomalso play a part in these phenomena ? I would not seem to exaggerate the

influence of that intra-atomic energy which I have already made use of to

explain many phenomena; but one must believe that its possible part in vital

action is often present to the mind, for I have received letters from many

doctors  on  this  subject.  I  should  not,  however,  have  spoken  of  this,  if

experimental  facts  did  not  seem  to  demonstrate  that  the  dissociation  of

n;iatter may be manifested within the organism. Thus, for instance, Professor

Dufour  has  recently  shown  that  air  that  has  been  breathed  contains

radioactive particles. Now these particles result, it will be remembered, from

the dissociation of matter. I am also led to believe—and M. Dastre, to whom

I have submitted my hypotheses, entirely admits the fact—that we must seek

in atomic dissociations for the origin of the increase of energy produced by

certain  excitants,  such  as  kola,  caffeine,  &c.,  whose  composition  clearly

shows that they cannot be considered as foods. Some diastasic actions may

well have a similar origin. The elements of protoplasm are considered at the

present day as very unstable colloidal substances, and I have shown that these

substances often come from the dissociation of matter. Given the colossal

energ^'^ of intra-atomic energy, we can understand that the cell may become

a  mighty  generator  of  energy  without  its  composition  being  perceptibly

altered. It must also be remarked that physiologists have never succeeded in

furnishing  an  acceptable  theory  of  the  action  of  the  excitants  spoken  of

above.  I  hope  that  Avhat  has  been  said  will  permit  them  to  give  some

explanation of these phenomena.

  These  intra-atomic  energies,  set  free  within  the  organism,  seem,

moreover,  of  rather  exceptional  occurrence,  and  only  intervene  under  the

influence of special excitants, when the living being is obliged to make a

considerable effort rapidly. In normal conditions the forces which it manifests

have especially as their origin the chemical energies which come from foods.

  These  last  may  be  very  varied,  but  may  be  reduced,  it  will  be

remembered, into three categories :—

  (1) Albuminoids (white of egg, flesh of animals, ^c).

  (2) Carbo-hydrates (starch, sugar, &c.).

  (3) Fats (the dift^erent fatty bodies).

  We must add to these the oxygen of the air absorbed by respiration and

necessary to displace, by combining with them, the energies of the chemical

compounds introduced into the organism.

  The  food  value  of  alimentary  substances  is  sometimes  estimated  byburning them in a calorimeter and measuring the calories they produced. This

rather barbarous process would lead us to consider coal and petroleum as

valuable foods, as they disengage by their combustion many calories. One

kilogramme of coal generates, in fact, 8000 calories; while the adult only

uses about 2500 a day. Professor Chauveau has said : " We must give up

looking  for  the  nutritive  value  of  foods  in  their  heat  of  combustion.  The

theory of food and alimentation cannot be presented under so simple a form."

  All  foods  produce  heat;  but  this  being  the  last  term  of  the  energetic

changes of the organism, and not the first, it is evident that it is not this which

generates the vital forces. Its part seems to be merely to put the elements of

the organism in the

    FORCES MANIFESTED BY LIVING BEINGS 367

    conditions necessary for their proper working. M. Dastre made this point

evident some time ago.

  When all the foods have given up their energy to the organism, they are

cast  forth  under  different  forms,  such  as  water,  carbonic  acid,  urea,  &c.,

deprived of utilizable energy.

  To sum up, we see that the vital forces are maintained by the chemical

forces, derived from the food, and that it is these last which uphold the first.

  § 3.— Tlie Forces ivliich Begidate the Organism

  Even  when  we  liken  to  physico-chemical  forces  the  vital  forces

manifested by living beings, it must be recognised that things happen as if

there existed quite pecuhar forces, some of which are intended to regulate the

functions  of  the  organs,  and  others  to  direct  their  force.  They  must  be

described, for the sake of clearness, by a name, although they probably are

only a synthesis of actions which are very different and not yet dissociated.

We will call the first category regulating and the second morphogenic {i.e.

generators of forms) forces.

  In spite of the efforts of thousands of workers, physiology has been able

to tell us nothing of the nature of those forces. They have no analogy with

those which are studied in physics.

  The regulating forces act as if they watched over the proper working of

the  living  machine,  regulating  the  temperature  and  the  constancy  of  the

composition of the blood and other secretions, limiting the oscillations of the

different functions, adapting the organism to the changes of the outer world,

&c. They hold undivided sway over that region of unconscious life which

constitutes the greatly pre-  ponderant part of the existence of beings. The philosopher may deny their

existence, but the physiologist, who sees them perpetually in action, hardly

contests it. He generally recognizes, like Claude Bernard, true " directing

principles which direct phenomena which they do not produce and physical

agents producing phenomena which they do not direct."

  These real or apparent directive actions formerly caused us to admit the

existence of immaterial agents, the soul or vital principle, independent of the

body and capable of surviving it. In reality it is not one single directive soul

that Ave should have to imagine, but many souls, for the life of an individual

appears to us as the sum of small cellular lives almost infinite in number, and

all fulfilling very different functions. Thanks to these directive forces, nature

shuts up each organ in the sphere designed by her, and constantly brings them

back to it Avith the two great springs of all the activity of beings— pleasure

and pain.

  The  regulating  forces  present  the  peculiar  characteristic  of  being

conditioned by a long ancestral past and of modifying it in every generation.

The most modest cell, an amreba or a globule of protoplasm, is charged with

a past. To this must be attributed the variety of the reactions of living beings

under  the  influence  of  external  agents.  In  any  vital  act,  and  psychical

manifestations must be included among them, our ancestors act as well as

ourselves; but, as their number is immense, there exists in every being the

possibilities of action dependent on excitants capable of calling them forth.

Many ancestors speak in us; but according to external circumstances

    FORCES MANIFESTED BY LIVING BEINGS 369

  they  are  not  all  equally  heard.^  It  is  exactly  this  enormous  past  with

which the least cell is saturated which makes so illusory all our attempts to

create living matter. " To create living matter !" writes M. Gustave Bonnier.

"How can it be hoped for an instant in the present state of science, when we

think  of  how  many  accumulated  characteristics,  how  much  heredity,  how

much complicated future, there are in a fragment of living protoplasm ? If we

think that the development of a higher animal, its successive transformation

in the embryo into a protozoon, into a worm, into a fish with gills, finally

producing  a  mammal,  a  man—and  that  all  these  future  forms  are  found

potentially  in  a  microscopic  fragment  of  inchoate  living  substance!  If  we

reflect  that  this  reminiscence  of  distant  ancestors,  this  heredity  acquired

during  tens  of  thousands  of  centuries  all  exist  in  this  minute  drop  of

protoplasm,—we then understand the meaning of the truth, that it is not moredifficult to create afresh a living animal —an elephant for instance—than to

create a speck of living matter. When man shall solve this last probleui, he

will have become more creative than the Creator, stronger than all Nature,

mightier than the Universe itself!"

  § 4.— The Morphogenic Forces

  The acquisition of a specific form belongs as well to minerals as to living

beings, since minerals can assume the geometric contours characteristic of

each. We have already studied their genesis when speaking in L'Evolution de

la Matihr. of the life of crystals.

  ^ See the author's application of this theory to the French Kevolution in

Les Lois psycholoyiques de revolution des Peuplcs.

  But these substances of the mineral world only represent a very low order

of  life,  fixed  to  some  extent  in  invariability  of  form,  and  there  is  only  a

distant analogy between the life of an animal which constantly assimilates

and destroys, and the immobility of a crystal. It does not represent a living

form of matter, but only the ultimate term of life.

  The  medium  supplies  to  the  living  being  the  matter  of  which  it  is

composed, the energies which it expends, and the excitants which put it into

play. All these external conditions may modify its form, but they act on a

basis of life that they cannot create. Until now only life has been able to

create life. That it may have been born spontaneously at the dawn of the

geological ages under the influence of unknown reactions is very probable,

for it must needs be that life has a beginning, but we cannot say why it began,

and we do not know how to make it begin again.

  The  living  being  alone,  then,  enjoys  the  property  of  ofenerating  a

substance analogous to its own and possessing the same forms. Every cell,

and  even  every  organ,  possesses  the  mysterious  power  of  creating  forms

similar to itself. Among the lower animals, every part of the animal when cut

in  pieces  reproduces  the  wounded  part.  Among  animals  of  fairly  high

organization, such as the tritons and the salamanders, a limb cut off, an eye

torn out, is soon reborn.

  By going back to the real origin of each living being— i.e. to the cell

from  which  it  is  derived—we  see  better  the  inexplicable  side  of  these

morpliogenic forces. This primal cell will undergo, thanks to them, the series

of transformation which load it to

    FORCES MANIFESTED BY LIVING BEINGS 371

  form a tree, a bird, a Avhale, or a man. It contains then, potentially, all theforms which go forth from it, and which always evolve in the same way for

each species.

  Such forces are, as M. Dastre has justly observed, " the most refractory

and the most out of the reach of physico-chemical explanations. " How shall

we explain," he says, " this unfathomable mystery which makes the egg cell,

drawing  to  itself  materials  from  without,  progressively  build  up  the

astonishing construction which is the body of an animal or of man himself ?"

  All our attempts at interpretation of such a phenomenon are so perfectly

futile, that it is better to give them up than to formulate them. The eminent

physiologist last quoted points this out: " The naturalists give us nothing but

words. They speak of heredity, of adaptation, of atavism, as if they were real

active  and  efficient  beings,  while  they  are  only  appellatives  and  names

Avhich are applied to collections of facts."

  These terms of adaptation, heredity, &g., are, however, not entirely vain

words  if  we  use  them  to  simply  translate  facts  of  observation  instead  of

considering  them  as  explanations.  They  mean  simply  that  forces  utterly

unknown, and of the nature of which we can have no suspicion, oblige the

primal cell of a being to become an animal or a plant, and to bequeath to the

beings derived from it the changes to which it has been subjected by different

actions, such as that of the medium. As the cell possesses such powers, we

conceive  that,  in  the  immense  ages  of  the  past,  forms  adapted  to  all  the

variations of the medium may have succeeded each other. It would

  seem that with a common stock of life, a sort of clay of beings, nature has

tried  numberless  combinations,  of  which  some  only  have  been  able  to

survive. We meet at the present day in geological debris some which seem

the  fancies  of  artists  haunted  by  the  visions  of  demoniacs.  Such  are,  for

instance, the gigantic Diplodocus, which resembles a pig, with the neck and

tail of a serpent, the Agathaumas orphenocerus, the Didonius onirahilis, the

Bronto-saurus and others, true dream-monsters.

  All these varied efflorescences of life formerly appeared to materialists as

the fancies of a Creative Power drawing them forth periodically from the

chaos which preceded the expression of his will. The immense service which

Darwin  rendered  to  the  scientific  mind  was  to  eliminate  the  supernatural

causes of the concatenation of things by making us see that laws which know

no caprice, such as adaptation, selection, and the survival of the fittest, can

explain  the  transformation  of  living  beings.  The  theor}^  of  evolution  is

tending to be in part replaced at the present day by that of abrupt mutations,the  existence  of  which  among  certain  vegetables  has  been  disclosed  by

patient observations. But by showing us the possibility of finding scientific

explanations  in  a  domain  Avhere  they  seemed  to  have  no  place,  Darwin

changed the orientation of ideas in the most important branches of scientific

activity. During half a century the learned world has been inspired by the

doctrines of this mighty genius. One may say of the prigin of Species what

Sainte-Beuve formerly wrote of the Esprit des Lois : " There is no book

Avhich we can quote as having done so much for the human race at the time

when it appeared, and from which a

    FORCES MANIFESTED BY LIVING BEINGS -^jz

  reader of our day can draw so few applicable and positive ideas. But this

is the destiny of nearly every work which has caused the mind of man to

progress."

  The  theory  of  abrupt  mutations,  which  has  shaken  some  fundamental

facts of Darwin's doctrines, is still in its infancy. The mutations which have

been  observed  are  rather  rare,  and  do  not  bear  upon  fundamental

characteristics. We have been able, however, to make use of them to obtain

new  species  of  cereals,  the  characteristics  of  which  are  reproduced  by

heredity  with  regularity  and  constancy.  The  scientific  and  philosophic

importance  of  these  mutations  especially  lies  in  the  establishment  of  the

notion that certain changes, prepared doubtless by an invisible and previous

evolution, may take rise abruptly.

  This fact will perhaps explain to us why at certain geological epochs there

have suddenly appeared a whole series of living species so difterent from

those which went before and those which come after them, as to make it very

difficult to establish a link between them. The lacunw which science has

vainly sought to fill should then, as Cuvier thought, be very real.

  We assuredly observe in the succession of beings a certain continuity, a

general  direction,  but  not  that  regular  and  lineal  continuity  Avhioh  many

naturalists still imagine. If the evolution of beings is represented by a curve,

this curve should indeed have a general regular trajectory, but would contain

many solutions of continuity and loops.

  The evolution of beings seems to have been obtained only at the price of

repeated essays which seem useless enough to the human eye. From the

  point of view of our limited intelligence, we might say that things happen

in nature as if they were sometimes directed by superior intelligences, and

sometimes by absurd combinations due to the blind grouping of improbablechances.  Nature  seems  to  be  at  the  same  time  full  of  foresight  and  of

blindness.  It  is  very  possible,  however,  that  both  the  foresight  and  the

blindness are only in our own minds. She has no doubt as guide and as means

of action elements which we do not suspect, and we cannot in consequence

judge  her.  We  must  always  distrust  hypotheses  made  on  the  subject  of  a

domain which no human eye has ever seen.

  Nor is there any occasion to bring into our explanations of things supreme

beings with whom we are not acquainted. It was by eliminating them that

science effected her greatest progress. We have seen that simple cells realize

in the organism chemical operations beyond the resources of our laboratories,

and act as if they were unceasingly guided by a superior intelligence. No one

imagines, however, that there is such an intelligence behind each cell, and

there is no occasion to imagine it for the aggregate of cells which constitute

any  animal  whatever.  Their  structure  discloses  an  extremely  skilful

mechanism directed by forces of which at the present day we do not know the

nature, but which we may hope to one day bring Avithin the cycle of our

knowledge.

  § 5.— Tlic, Interpretations of the Plienomena of Life

  What has been said shows that the phenomena of life were always the

stumbling-block of philosophy

    FORCES MANIFESTED BY LIVING BEINGS 375

  and  physiology.  "Physiology,"  writes  M.  Dastre,  "  cannot  answer  the

question of the ages,—What is life {" The philosophers have not been able to

answer  it  either,  or,  at  least,  none  of  their  answers  could  bear  criticism.

"Philosophy offers us," writes the same scholar, " in order to conceive life

and death, hypotheses. It offered us the same 30,100, 2000 years ago : —

animism, vitalism under its two forms, unitarian vitalism, or the doctrine of

the vital force, and dismembered vitalism, or the doctrine of vital properties;

and finally materialism, mechanicism, or unicism, or monism (to give it all its

names), that is to say, the physico-chemical doctrine of life."

  It is this last explanation which predominates at the present day. It is not,

perhaps, the most certain, but it is certainly the most fertile, since it excites

researches which render useless the vitalistic and animistic theories which

endow livinaf beinsfs Avith an

  o

    incomprehensible  power—the  soul  or  vital  principle  —-the  power  of

which dispenses us from seeking further for explanations.  The  true  problem  which  now  presents  itself  for  solution,  and  will

doubtless  do  so  for  a  long  time  yet,  is  this:—Have  vital  and  psychic

manifestations distinct causes ? Are the vital forces absolutely different from

those with which we are acquainted ? Do they represent an independent and

irreducible category ? Is it possible to pass from the laws of crude matter to

those of livingf matter ?

  Up till now Ave have found no bridge capable of linking together these

tAvo orders of phenomena, and the gulf which separates them appears yet

deeper if among the vital forces avc include the psychical phenomena A\'hicli

end in intelligence.

  This link which we do not see will perhaps some day appear, and we may

already guess how it will be found. As continuity seems a general law of

nature, it is not in the higher being that the vital and psychical phenomena

must  be  studied,  because  there  their  complication  makes  them  too

inexplicable.  But  by  descending  to  the  very  first  stages  of  life  we  shall

discover the outline of an explanation of psychical phenomena. Among quite

primitive beings, such as a globule of protoplasm, we observe, as several

volumes  of  researches  have  shown,  acts  well  adapted  to  the  end  to  be

achieved  and  varying  according  to  circumstances,  as  if  the  being  were

capable  of  a  rudimentary  reason.  But  these  are  perhaps  only  physico-

chemical reactions generated by external excitants. Their interpretation by the

hypothesis  of  simple  reactions  is  very  insufficient.  We  are  evidently

confronted by a chain of causalities of which we possess no single link, and

which consequently we do not understand. We shall not penetrate any further

into them by imagining, to explain them, immaterial principles endowed with

the attributes we ourselves lend them. This would be to return to the time

when the will of Jupiter produced the thunder and that of Ceres the crops.

  The  learned  ought  to  shun  supernatural  explanations,  and  also  those

which are too simple. The materialist and spiritualist interpretations are only

words devoid of all worth and only of interest to those minds which prefer

any explanation to none at all.

  We must seek, and not invent explanations. The book of nature is one

which takes long to read. The few pages painfully deciphered after centuries

of

    FORCES MANIFESTED BY LIVING BEINGS 377

  effort show us a universe mucti more complicated than it appeared at

first.  Our  sciences  are  built  up  on  concepts  representing  merelyinterpretations capable of adapting themselves to the little fragments of things

which are within the reach of our intelligence.

  If it be true that we do not know the causes of life, nor even the final

reasons of a single phenomenon, nothing warrants our saying that we shall

always be ignorant of them. We confine ourselves within a barren philosophy

when we declare unknowable that which is only unknown as yet. Science

descends a little further each day into the mysterious gulfs where the last

elements  of  things  lie  hid.  But  as  a  philosopher  has  rightly  said,  our

sounding-rod is still too short for the immensity of such abysses.

  INDEX OF SUBJECTS

    Absorption  of  radiations,  153,  163;  of  energy  by  atmosphere,  205;  of

ether-vibrations by vegetables, 188, 320; of light, 207 ; bands, 210

    Accumulation of impressions, 199

  Acid, acetic, 108 ; carbonic, 188, 322 ; phosphoric, 264 ; sulphuric, 108 ;

trichloracetic, 105

  /\cids, strong and weak, 108

    Adiabatic state defined, 180

    Affinities, 84, 104, 109

  Air, liquid, 73, 191, 237, 257

    Albuminoids, 363, 36G

  Alum, 314

    Alumina, hydrated, 265

    Aluminium, 128, 235; arrow of, poised in air, 116; variable conductivity

of, 147

  Amethyst, 235, 246, 252, 254 _

    Ammonia, detection of pyridine in, 210

  Amoeba, 368

    Amplitude of waves, 195, 198 ; minimum, for photographic action, 200

  Analogies:  of  a  compressed  spring,  67;  hydraulic  and  thermal,  to

electricity, 47, 50, 71, 75 ; of a pendulum, 198 ; of a spinning top, 167 ; of a

tuning-fork, 208, 274 ; of phosphorescence by heat and by light, 255

  Anarchy in physics, 7. 36

    Ancestors, influence of, 368

  Animals, eyes of nocturnal, 302, 318

  Animal tissues, photographic radiation from, 300

  Antimony, 314

  Apatite, 226, 235, 240, 252, 254, 259 ; and its impurities, 275  Areopagus of scholars, 9

  Argon, l09

    Arsenic, 314

    Asparagine, 267

    Athermanous bodies, definition of, 178, 191

    Atmosphere, metallic, 147 ; absorptive eifect of, 205

  Atoms, disintegration of, 78, 193 Ipassim); each a minute universe, 82,

175, 353; electric, 170; instability of, under suitable reagents, 274

    Bacteria, cultivation of phosphorescent, 267: part played by, in life, 320

  Barium bromide, 254 ; platino-cyanide, 262; sulphide, 226, 254

  Baryta, 246

  Beta particles, 94

  Bismuth, 276

  Bitumen, prism of, 143, 153

  Black light. Sec Light.

  Blood, composition of, 367

    Bolometer, 201, 358

  Brass produced by pressure, 355

    Bromine, 314

    Bronzing varnish, 229, 289

  INDEX OF SUBJECTS

  579

  Caffeine, 365

  Cage, Faraday's, 157

    Calcination, phosphorescence on,252, 275

  Calcium fluoride, 2-10, 24G, 260 ; sulphide, 226, 238, 284, 309, 311, 338

; sulphide with green phosphorescence, 247; sulphide, varieties of, 248

  Calorie, great, 41

  Candle, great illuminating ell'ect of a, 309; combustion of a, 107

    Carbo-hydrates, 366

  Carbon, 67, 188, 197; bisulphide of, 200

    Castor, 246

  Cells, life of, 361

    Cellulose, 363

    Cement, Portland, 160

    Cereals, instances of abrupt mutations in, 373

    Cerium, oxide of, 196  C. G. S. system, 17

  Chalk, 276

    Charcoal, absorption of gases by, 357

  Charges, loss of electrical, 124

    Charge, electric, dependent on atomic weight, 106

  Chemical properties, a function of electric charges, 106, 171 ; reactions

and phosphorescence, 275 ; reactions within solid bodies, 277

    Chlorine, 105, 110, 200; ions, 108

    Clilorophane, 249

    Chlorophyll, 320; function of, 319

    Chlorospinel, 246

    Cinchonine, 264

    Civilization, phj'sical conditions of, 348

  Cloth, black, 314

    Coherer, 144

    Cohesion, 84, 179, 355

    Colemanite, 246

  Colloids, 130, 365

  Colour, explanation of, 209

  I  Column  of  water,  infrangible,  I  79  Comets,  211,  347  Compounds,

binary  and  tertiary,  104  I  Conduction  of  electricity,  125  j  Conductivities,

same for heat

  and electricity, 192 I Conservation of energy, 39, 187; rephrasing of the

law of, 71 Contact, sufficient to produce

    electricity, 129 Copper, electrified by friction, 128; sulphate, 314, 332;

uniform resistance of, 146 Creator, hypothesis of, 98 Cryolite, 246

  Curves of loss of phosphorescence, 239 Cymometer, 269

    Darkness added to darkness gives light, 291

  Deep-sea, phosphorescence of, 266

  Dehydration and phosphorescence, 265

    Dematerialization, 16, 90

    Demons, Maxwell's, 45, 98

    Diamonds,  226,  231,  256,  259,  262;  discrimination  of,  by

phosphorescence, 234; and impurities, 275 ; ashes of,after incineration, 236

  Diastase, 130, 325

  Diastasic action, 365

    Diathermanous bodies, solution of, 191    Dichotomies, unscientific, 12, 14, 55, 85

    Dielectrics, 124; transparenc}-of, to Hertzian waves, 153

    Diffraction of electric waves, 148, 157, 163

  Discharge, nature of, produced by light, 218; sudden, and electric waves,

144; so-called negative really positive, 218

    Dissociation of matter, 16, 55, 87, 207; proof of, 114; in

  INDEX OF SUBJECTS

  llame, 197 ; and phosphorescence, 272 ; under appropriate stimulus, 118

    Distribution of energy in spectrum, 204

    Dogmas, in energy and matter, 10, 39; in electricity, 104; philosophical

and religious, 5

    Dualistic theory of chemistry, 104

    Earthquakes and radium, 223

    Ebonite, loss of charge on, 124 ; transparency of, to Hertzian waves, 314;

screen, 245, 294, 310

    EfHuves, high frequency, 261; produced by light, 218

  Electricity  an  active  agent  of  dissociation,  119;  the  best  measure  of

energy, 182 ; a difference of level, 73 ; and heat, simultaneous production of,

192  ;  a  liberator  of  intra-atomic  energy,  87,  127;  a  restorer  of

phosphorescence, 252; a secondary transformation of atomic energy, 165 ;

not a product of work, IIG; modes of conveyance of, 124 ; particle of, 89;

static and dynamic, 170; unlimited production of, 116; an unstable form of

energy, 16 ; various forms of, 168 ; velocity of, 125

    Electricities, contrary', 105

    Electrification by influence, 113

    Electrolysis and electrolytes, 105

    Electrons, theory of, 104, 109, 111, 120,131, 165

    Electroscope,  138  ;  discharge  of,  220  ;  opposed  signs  of  successive

charges on, 122

  Elements,  growing  complexity  of,  93;  electro-positive  and  electro-

negative, 104

    Embryo, 369

    Emeralds, 246

    Emission hypothesis in optics, 112

    Emissions, 87 ; 111; electrical, accompanying heat, 191

  Energetic mechanics, 42

    Energetics, science of modern, 15, 36, 53    Energy,  birth  of,  94  ;  concentra-tive  phase  of,  94;  defined,  75;

degradation of, 56, 89; difficulties in harmonising various forms of, 49, 58,

64; dogma of indestructibility of, 10, 39, 56; discover}' of new forms of, 169;

enormous concentrations of, 85, 166, 181; exchange of, between matter and

ether,  178,  189;  forms  of,  49,  58,  64;  not  reducible  to  heat,  183,  206  ;

gravific,  48,  56  ;  individuality  of  different  manifestations  of,  {)G  ;  intra-

mole-cular, may disappear at low temperatures, 185 ; kinetic, 47, 74 ; of

earth, 32 ; of sun, 346 ; matter a stable form of, 15; misnamed potential, 47,

57, 77; not strictly absorbed by heat, 68; table of concentration of, in bodies,

180; thermal, 48, 74 ; total, of universe, 61 ; transformation of matter into,

113; storage of, in plants, 320 ; unstable forms of, 16; vanishing of, 89,96.

See Intra-atomic Energy, infra

    Entropy, 48

    Equations, 4, 10, 35, 53, 159

    Equilibria, governing factor in matter, 178; source of new matter, 95;-

changes in, a source of energy, 67, 69, 75, 167, 221 ; chemical, in matter, 178

; in phosphorescence, 247, 255; osmotic, 360

  Esculine, 263

  Ether, 13, 16, 69 ; identical with matter, 140 ; return of worlds to, 96 ;

seat of lines of force, 136 ; void of temperature, 187 ;

  INDEX OF SUBJECTS

  ^8i

  vortices of, 78, 79, 87, 89, 94,

  13G,  167.  Sec  Matter  Etherification  (chemical),  363  Evolution,  372;

extension of,

  to chemical species, 16; of

  worlds, 83, 87, 92 Exchange of energy between

  matter and ether, 178, 189 Excitants in dissociation of

  matter, 14, 3G6 ; physiological,

  365 Explosion, the last stage of a

  star, 92. See Perseus Exposure affecting the part of

  spectrum utilized, 215 Eves of animals, 202 ; of nocturnal animals, 302;

artificial, 302

  Fatigue of metals, 221, 298

  Fats, 363, 366

  Field (molecular) of attractive and repulsive force, 354

  Fields, intense electric, 148; magnetic, quasi-viscosity of rotating, 140    Filings-tube, 143

  Flame, 192

  Flint, pieces of, 322

  Fluid, the electric, 169; ionic, 171; phlogistic, 176

    Fluorescent substances, 226, 261 (passim)

    Fluorides, phosphorescent, 240, 246, 248

  Fluorite. 236, 246, 275, 315

    Fluorspar, 235

  Focus of camera with great wave lengths, 307

  Force, centrifugal, 167, 347 ; and movement, 31; a subjective motion, 18 ;

nature of, 16

  Forces, liberation of, 118; of nature, unsuspected, 350; morphogenic, 367,

369; vital, 361, 375

  Fossil animals, 372

  Friction, a cause of phosphorescence, 259

  Fruits, suggestions for modifying colour and taste of, 326

  Gas, luminosity of coal, 197

  Gaseous state, 179

  Gases, absorbent powers of, 211; phosphorescence of, 268 ; theory of, 36,

60, 356

  Gauze, opaqueness of, to Hertzian radiations, 157

    Geological origin of diamonds, efi'ect of, on phosphorescence, 234, 251

  Glass, black, 245, 295, 310, 317 ; coloured, in photography for dark light,

214, 215 ; green, 216 ; Jena, 213 ; monochromatic, 323 ; jDOwdered, and

phosphorescence, 253; red and coloured, 323; variable transparency of, 211,

314; water, 314; yellow, 213, 241

    Glow-worm, 270, 277

  Gold, size of molecules of, 354

    Gravitation, annulling of, 212, 351 ; causes of, 342; consequences of, 346

; the primitive force, 81

  Gravity, variation of, 29

    Greenhouse, transparency of, to radiations, 312, 824, 325

  Heat,  action  of,  on  phosphorescence,  294  ;  attempt  to  define,  179;  a

destroyer of cohesion, 355; influence of, on radioactivity, 220; a mode of

vibration, 174; mechanical equivalent of, 41 ; not the best gauge of energy,

206 ; radiant, 186; solar, 12, 55, 87; a source of work, 43; an unstable form of

enersv, 16    Helium, 109, 269

    Heredity, 371

  Hertzian waves, 34, 147, 312; course of, round hills, 159; ditticulties of

protection  against,  150;  identical  with  light,  141  ;  laws  of  their  passage

through matter, 163 ; penetration of, through slits and holes, 156. Sec Stone

  INDEX OF SUBJECTS

    Human body, radiations from,

  318 Hydration a cause of phos-

    ishorescence, 264, 274 Hydrogen, 83, 105, 197, 200

  Ice, lens of, 187 ; melting, 180 ; a source of energy, 73; a source of lieat,

190

  Impact, a cause of phosphorescence, 259

    Impurities, detection of minute, 210

    Incandescence, stellar, 95 ; and electricity, 193

    Individualization of matter, 95

    Induction, problem of, 133 ; currents, 133

    Inertia, 29, 74, 1(34; stability of, 31

    Influence, electrification by, 113 ; theories of electric, 120

    Influenced bodies, charge on, afl:ected bj- shape, 121

    Infusoria, 266

  Instability, the law of life, 364 ; of matter, 129, 274

  Intensity of light, depends on amplitude of waves, 199

  Intra atomic energy, end of, 96 ; limited amount of, 88 ; connection of,

with  intra-molecu-lar,  193;  the  explanation  of  magnetism,  131;  and

phosphorescence, 271, 273 ; stability of, 86; instability of, 274; proof of, 115;

unaft'ected by temperature, 185 ; and vital processes, 365

    Inversion, photographic, a process of antagonism, 329, 340

  Ionization, 104, 106; of simple bodies, llO

  Ions, 107, 171; negative, 273

  Iron sulphate, 314

    Irradiation, 214

    Irreversibility of phenomena, 45

    Japankse varnish, 289, 306, 310 Joule, the unit of work, 48

    KiLOGRAMMETRE, unit of work,

  48 Kola, 365

  Lamp, dark, 291 ; mercury vapour, 269

  Lamp - black, transparency of, to invisible radiations, 314, 315    Lamprey, Italian, 268

  Law of least action, 42, 46 ; of Ohm, 145

  Lens for concentrating waves, 199

    Leucophane, 226, 246, 252, 254, 259

  Level, alterations of, 69

    Levitation, 351

  Life, appearance of, in planets, 95 ; definition of, 364 ; part played by

light in phenomena of, 319 ; intra-atomic energy and,129

  Light emitted by matter, 194 ; black, 279, 280, 286, 301, 325; cold, 224,

273; difltused. 337; infra-red and phosphorescence, 227, 245, 280, 289; and

heat,  294;  calorific  equivalent  of,  298;  and  plants,  321  ;  transparency  of

sulphides to, 311; invisible, 194, 280, 314, 340; pressure of, 211, 349; an

unstable form of energy, 16 ; "living," cultures of, 267 ; physiological action

of, 319, 325

  Lighting, expense of artificial, 204; future artificial, 270; invisible at a

distance, 316; waste of energy in, 316

  Lime carbonate, 253; phosphate, 246; sulphate, 265

  Lines  of  force,  absorption  of,  133,211;  defined  as  directions,  355;

magnetic,  33,131;  photography  of  electric,  136  ;  their  power  to  penetrate

matter, 137 ; real existence of, 139

  Liquid state, 179

  INDEX OF SUBJECTS

  383

  Liquids, law of their flow, 4i ;

    rigidity of rotating, 79 Luminosity at all temperatures,

  IM

      MACHiNES,electro-static,voltage of, 50

  Magnesia, phosphorescent, 264, 2(55

    Magnetic screens, l.'}9; spectrum, 131

  Magnetism, 170; loss of, by heat, ()0 ; inexplicable by older theories, 182;

the problem of, 130 ; induced, 182

    Magneto-electric machines, 133

    Magnitudes of the universe irreducible, 17

    Manganese, 276

    Marble, 276, 314

  Mass and weight, relation of, 29 ; variation of, 80

  Matter, dogma of indestructibility of, 9 ; germs of, 94 ; individualizationof, 95 ; identical with ether, 18, SO; a fixed form of energy, 55, 85, 112; laws

of  dissociation  of,  15;  liable  to  old  age,  80;  living,  creation  of,  869  ;

organized  ether,  353;  permeability  of,  to  lines  of  force,  137  ;  perpetually

luminous, 195; a reservoir of energ}', 12,14, 15, 85, 118, 166 ; sensitiveness

of,  142,  165,  178  ;  unstable  forms  of,  129;  vanishing  of,  89  ;  visibly

transformed into energy, 119

    Measurements essential to knowledge, 20

    Mechanics, principles of, 7; fundamental equations of, 80 ; three systems

of, 36 ; new system suggested, 37

  Mercury, phosphorescence of, 260

  Metals electrified by friction, 128; fatigue of, 221, 298; polished, retain

heat, 189 ; radiation of, 298

    Meteorology and solar energy,

  203 Mica screen, 298, 306 Molecule, energies of, 84 Monistic conception

of force, 41 Mortar, absorbent influence of,

  on radiations, 161 Movement, analysis of, 31 Mutations, abrupt, 372 ;

within

  matter, a source of energy, 66

    Nebula, 88, 87, 94, 346

  Neon, tubes of, 269

  Neutral electricity a misnomer,

  168, 171 ; molecules of, 107 Nitrogen iodide, 260

  Opal, 246

    Opaqueness of metals to electric waves, 154

    Orthochromatic plates, 214, 216

  Osmotic pressure, 359; equilibria, 360

  Ovum, first form of life, 362

    Oxidation, an exceptional cause of phosphorescence, 263 ; and plant life,

319, 363

  Oxygen, 197 ; and phosphorescence, 260

  Ozone absorbent for ultra-violet rays, 211

    Paraffine, residual charge on, 124

  Perseus, explosion in star, 93

    Petalite, 246

  Phenacite, 246

  Phlogiston, 168, 176

  Pholads, 266    Phosphorescence, laws of, 258, 277 ; aptitude for, 242, 254, 260, 275,

287 ; classification of, 225; by chemical reactions, 202, 268, 275 ; curves of,

239; extinction of, 230 ; force antagonistic to, 241 ; by friction and impact,

259  ;  of  gases,  268;  by  heat  and  light  compared,  250,  255,  257;  inde-

finitcdurationof,256; andheat,

  INDEX OF SUBJECTS

  apparatus  for  studvina:,  244  invisible,  200,  243,"  280,  289  invisible

spontaneous, 283; by light,mobility of, 276 ; regeneration of, 252 ; residual,

240, 287, 291; a superficial atomic phenomenon, 273; variously coloured,

227, 276 ; by X-rays and cathode rays, 261; transformation of invisible, 287

    Phosphorescent bodies, lisc of, 240 ; animals, 204, 267; animals in deep

sea, 224 ; marine organisms. 266 ; solution, formula for, 263, 267

    Phosphoroscope, Becquerers,226

    Phosphorus, 363; red, 314

    Photographic plate, sensitiveness of, 200

    Photography,  212,  339  ;  of  fine  lines,  215;  instantaneous,  213;

instantaneous in dark, 310; of landscapes, 214; through opaque bodies, 303

  Physics, anarchy in, 7, 36

  Pitch, musical, 198

    Planets, formation of, 95 ; path of, 347

  Plants, list of, submitted to various lights, 324; colours of, suggestions for

modifying, 326

  Plant life, how influenced by solar spectrum, 321

    Platinum, 192

    Polarization of invisible light, 281, 285

    Pollux, 246

    Polymerization, 363

  Polyps, phosphorescent, 267

    Ponderable  and  imponderable,  misleading  terms,  12,  16  ;  useful

distinction, 55

    Potassium,104; bichromate,314; chloride,110; ferrocyanide,360

  Potential energy. See Energy,

  Pressure of light, 211, 349 Principles, fundamental, of material world, 15

  Prisms, inaccuracy of, in spectrum measurements, 205, 321; quartz, rock-

salt, flint, 213, 322; bitumen, 143, 153

    Probabilities, calculation of, 36

    Proportions, laws of simple and definite, 277    Protoplasm, 361, 376

    Protozoon, 369

  Pyridine, detection of, 210

    Quantity,  74;  a  factor  of  energy,  47  ;  and  tension  discriminated,  50

Quartz, prisms of, 213, 322 Quinine sulphate, 136, 264, 274 ; experiments

with, 332

  Radiant heat a misnomer, 186

  Radiations, excitant and antagonistic, 324, 337 ; traverse opaque bodies,

302; permanent property of matter, 190. See Rays, ultra - violet and infra-red,

infra

    Radio-active bodies, artificial, 86 ; matter in expired air, 365

  Radio - activity, 143 ; spontaneous, of all metals, 219

  Radium, 12, 86, 92, 111, 197, 221, 262; not a well-defined substance, 222

; salts of, 265

  Rays, beta, 217; blue, 212; cathode, 110, 170, 183, 197, 217. 261; N-,

352; infra-red, 194, 202, 205, 805; X-, 137, 170, 234, 261, 301; ultraviolet,

82, 183, 195, 202, 207, 212, 218, 226, 261, 311; violet, 212

  Reaction, chemical, phosphorescence by, 263

  Reflection and refraction of electric waves, 143

    Reflectors, cylindro - parabolic, 148

    Refraction, index of, 28(); of invisible liglit, 281

  Regulators of vital forces, 367

  Relativity of knowledge, 20

  INDEX OF SUBJECTS

  38s

  Resistance, electrical, 49 ; variability of, 145, 201

    Resonance, acoustic, 189, 208 ; molecular, 209

  Resonator, Oudin, 148

    Retina, sensitiveness of, 200, 208 ; imperfection of, 318, 338

  Rigidity of rotating liquid, 79

  Rock salt prisms, 322

  Rotation a factor in energy, 33

  Rubies, 261

  Saccharose, 360

  Saturn's rings, 81

    Scalars, and vectors, 65

    Scheelite, 246    Science, present anarchy in, 7, 36

    Screens,  diif  using,  308  ;  process  for  making  phosphorescent,  229  ;

radioafraphic,  262;  sulphide,  294,'296,  305,  308,  312,  330;  summary  of

various, 328, 336 ; thin metallic, 219

  Sea of fire, 266

  Senses, insufSciency of, 34, 37

  Short circuits, 149'

  Silver, wire, 192 ; chloride, 314

    Simplicity of science, a delusion, 3, 34

  Slits in metal protectors and Hertzian waves, 156

  Sodium chloride, 108

  Solar system, formation of, 81

    Solutions, 107, 356

  Sound, silent, 200

  Space, a suljjective notion, 18 ; cold of, 187

    Spectrum,analysis,82;  magnetic,  131;  energv  in  each  region  of,  183  ;

soIai^"'l96,  202,  203,  213,  312;  diffraction,201;  invisible,  201;  maximum

heating effect of, 205 ; action of, on phosphorescence, 230, 293, 300; action

of, on plant life, 321; antagonistic actions of several regions of, 329, 341

(table)

  Squares, law of inverse, 345

  Stability of atom, 91

  Starch, 363

  Stars,  age  of,  82  ;  cold  but  luminous,  271  ;  composition  of,  82  ;

incandescence and refrigeration of, 95 ; number of, 83. See Explosion

    Statues, photographs of, in dark, 290

  Steam, latent heat of, 180

    Steam-engines, return of, per heat applied, 56

  Stone, absorbs Hertzian waves, 162

    Strontium sulphide, 226, 254, 276, 292

    Subjective notions, 18

  Sugar, phosphorescence of, 259

    Sulphides, phosphorescent, 226, 254, 256, 261,289

  Sulphur, 153

    Supernatural, the, 372

  S urface density of electricity, 123

  Talc, 246    Tantalum, 357

    Telegraphy, wireless, 141, 143, 164

    Temperature, effect on light, 195 ; effect on electrification of metals, 128;

effect on mass, 30; phosphorescence, 238, 242, 255 ; different effect on intra-

molecular and intra-atomic energy, 185 ; of body, regulation of, 367; absolute

zero of, 13, 183, 318

    Tension,  43,  47,  70;  of  static  and  galvanic  electricity,  50,  125;  and

quantity, two forms of same thing, 52

    Theory, phlogistic, 176

    Thermo-chemistry, 67, 84, 106

    Thermo-dynamics, principles of, 42, 75, 84 ; breakdown of, 176 ; and

absolute zero, 184; second law of, 98

    Thorium, 92, 196, 265

  Tides, 344

  Time,  effect  of,  on  phosphorescence,  238,  253;  effect  of  on  invisible

radiation, 284; 2 B

  INDEX OF SUBJECTS

    enormous, needed for evolution, 84; a subjective notion, 18

  Topaz, 246

  Toxins, 130

    Transparency to Hertzian waves, 150; observation on, 313; a selective

phenomenon, 208, 311 ; table of, 314

  Tubes, Crookes, 111; Geissler, 261; neon, 269

    Turpentine, oil of, 136

    Universe, an articulate system, 71 ; irreducible magnitudes of, 17 ; new

cycle of degradation for, 87 ; origin of energy of, 77 ; rejuvenescence of, S8 ;

systems of the, 11, 34, 57; total energy of, 61

  Uranium, 86, 218, 259

    Valency, 108

    Vapour-pressures, 358

    Vectors, and scalars, 65

    Vegetables,causeof  theirgrowth,  188,  202  ;  function  of  light  on,  201;

experiments on, 326; link between animal and mineral world, 320

  Velocity, a factor in rigidity, 79 ; a factor in stability, 91 ; a function of

heat, 174; of gravity, 344 ; of heat and electricity, 192; influence of, on mass,

30, 60; inside the atom, 82, 167

    Vibration, a factor in energy, 33 ; a factor in heat, 174    Vibrations of ether classified,

  211 Vortices of ether, 87, 343, 354;

    rigidity of, 79; stability of,

  91

    Wagnerite, 246

  War, influence of Hertzian rays in, 149, 316

  Water, column of. infrangible, 79

    Wave-lengths, effect of, on transparency, 311; radiations of great, 289,

295, 318

  Waves, electric, 140, 171; apparent rigidity of, 157 ; solar, all of one kind,

20(;. See Hertzian waves

  Weight, 348

    Weight and mass, relation of, 29

  Wood, radiations from, 300; transparency of, 314

  Work obtained from heat, 43 ; and electricity mistakenly connected, 116;

and energy, perhaps distinct, 64 ; unit of, 48

  World, periods of evolution of a, 94, 98

  Zero, conventional, 184. See Temperature

  Zinc, 152, 217; chloride, 109; sulphide of, 226, 238, 254, 296, 303, 338;

sulphide of, with green phosphorescence, 300, 311,330

  Zoolog}', descriptive, 54

  INDEX OF NAMES

    Ampere, 131 Arrhenius, 107 Auer, 195 Auvergne, 246

  Bahia, 232

  Bale, 152

  Balfour, A. J., 165

  Becquerel, Edmond, 225, 226,

  249, 250, 276, 282, 380 ; Henri,

  282, 293 Bernard, Claude, 368 Berthelot, 12, 106, 200 Berzelius, 104,

106 Beudant, 249, 250 Bogota, 246 Bologna, 254 Boltzmann, 98 Bonnier,

Gustave, 369 Bose, Professor, 151, 152. 154 Boussinesq, 178 Bouty, 315

  Boys, Professor Vernon, 344 Branly, 143,144, 154, 160 Brazil, 232, 262,

289 Brunhes, Bernard, 61, 97, 98

    Canton, 256, 282

  Cape of Good Hope, 232, 260

  Carnot, 42, 43, 44. 45, 46, 47, 97,

  98, 176, 177 Carus, 268    Chauveau, Professor, 366 Chwolson, 203 Clausius, 43, 107, 176 Comte,

Auguste, 9 Cornu, 34 Crookes, Sir William, 106, 221,

  262, 273, 352 Cuvier, 373

  Dalton, 184

    Darwin, 54, 188, 372, 373

    Dastre, 352, 365, 371, 375

  Davy, 104, 106, 173

  De Heen, 120, 168, 176, 272

  Delbruck, Georges, 351

  Descartes, 9, 34, 35

    Deslandres, 200

  Dewar, 237, 257

  De Watteville, 213

    Dufour, 365

  Duhem, 35, 175

  Dumas, 105

    Dwelshauwers Dery, 36

    Estremadura, 247

    Faraday, 105, 106, 107, 109,

  136, 137, 157 Ferrand, 15 Fisher, 266 Fleming, 269 Fresnel, 291

  Galileo, 848 Gariel, 281

    Gautier, Armand, 348 Geissler, 261 Gerhard, 105 Green, 325

    Hamilton, 45, 63 Helmholtz, 40, 1U9, 176, 346 Herblay, 248

  Hertz, 36, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 148, 158,159

  Iceland, 276, 285, 293 India, 232 Izarn, 306

  INDEX OF NAMES

  Jamin, 115, 206, 315 Joubert, 151 Joule, 40, 188 Juvisy, 324

    Kahlbaum, 300

  Kant, 18, 19, 81

  Kelvin, Lord, 21, 40, 184, 221

  Kepler, 347

  Kolbe, 13G, 280

    Lagrange, 7, 11, 35

  Lamarck, 54

  Lame, 177

  Landrin, 236

  Langley, 196, 201, 202, 203, 300  Laplace, 7, 81, 177, 184, 345

    Laurent, 105

    Lavoisier, 12, 176, 184

    Lebedeff, Professor, 280

  Le Bon, 217

  Lechatelier, 199

  Leduc, Stephane, 859

  Legge, F., 351

    Leibnitz, 19

  Lenard, 218, 272

  Lenz, 26

    Licbtenberger, 96

  Lister, 189

  Locke, 185

  Lodge, Sir Oliver, 151, 221, 352

    Lorentz, 109, 131

  Mach, Professor, 7

    Madagascar, 246

  Marconi, 148

  Maxwell, 45, 97, 136, 159

    Mayer, Dr., 40, 188

    Meiander, 300

  Melloni, 312

  Moissan, 273

  Monaco, Prince of, 267

  Morgeu (Saone et Loire), 248

  Mourelo, 256, 276

  Naumann, 249

  Newton, 11, 112, 158, 342, 343

    Nietzsche, 96

  OCHS, 233

  Ohm, 145

    Ostwald, Professor, 53, 65

  Oudin, 148

  Pasteur, 188

    Pelletier, 233

  Picard, Emile, 6  Pictet, 191

  Pliny, 266

    Poincare, Henri, 6, 56, 58, 60,

  151, 345 Poincare, Lucieu, 7,49,63,112,132 Poisson, 177 Poynting, 29,

349 Pyrenees, 248

  RAMSAY,  Sir  William,  217,  218  Reaumur,  266  Richard,  Dr.,  267

Ricket, 352 Righi, 153 Rontgen, 279 Rubens, 201 Russell, Dr., 300

  Sabatier, 61 Sainte-Beuve, 372 Schwarzenberger (Saxony), 248 Siberia,

246 Soddy,217 Spring, 355

  Tait, 188

  Thompson, Professor Sylvanus,

  203 Thomson, J. J., 91 Thomson, W., 40 Traube, 359 Tyndall, 181, 188

  Van der Waals, 358 Veillon, Henri, 152 Volta, 129

    Wedding, 203 Wickersheimer, 28

    Zeeman, 165, 192 Zirkel, 249

  Printed by Ballantyne, Hanson &= Co. Ediulnirgh <5^ Loiuion

  The International Scientific Series.

  Each Book complete in One Vol. Crown 8vo. cloth, 5s., unless otherwise

descrihed.

  Edited by

  F. LEGGE.

 




 


    KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER, . . AND CO., LTD. .

  DRYDEN HOUSE, GERRARD STREET, W.

  THE

    INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC SERIES.

  Edited by F. LEGGE.

  Each  Book  Complete  in  One  Volume.  Crown  8vo.  cloth,  5s.  unless

otherwise described.

  I. FORMS of WATEB: in Clouds and Rivers, Ice and

    Glaciers.  By  J.  Tyndali.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.  With  25  Illustrations.  Twelfth

Edition.

  II. PHYSICS and POLITICS ; or, Thoughts on the Application of thePrinciples  of  'Natural  Selection'  and  'Inheritance'  to  Political  Society.  By

Waltbii Bagehot. Tenth Edition.

  III.  FOODS.  By  Edward  Smith,  M.D.,  LL.B.,  F.R.S.  With  156

Illustrations. Tenth Edition.

  IV.  MIND  and  BODY:  the  Theories  of  their  Relation.  By  Alexander

Bain, LL.D. With Four Illustrations. Ninth Edition.

  V. The STUDY of SOCIOLOGY. By Heebert Spenceb.

  Eighteenth Edition.

  VI.  The  CONSERVATION  of  ENERGY,  By  Balfour  Stewart,  M.A.,

LL.D., F.B.S. With 14 Illustrations. Eighth Edition.

  VII. ANIMAL LOCOMOTION; or. Walking, Swimming, and Flying. By

J. B. PBrmGRKW, M.D., F.R.S., &c. With 130 Illustrations. Fourth Edition.

  VIII. RESPONSIBILITY in MENTAL DISEASE. By Henry Maudsley,

M.D. Fifth Edition.

  IX. The NEW CHEMISTRY. By Professor J. P. Cooke, of the Harvard

UnlTcrsity. With 31 Illustrations. Eleventh Edition.

  X. The SCIENCE of LA"W. By Professor Sheldon Amo8.

  Eighth Edition.

  XI.  ANIMAL  MECHANISM  :  a  Treatise  on  Terrestrial  and  Aerial

Locomotion.  By  Professor  E.  J.  Marey.  With  117  Illustrations.  Foui-th

Edition.

  KII. The DOCTRINE of DESCENT and DARWINISM. By

    Professor  Oscar  Schmidt  (Strasburg  University).  With  26  Illustrations.

Eighth Edition.

  XIII.  The  HISTORY  of  the  CONFLICT  between  RELIGION  and

SCIENCE. By J. W. Draper, M.D., LL.D. Twenty-second Edition.

  XIV. FUNGI : their Nature, Influences, Uses, &c. By M. C. Cooke, M.A.,

LL.D. Edited by the Rev. M. J. Berkeley, M.A., P.L.S. Witl; Illustrations.

Fifth Edition.

  XV. The CHEMISTRY of LIGHT and PHOTOGRAPHY.

  By Dr. Hermann Vogkl. With 100 Illustrations. Sixth Edition. 2

  Eegan Paid, Trench, Trilhner, & Co., Ltd.

  XVI. The LIFE and GBOW^TH of LANGUAGE. By Williai

    DwiQHT Whitney. Sixth Edition.

  XVII. MONEY and the MECHANISM of EXCHANGE. B]

  W. Stanley Jevons, M.A., F.R.S. Eleventh Edition.

  XVIII. The NATURE of LIGHT, with a General Account o: PHYSICALOPTICS. By Dr. Eugene Lommel. With 188 lllue trations and a Table of

Spectra in Chrome-lithography. Sixth Edition.

  XIX. ANIMAL PARASITES and MESSMATES. By Monsieui

  Van Beneden. With 83 Illustrations. Fourth Edition.

  XX. FERMENTATION. By Professor Schutzenbeegeb. Witl

  28 Illustrations. Fourth Edition.

  XXI. The FIVE SENSES of MAN. By Professor Bernstein

  With 91 Illustrations. Seventh Edition.

  XXII. The THEORY of SOUND in its RELATION to MUSIC

  By Professor Piktro Blaskrna. With numerous Illustrations. Sixt: Edition.

  XXIII. STUDIES in SPECTRUM ANALYSIS. By J. Nobmai

  LocKYER,  F.R.S.  With  Six  Photographic  Illustrations  of  Spectra,  an

numerous Engravings on Wood. Fifth Edition. 6«. Gd.

  XXIV. A HISTORY of the GROWTH of the STEAM ENGINE

  By Professor R. H. Thurston. With numerous Illustrations. Fift Edition.

  XXV.

    EDUCATION as a SCIENCE.

  Ninth Edition.

  By AiEXANDBB Bain, LL.E

  XXVI. The HUMAN SPECIES. By Professor A. de Quateefages Membre

de I'lnstitut. Fifth Edition.

  XXVII.  MODERN  CHROMATICS.  With  Application  to  Art  am

Industry. By Ogden N. Rood. Third Edition. With 130 oiigins Illustrations.

  XXVIII. The CRAYFISH : an Introduetion to the Study of Zoology By T.

H. Huxley, F.R.S, Sixth Edition. With 82 Illustrations.

  XXIX. The BRAIN as an ORGAN of MIND. By H. Chakltoi Bastian,

M.D. Fourth Edition. With 184 Illustrations.

  XXX. The ATOMIC THEORY. By Professor A. Wortz. Trans lated by

E. Cleminshaw, F.C.S. Seventh Edition.

  XXXI. The NATURAL CONDITIONS of EXISTENCE ai they affect

Animal Life. By Karl Skmpkr. Fifth Editior With 2 Maps and 106 Woodcuts.

  XXXII. GENERAL PHYSIOLOGYof MUSCLES and NERVES

  By Prof. J. Rosenthal. Fourth Edition. With 75 Illustrations.

  XXXIII. SIGHT : an Exposition of the Principles of Monocular ani

  Binocular Vision. By Joseph Le Conte, LL.D. Third Edition. Wit: 132

Illustrations.

    XXXIV.    ILLUSIONS: a Psychological Study.

  Fourth Edition.

  By James Sull^ 3

  The International Scientific Series —continued

    XXXV. VOLCANOES: what they are and what they teach. Bj

  John W. Judd, F.K.S. Fifth Edition. With 96 Illustrations.

    XXXVI. SUICIDE : an Essay on Comparative Moral Statistics

  By Professor H. Morshlli. Third Edition.

  XXXVn. The BRAIN and its FUNCTIONS. By J. LtTYS,

    Physician to the Hospice de la Salpgtrifere. With numerous Illus trations.

Third Edition.

  XXXVIII. MYTH and SCIENCE : an Essay. By Tito Vignoli

  Fourth Edition.

    XXXIX. The SUN. By C. A. Young, Ph.D., LL.D. Fifth Edition With

numerous Illustrations.

  XL.  ANTS,  BEES,  and  "WASPS.  A  Record  of  Observations  on  the

Habits  of  the  Social  Hymenoptera.  By  Lord  Avebury  Fourteenth  Edition.

With 5 Chromo-lithographic Plates.

  XLI. ANIMAL INTELLIGENCE. By Geoeqe J. Eomanes, LL.D., F.R.S.

Sixth Edition.

  XLII. The CONCEPTS and THEORIES of MODERN PHYSICS. By J.

B. Stallo. Third Edition.

  XLIII. DISEASES of MEMORY. An Essay in the Positive Psychology.

By Th. Ribot. Fourth Edition.

  XLIV. MAN BEFORE METALS. By N. Jolt, Correspondent de rinstitut

de France, Fifth Edition. With 148 Illustrations.

  XLV. The SCIENCE of POLITICS. By Prof. Sheldon

  Amos. Third Edition.

  XLVI. ELEMENTARY METEOROLOGY. By Robebt H.

  ScoTi. With 11 Plates and 40 Figures iu Text. Seventh Edition.

  XLVII. The ORGANS of SPEECH. By Geobg Hermann

  VON Mbver. With 47 Illustrations.

  XLVIII.  FALLACIES  :  a  View  of  Logic  from  the  Practical  Side.  By

Alfred Sidgwick. Second Edition.

  XLIX. The ORIGIN of CULTIVATED PLANTS. By

    Alphonsk De Candolle. Second Edition.

  L. JELLY FISH, STAR FISH, and SEA URCHINS.  Being a Research on Primitive Nervous Systems. By G-. J. Romanes,

LL.D., F.R.S. Second Edition.

  LI. The COMMON SENSE of the EXACT SCIENCES.

  By the late Willlam Kingdon Clifford. Third Edition. With 100 Figures.

  LII. PHYSICAL EXPRESSION : its Modes and Principles. By Francis

Warner, M.D., F.R.C.P. Second Edition. With 50 Illustrations.

  LIII. ANTHROPOID APES. By Robert Hahtmann. With 63 Illustrations.

Second Edition.

  LIV. The MAMMALIA in their RELATION to PRIMEVAL

    TIMES. By Oscar Schmidt. Second Edition. With 51 Woodcuts. 4

    EeganfPaul, Trench, Trilbner, d Co., Ltd.

  LV. COMPARATIVE LITERATURE. By H. Macaulay

  POSNKTT, LL.D.

  LVI. EARTHQUAKES and other EARTH MOVEMENTS.

  By Prof. John Milne. With 38 Figures. Fourth Editiou, revised.

  LVII. MICROBES, FERMENTS, and MOULDS. By E. L.

    Trouessart. With 107 Illustrations. Third Edition.

  LVIII.  GEOGRAPHICAL  and  GEOLOGICAL  DISTRIBUTION  of

ANIMALS. By Prof. A. Heilpiun. Second Edition.

  LIX.  "WEATHER:  a  Popular  Exposition  of  the  Natvire  of  Weather

Changes from Day to Day. By the Hon. Kalph Abercromby. With 96 Figures.

Fourth Edition.

  LX. ANIMAL MAGNETISM. By Alfbed Binet and Chahles Fere. Fourth

Edition.

  LXI. MANUAL of BRITISH DISCOMYCETES, with descriptions of all

the Species of Fungi hitherto found in Britain included in the Family, and

Illustrations of the Genera. By William Phillips, P.I,.S. Second Edition.

  LXII.  INTERNATIONAL  LA'W.  With  Materials  for  a  Code  of

International Law. By Professor Leone Levi.

  LXIII. Tlie GEOLOGICAL HISTORY of PLANTS. By Sir J.

    WiLLLAM Dawson. With 80 Illustrations.

  LXIV. The ORIGIN of FLORAL STRUCTURES THROUGH INSECT

and other AGENCIES. By Prof. G. Henslow. Second Editiou.

  LXV.  On  the  SENSES,  INSTINCTS,  and  INTELLIGENCE  of

ANIMALS, with special reference to INSECTS. By

  Lord AVKiiUKY. With 118 Illustrations. Third Edition.

  LXVI. The PRIMITIVE FAMILY in its ORIGIN and DEVELOPMENT.By C. N. Starcke. Second Edition.

  LXVII. PHYSIOLOGY of BODILY EXERCISE. By Febnand

    Lagrange, M.D. Second Edition.

  LXVIII.  The  COLOURS  of  ANIMALS  :  their  Meaning  and  Use,

especially considered in the case of Insects. By E. B. Poulton, F.E.S. With

Chromolithographic Frontispiece and upwards of 60 Figures in Text, Second

Edition.

  LXIX.  INTRODUCTION  to  PRESH."WATER  ALG-^.  With  an

Enumeration  of  all  the  British  Species.  By  M.  0.  Cooke,  LL.D.  With  13

Plates Illustrating all the Genera.

  LXX. SOCIALISM: NB"W and OLD. By William Geaham,

  M.A.,  Professor  of  PoUtical  Economy  and  Jurisprudence,  Queen's

College,

  Belfast. Second Edition.

  LXXI. COLOUR-BLINDNESS and COLOUR-PERCEPTION.

  By F. W. Edridge-Gbebn, M.D. With 3 Coloured Plates.

  The International Scientific Se7-ies —continued.

  LXXII. MAN and the GLACIAL PERIOD. By G. F. Wright, D.D. With

111 Illustrations and Maps. Second Edition.

  LXXIII. HANDBOOK of GREEK and LATIN PAL-^IO-

    GRAPHY.  By  Sir  E.  Maunde  Thompson,  K.O.B.  With  Tables  of

Alphabets and Facsimiles. Second Edition.

    LXXIV. A HISTORY of CRUSTACEA : Recent Malacostraca.

  By Thoiias R. R. Stebbing, M.A. With 19 Plates and 32 Figures in Text.

  LXXV.  The  DISPERSAL  of  SHELLS:  an  Inquiry  into  the  means  of

Dispersal  possessed  by  Fresli  Water  and  Land  Mollusca.  By  H.  WALLia

Kew, F.Z.S. With Preface by A. R. Wallace, F.R.S., and Illustrations.

    LXXVI. RACE and LANGUAGE. By Andre Lbfbvre, Professor in the

Anthropological School, Paris.

  LXXVII. The ORIGIN of PLANT STRUCTURES by SELF-

    ADAPTATION  TO  THE  ENVIRONMENT.  By  Rev.  G.  Hex.slow,

M.A., F.L.S., F.G.S., &c., author of 'The Origin of Floral Structures,' &c.

    LXXVIII. ICE-WORK PRESENT and PAST. By Eev. T. G.

    BOXNEY, D.Sc, LL.D., F.R.S., &c., Professor of Geology at University

College, Loudon ; Fellow of St. John's College, Cambridge.

    LXXIX. A CONTRIBUTION to our KNOWLEDGE of

    SEEDLINGS. By Lord Aveeury.  LXXX. The ART of MUSIC. By Sir C. Hubert H. Parht.Mus. Doc.

    LXXXI. The POLAR AURORA. By Alfred Angot. Illustrated.

  LXXXII. "WHAT is ELECTRICITY? By J. Trowbridge. Illustrated.

    LXXXIII. MEMORY. By F. W. Edhidge-Green, M.D. With Frontispiece.

    LXXXIV. The ELEMENTS of HYPNOTISM, By R. Harry

  Vincent. With Diagrams. Second Edition.

    LXXXV. SEISMOLOGY. By John Milne, F.K.S., F.G.S., &c., Author of

' Earthquakes.' With 53 Figures.

    LXXXVI,  On  BUDS  and  STIPULES.  By  Lord  AVEBURY,  F.R.S.,

D.C.L., LL.D. With 4 Coloured Plates and 340 Figures in the Text.

    LXXXVII. EVOLUTION byATROPHY,in Biology and Sociology.

  By Jean Demoor, Jean Massart, and Bmile Vandkrvelde. Translated by

Mrs. Chalmers Mitchell. With 84 Figures.

  LXXXVIII. VARIATION in ANIMALS and PLANTS. By

  H. M. Vernon, M.A., M.D. 6

  IN THE

    INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC SERIES.

  NOW READY. Vol. LXXXIX.

  THE MIND AND THE BRAIN.

  By ALFRED BINET,

    Directeur  du  Laboratoire  de  Psychologie  k  la  Sorbonne,  being  the

authorised translation of ' L'Ame et le Corps'

  TITJE  SCOTSMAN.  —'  His  treatise  is  fresh  and  vigorous  ...  of  an

unusual  interest  to  readers  in  this  part  of  the  world,  as  adopting  and

developing to new issues ideas already characteristic of two leaders in the

Scottish philosophy. ... It furnishes wholesome food for thought for anyone

who wishes to inquire how much of himself is consciousness and how much

nerves.'

  THE PUBLISHER AND BOOKMAN.—'M. Binet gives a clear exposure

of the perils of construction—the dangers of depreciating facts that may not

fit  in  with  the  preconceived  idea.  The  work  is  one  that  is  bound  to  be

provocative of thought—and criticism.'

  THE  SPECTATOR.  —'  M.  Binet  sets  forth  his  views  with  admirable

clearness. The argument is a model of French lucidity of expression, and is

well worth study.'

  Vol. LXXXX.

  THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN PHYSICS.  By LUCIEN POINCARE.

  Edited by F. LEGGE.

  Vol. LXXXXI.

  THE FORCES OF NATURE.

  By DR. LE BON.

  Crown 8vo. Price 5s.

  Several  further  volumes  are  in  preparation,  and  will  he  issued

itnmediately.

  The  following  Works  are  not  Included  in  the  'International  Scientific

Series:'

    INTRODUCTION TO THE SCIENCE OF ELECTRICITY.

  Lectures by BRUNO KOLBE,

  Chief Science Master at St. Anna's Schools, St. Petersburg.

  Edited and Revised by the Author for publication in England.

    Authorised Translation by JOSEPH SKELLON, formerly Master at

  Beaumont College, Old Windsor.

  Demy 8vo. with 76 Illustrations,'price lOs. 6cl. net.

  PLANT BREEDING.

  By HUGO DE VRIES,

    Professor of Botany in the University of Amsterdam ; Author of ' Species

and Varieties.'--

  Demy 8vo. Illustrated, price 7s. 6d. net. ^ «»

    OPHTHALMIC OPERATIONS.

  By H. GRIMSDALE, F.R.S., M.B., B.C.Cantab.,

    Westminster Ophthalmic Hospital, Ophtl to St. George's Hospital; and

  E. BREWERTON, F.R.C.S.,

  Royal Westminster Ophthalmic Hospital, Surgeon Metropolitan Hospital,

&c.

  With numerous Diagrams. Demy 8vo. price 12s. net.

    Surgeon, Royal Westminster Ophthalmic Hospital, Ophthalmic Surgeon

to St. George's Hospital; and

  Surgeon  to  Royal  Westminster  Ophthalmic  Hospital,  Ophthalmic

Surgeon Metropolitan Hospital, &c.

    NUTRITION AND DYSENTERY.

  By U. N. MUKERJI, M.D.Edin.,

  Member  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  England,  Lieut.-Colonel

Indian Medical Service.  Crown  8vo.  price  3s.  6d.  net.  London:  KEG  AN  PAUL,  TRENCH,

TRUBNER, & CO., Ltd.

  PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE  CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS

POCKET

    UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY

    P&ASci. 




  




 